Articles
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-020-00986-6
Police demilitarization and violent crime
Kenneth Lowande ✉
Policymakers and advocates make contradictory claims about the effects of providing military equipment to local law
enforcement, but this intervention is not well understood because of severe data limitations and inferential challenges. I use
3.8 million archived inventory records to estimate the magnitude of sources of bias in existing studies of the 1033 Program.
I show that most variation in militarization comes from previously unobserved sources, which implies that studies that show
crime-reduction benefits are unreliable. I then leverage recent policy changes to evaluate the effect of military equipment: the
Obama Administration recalled property under Executive Order 13688, which resulted in a forced demilitarization of several
hundred departments. Difference-in-difference estimates of agencies that retained similar equipment show negligible or unde-
tectable impacts on violent crime or officer safety. These findings do not suggest that similar scale federal reforms designed to
demilitarize police would have the downside risks proposed by proponents of military transfers.
F
ederal transfers of billions of dollars in military equipment to transforms one publicly available active inventory into a time series.
local law enforcement have fuelled an ongoing debate about the As of 4 May 2020, there were at least 17 such studies (10 published
‘militarization’ of police1–4. Proponents refer to this equipment in peer-reviewed journals) publicly available in the fields of eco-
as ‘life-saving’5 and critical to fighting violent crime. Announcing nomics, political science, public policy and policing. They have
the reversal of Obama-era restrictions in August 2017, Jeff Sessions been cited 154 times according to Google Scholar, and the earliest
said that ‘studies have shown this equipment reduces crime rates, was produced in 2015. The peer-reviewed work has also been cited
reduces the number of assaults against police officers, and reduces by journalists and policymakers, and mostly includes studies that
the number of complaints against police officers.’ Meanwhile, oppo- find evidence in support of violence-reduction claims.
nents suggest the equipment is to blame for excessive use of force by To avoid this bias, I then use recent regulatory changes to the
police and that its acquisition is motivated by racial threat.6,7 1033 Program to estimate the impact of demilitarization on violent
However, systematic evidence evaluating these claims faces crime and officer safety (Fig. 2). Public criticism of the program in
severe data limitations and inferential challenges. Numerous stud- 2015 led the Obama Administration to recall select property under
ies in circulation link military equipment to improved law enforce- Executive Order 13688 (ref. 18). Particular items were selected for
ment outcomes8–12. Others link military equipment to worse law recall and shipped, free of charge, back to federal processing facili-
enforcement outcomes8,11,13. In a replication of two published stud- ties or otherwise destroyed (Supplementary Table 8). In effect, this
ies, Gunderson et al. show that previous claims that suggest milita- forced the demilitarization of agencies who held this equipment,
rization reduces crime are not robust to agency-level analysis and while allowing others to retain equipment criticized by groups
alternative calculations of key instrumental variables14. opposed to the program as operationally equivalent. By identify-
More fundamentally, the publicly released data—on which all ing these items and tracking their attrition, I show that these orders
past work is based—is subject to substantial error. These data omit were implemented effectively by administrators and led to a sudden
military equipment returned or destroyed before the first avail- demilitarization that was out of the hands of law enforcement agen-
able records released in 2014, and conflate inter-agency transfers cies (LEAs; Fig. 3, Supplementary Tables 4 and 5 and Fig. 5).
with new distributions. The severity of this error led Mummolo15, I leverage this sudden change to estimate difference in differ-
for example, to investigate the impact of the deployment of special ences (DiD) by comparing over-time trends in crime and officer
weapons and tactics (SWAT) teams as an alternative measure of mil- safety across demilitarized LEAs and unaffected LEAs matched
itarization. SWAT teams themselves have also received considerable on a set of pre-order characteristics (Fig. 4). With demilitarization
scholarly attention16,17. Nonetheless, transfers of military weapons pre-defined by the order, I also avoid vast researcher degrees of free-
and equipment remain a highly contested aspect of policing in the dom available in past work—attributable to estimating the effects
United States, as well as the programmatic feature of police militari- of a handful of the roughly 35,000 unique items of military equip-
zation most subject to federal-level reforms. ment in these data19. I find little evidence that this demilitarization
This study reports estimates of the scale of error in past research led to changes in either rates of violent crime or officer deaths and
on the effects of the 1033 Program. I leverage all active inventories assaults. These findings are not sensitive to matching methodology,
of military equipment under the program from 2014 to 2020, which measurement strategies, estimation procedure or outcome measure.
were obtained via a Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) request Put simply, the executive order had no detectable impact on violent
(Supplementary Tables 1 and 2). Comparing within-agency inven- crime or officer safety in these data.
tories over time enables parsing of attrition, inter-agency transfers This information is valuable for those considering future reform.
and new distributions. I find that attrition within law enforcement In the United States, the acquisition of federal military equipment
inventories is common—about one in five weapons are returned monotonically increased beginning in the late 1990s. I provide the
or destroyed within 5 years—and that it is associated with some first counter-factual estimates of what would occur under similar,
policing outcomes (Fig. 1). This implies that the estimated effects hypothetical demilitarization policies. Alongside studies that sug-
of equipment on crime are biased in all previous research that gest that retaining military equipment poses risks to public support
Department of Political Science, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. ✉e-mail: lowande@umich.edu
Nature HumaN BeHaviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NATurE HumAN BEHAvIOur
1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0
2015 2017 2019
Fig. 13 to visualize one such snapshot. This conflates three sources
of variation:
of LEAs15,20, my findings imply that the downside risks of returning
certain types of weapons and equipment are undetectable for many • New distribution: equipment shipped from the DLA to a par-
outcomes that law enforcement and the public care about. ticipating LEA.
Police militarization has been defined as the adoption of weap- • Attrition: equipment either destroyed or returned to the DLA or
ons, equipment, tactics and organizational patterns of the military a state coordinator. Attrition before 2014 is unobservable in the
by LEAs21. While there is no scholarly consensus on the definition public records.
of police militarization, this definition is broadly inclusive22. There • Transfer: equipment shipped from one LEA to another with a state
are, however, some aspects of militarization (for example, the adop- coordinator as intermediary. When weapons are transferred, they
tion of military culture) that this study does not directly address. In retain their original shipment date in the DLA inventory. Transfer
the United States, the documented rise in police militarization1,16 before 2014 is unobservable in the public records.
has been attributed to the War on Drugs2, the War on Terror23 and
US military interventions abroad3. Beyond explanations for this Attrition and transfer are sources of unmodeled error in existing
increase, critical debates centre around its impact on crime and research. For example, the December 2014 DLA release indicates that
public trust in law enforcement. the number of 5.56-mm assault rifles held by the Cambridge Police
This study investigates one aspect of militarization—the use of Department was 25. These gradually disappear from their invento-
military equipment—for several reasons. First, though organiza- ries until March 2017, when all drop out. Inventory records from the
tional features of LEAs receive public scrutiny (for example, civilian LEAs themselves confirm that attrition like this is a regular part of the
oversight boards and investigation procedures for officer miscon- program (Supplementary Figs. 3 and 4). Earliest records indicate that
duct), most are not adopted by LEAs as a result of a military analogue. the Yale Police Department held no equipment shipped in 2014, but
Second, public debate on policing often centres around equipment, by 2019, 69 rail-mounted optics appear. Before coming to New Haven,
weapons and tactics. Weapons and equipment have received consid- this equipment was likely held by another LEA in Connecticut. While
erable attention from Congress and news organizations. In addition, both are examples of measurement error in the treatment, attrition is
though some argue that there is no clear political avenue for revers- most problematic, as the decision to return or destroy an item may be
ing trends in police militarization24, the distribution of weapons driven by crime, officer safety or citizen complaints.
and equipment through the 1033 Program presents one of the few
opportunities for a centralized policy response within the executive results
branch. In addition, materiel may have secondary effects on other The scale of error in prior research is substantial. I plot this error in
aspects of militarization. Reduction in the use of military uniforms, Supplementary Figs. 1 and 2, recovered on the basis of a procedure
for example, has been suggested as a means of affecting the cultural described in detail in the Methods section. In the median 3-month
aspects of police militarization25. And while recent work has inves- period, more than 15,000 controlled items vanish from agency
tigated the effects of controversial, military-style tactics, such as inventories and more than 4,000 items are received in transfer. Most
no-knock warrants and the deployment of SWAT teams15,26–28, the of the variation in militarization during this period is due to these
effects of weapons and equipment are contested because of straight- previously unobserved sources. Due to secular changes in defense
forward—but critical—data integrity challenges. procurement patterns after the height of the Iraq War (which
The basic problem is that the current scientific record, published influences the supply of equipment), the preceding 5–7 years are
and unpublished, treats data on equipment released by the Defense likely similar. A striking illustration of this pattern is AR-15-style
Logistics Agency (DLA) as a time series—when, in fact, it represents 5.56-mm rifles, the most common weapon requested by agencies
a point-in-time snapshot of active inventories. See Supplementary and the item on which some estimates of the effect of militarization
)%(
gniniameR
Murder
Assault
Rape
Manslaughter Sample
Baseline
Dec. 2014 inventory Robbery
Inclusive
Assault rifles Felonious officer deaths
Restrictive
Handguns Accidental officer deaths
MRVs Officer assaults (injury)
Shotguns Officer assaults (no injury)
–0.1 0 0.1 0.2
Fig. 2 | Demilitarization did not lead to substantively significant increases
or decreases in violent crime or officer safety. Point predictions and
90%, 95% and 99% confidence interval estimates from linear models
with two-way fixed effects for the effect of demilitarization on policing
outcomes, with observations weighted by matched LEA sample weights.
The dataset includes six panels (three quarters before and after the
Fig. 1 | roughly one in five controlled weapons turn over within 4 years. executive order was implemented). ‘Sample’ refers to the number and
The proportion of December 2014 inventory remaining within police degree of coarsening in pre-treatment covariates; ‘Restrictive’ includes
department as of December 2019. In the initial inventory, there were 2,509 LEAs (n = 17, 570), ‘Baseline’ includes 5,315 LEAs (n = 37, 233) and
82,634 assault rifles, 8,494 handguns, 625 mine-resistant vehicles (MRVs) ‘Inclusive’ includes 7,495 LEAs (n = 52, 514).
and 1,074 shotguns.
Nature HumaN BeHaviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NATurE HumAN BEHAvIOur Articles
30
20
10
0
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
on crime are based. Between 2016 and 2019, all 5.56-mm assault ferences across LEAs. Specifically, Supplementary Table 3 reports
rifle variation is due to either the transfer of those already circula- coefficients from two-way fixed effects models that account for
tion among LEAs or the disposal of weapons that have fallen out of over-time variation in inventory and recalled property. They sug-
use. As Fig. 1 suggests, 5-year rates of attrition for other weapons gest detectable, negative associations between attrition and four
and armoured vehicles are similar. policing outcomes, including murder (β = − 0.0016, 95% CI
Importantly, this approach also reproduces known patterns on (−0.0002, −0.0031), P = 0.048) and assaults against police officers
the basis of top-down policy changes. The first quarter of 2015 sees with injury (β = −0.0023, 95% CI (−0.0011, −0.0036), P = 0.000).
little variation as it underwent review by a federal task force. Aside Thus, even the relatively short time series from the contempo-
from the end of 2017 (when a subset of items was no longer desig- rary period (for example, March 2015 to March 2020) suggests
nated as controlled), transfer and attrition track one another and that increases in crime are associated with whether LEAs return
transfers never outnumber attrition, suggesting that many items are or destroy equipment, potentially biasing in favour of the posi-
returned to state coordinators for use in other departments. This tive relationships uncovered by past research. This also suggests
suggests that the strategy for recovering this variation is valid. that the measurement error in prior research is systematic,
Most problematically, attrition appears to be correlated with and thus, instrumental variable approaches cannot correct
policing outcomes, even after accounting for time-invariant dif- for it.
)snoillim
$(
eulaV
600
400
200
0
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
stnempihS In circulation
Attrition
Transfers
New distributions
Fig. 3 | eo 13688 achieved near-perfect compliance and resulted in demilitarization among affected Leas. Summary plots of recalled property (that is,
grenade launchers, .50 calibre weapons, tracked armoured personnel carriers and bayonets) in active inventories from December 2014 to March 2020.
Shaded bar indicates issuance of restrictions.
LEA group
Control
Demilitarized
Fig. 4 | Local Leas with recalled equipment were concentrated in the South, midwest, and California. Locations of demilitarized agencies (n = 315) and
baseline set of unaffected agencies (n = 5, 000) assigned greater than zero weight, which are matched within state on the basis of pre-order department
size, amount of 1033 equipment, and non-White population in jurisdiction. Shapefiles from US Census Bureau.
Nature HumaN BeHaviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NATurE HumAN BEHAvIOur
It is also important to note that these associations do not imply I describe each of these samples in detail in the Methods section.
that the studies finding reductions in crime as a result of property Another potential explanation for the estimated effects near zero is
distribution are underestimating the magnitude of its impact. In that demilitarization is thought to have an impact on crime, in gen-
this case, transfers also occur, and are difficult to model. In addi- eral, rather than particular offences. In addition, unmodeled varia-
tion, previous studies generally select some subset of complete tion in the reporting and classification of particular offences can
weapons and equipment, which may have different attrition pat- make them less reliable30. But in robustness checks that use linear,
terns in the periods of study. This poses another research challenge additive indices of violent crime and officer safety, we again cannot
not discussed by these studies, as parts for weapons and equipment be confident about the sign of these effects (Supplementary Fig. 8).
are also distributed, but often left out of analyses. For example, the I adopted several approaches to ensure the results were not a
upper receiver of an AR-15-style assault rifle is a controlled item, function of dichotomous specification of the key independent vari-
serialized, and legally considered the firearm itself. However, this able. I use the amount of recalled equipment (log scale) and a thresh-
item is excluded from studies’ measures of police militarization. old value of recalled equipment ($1,000) as alternative treatment
When there is more than one source of error, and that error will variables. The estimates reported in Supplementary Fig. 9 show
likely exhibit temporal variation, it is difficult to be confident about that neither specification provides evidence that the presence of
the direction of the bias in any particular study. Instead, this should recalled equipment had an impact on outcomes. Put differently, the
be taken as a demonstration that attrition and transfer occur, are results are robust to accounting for the magnitude of demilitariza-
substantial in scale and are likely not random. tion within affected agencies. Some specifications for incidence of
Thus, existing estimates of the effects of militarization on the robbery are statistically distinguishable (by convention) from zero,
basis of these data are seriously flawed. Moreover, the DLA did not but the scale of these effects is vanishingly small. The coefficients
retain active inventories before the first data release in 2014. This for the continuous treatment imply that the loss of all weapons and
means that accurate time series records of military equipment on equipment led to a 0.8 percentage point increase in the incidence of
hand can only be obtained through another source—the records of robbery (95% CI (−0.003, −0.017), P = 0.012). The estimated coef-
LEAs themselves, which are highly decentralized and may be miss- ficient for these outcomes is similar for the threshold version of the
ing. This necessitates an alternative means of estimating the effect of treatment, which essentially recodes departments with very little
militarization over the contemporary period for which more accu- recalled equipment (typically several dozen bayonets) as untreated.
rate records exist. These estimates do vary depending upon the length of the pre-
and post-demilitarization period (Supplementary Figs. 11 and 12).
Effects on violent crime and officer safety. To assess the claims of The results reported in Fig. 2 include the second quarter of 2015 to
policymakers and past research, I estimate the effect of demilitariza- the third quarter of 2016, which is two quarters before demilitariza-
tion in panels of demilitarized and matched agencies. As I describe tion and two quarters after all demilitarization was completed. But
in more detail in the Methods section, I present estimates from lengthening the post-treatment study period does not impact these
generalized difference-in-difference models with intercept shifts estimates in a consistent direction, which would not be the case if
for agency and time. Diagnostic checks suggest that the demilita- the order had systematic, long-term effects.
rized and matched agencies have similar pre-treatment trends in A narrower study period also lowers the chance that treated
crime (Supplementary Table 7 and Figs. 6 and 7). This accounts for agencies will have ‘re-militarized’ via some unobserved means. In
fixed features of LEAs and their jurisdictions that influence crime. the contemporary period, for example, homeland security grants
Pre-processing to comparable sets reduces model dependence29 and enable LEAs to purchase weapons and equipment. There is no cen-
the incidence of false negatives. Moreover, relying on a plausibly tralized record of what is acquired through these grants. In addition,
exogenous source of variation addresses inferential challenges com- many grants ‘pass through’ other jurisdictions (that is, counties or
mon in studies of police militarization. The dependent variables are states) and are then used for purchases at the municipal level. This
logged to reduce the influence of extreme cases. is a persistent challenge for estimating the effect of weapons and
Figure 2 plots estimates of the 2015 demilitarization on violent equipment generally, which further suggests that examining the
crime and officer safety, leveraging various matched sets and the impact of a top-down policy change is more credible. In addition,
three quarters before and after the change. The treatment variable for this reason, estimates that include a longer post-treatment time
is a dichotomous indicator of when the police department com- horizon should be treated with more scepticism.
plied with the demilitarization order (as described in the Methods The results presented in Fig. 2 rely on the timing of observed
section). Coefficients for violent crime are mixed. Estimates for compliance with the executive order as a treatment. Though this
the effect of demilitarization on murder and manslaughter allow likely introduces additional error, since it is known that some agen-
us to statistically reject effect sizes of more than +/–5 percentage cies did not immediately demilitarize (see Methods section and
points. Estimates for effects on the incidence of robbery are not dis- Supplementary Table 5), an alternative specification would be to
tinguishable from zero at conventional levels (β = 0.066, 95% CI use the timing of the executive order itself. I report these results
(−0.00, 0.13), P = 0.063). Moreover, these effects are highly uncer- in Supplementary Fig. 10. Coefficients that use the release of the
tain—even if conventionally distinguishable from zero under some guidelines are consistent with the effects reported in Fig. 2, but
model specifications and robustness checks reported in the supple- moving the treatment timing one quarter later (until complete com-
mentary information. Estimates for officer safety are near zero and pliance is achieved for all agencies) reverses the sign of most coef-
are more consistent. Officer deaths are sufficiently rare that the ficients. This again, underscores the lack of consistent evidence of
effects are near (or in some specifications, at) zero. These allow us significant effects of demilitarization on crime.
to reject effect sizes of greater than +/–1 percentage point. Officer This set of mostly null effects, of course, does not itself imply that
assault estimates are near zero, suggestive of only minor effects, and demilitarization has no effect. To estimate the power of this research
inconsistently signed. design, I simulated from the observed covariate distributions in
This substantive interpretation of the findings is consistent the baseline matched sample. Given a true effect size, sample size,
across numerous robustness checks. Most obviously, the results are treatment assignment and research design, the simulation drew
stable across different specifications of comparable departments. unit, time and error term effects from a standard normal distribu-
Estimated effects among the inclusive, baseline and restrictive tion. The observed data were then regressed against the simulated
samples are very similar, and narrowing or broadening the inclu- dependent variable, which was then repeated 1,000 times to obtain
sion criteria is not associated with any consistent effect pattern. false-negative rates by effect size and outcome. As Supplementary
Nature HumaN BeHaviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NATurE HumAN BEHAvIOur Articles
Table 6 reports, this design should be capable of detecting effects as methods
small as 0.1 standard deviation for the conventional power thresh- To parse variation in attrition and transfer between departments, I obtained every
old of 80% with α = 0.05. This means that, for the highly variable quarterly inventory from 2014 to 2020 from the DLA via a Freedom of Information
Act (FOIA) request. In total, these contain ~3.8 million shipment records from
outcomes (that is, assault, robbery and rape), the effects would have
roughly 9,300 unique LEAs in 22 data releases (Supplementary Table 1). Individual
to be quite large to be reliably recovered with this research design. shipments are identified and tracked by their shipment date, recipient and national
For other outcomes, such as murder and officer deaths or assaults, stock number (NSN). Within agency inventories, I define a new distribution
more confidence in the lack of even small, positive effects for demil- as a controlled item that appears in active inventory q + 1, but not q, with a
itarization is warranted. shipment date after q. The technical definition of controlled item is one that has
a demilitarization (DEMIL) code B, C, D, E, F, G or Q3. In general, a controlled
In summary, there is little evidence from these data that the 2015
item is one that requires some degree of physical destruction before disposal.
demilitarization of police departments participating in the 1033 Uncontrolled items do not have to be tracked by recipient agencies. The modal
Program had substantively significant impacts on violent crime or distribution in the 1033 Program is uncontrolled, and can include items such as
officer safety. exercise equipment, socks, computers or wiffle bats. Attrition corresponds to a
controlled item that appears in inventory at q but not q + 1, and transfer to a new
item with a shipment date before q. I identify each type of shipment variation for
Discussion
each agency and quarter after December 2014, then adjust the algorithm to account
Over the last three decades, local LEAs in the United States have for the most common record-keeping errors to ensure that these are not counted as
acquired and routinized the use of weapons, equipment and tactics attrition or transfer (see Supplementary Information page A3). While this provides
previously exclusive to the military. Weapons and equipment acqui- descriptive information about sources of error, it also allows us to validate reported
patterns of attrition as a result of changes in policy.
sition has been subsidized by federal authorities, but fundamental
limitations in record-keeping about these transfers have rendered
Identification strategy: Executive Order 13688. My approach for estimating
studies of their effects not credible. This has not, however, limited
the effect of military weapons and equipment relies on regulatory changes
their reach and potential influence among policymakers. This study
implemented by the Obama Administration in response to public scrutiny of the
analysed archived federal inventory records to gauge the reliability 1033 Program in late 2015. This allows us to estimate the average effect of the
of this work, while providing estimates of the effect of an instance of order for demilitarized agencies by comparing over-time changes in measures of
demilitarization with weaker identification assumptions. violent crime and officer safety. This improves upon existing strategies that are not
applicable to the contemporary period and which have themselves been critiqued14.
I find that most changes in police militarization in the contem-
This strategy addresses an important challenge for inference—that the
porary period are the result of weapons and equipment already in distribution of weapons and equipment is endogenous to policing outcomes.
circulation, and that attrition of these weapons is common. This is Harris et al.31 and Bove and Gavrilova12 rely on instruments—county location and
highly problematic for studies that estimate the effect of militariza- variation in military spending, respectively—to address this concern. Proximity
tion (on any outcome) using data series that include years before to DLA distribution centres is thought to impact the likelihood of obtaining
equipment because LEAs pay shipping costs. However, as Supplementary Fig.
2014. In addition, this suggests that the secular trends in militari-
2 shows, transfer accounts for most distributions, and these occur within state.
zation through this program have levelled off—possibly due to the Moreover, when transfers occur, changes in military spending will have very little
draw down of US military personnel abroad. Notably, however, purchase on the presence of equipment in individual LEAs.
there was a non-negligible increase in new distributions in late 2019 President Obama signed Executive Order 13688 on 15 January 2015, creating
and early 2020 (Supplementary Fig. 2). an inter-agency working group tasked with developing reform proposals for the
distribution of military surplus. Their final report was released in May 2015 (ref. 32)
Importantly, this means that the operative question facing
and led to the recall of tracked armoured vehicles, grenade launchers and bayonets
interested parties is the potential effects of policy interventions (Supplementary Table 8). Also banned was the distribution of small arms greater
that demilitarize departments with already acquired equipment. than or equal to .50 calibre, but no such weapons were ever distributed according
This study examined the only known effort to do so, which was to DLA inventories. I argue that this led to a demilitarization that was exogenous
to policing outcomes. This is supported by key features of the regulations. First,
implemented by the Obama Administration in 2015. Contrary
the May 2015 report indicates that its authors did not know which agencies held
to the claims of the Administration’s critics, this policy reduced
recalled equipment, and only 7 of the nearly 10,000 LEAs in the program submitted
the level of militarization in select agencies. This suggests that comments. According to the report, at the time of its release “a Government-wide
demilitarization by presidential fiat is indeed feasible for the set assessment [...] to identify the LEAs that have acquired the types of equipment
of 1033 Program participants. Finally, I find little to no evidence identified on the recommended prohibited equipment list” was ongoing. This
is evidence that the choice of recalled items could not have been influenced by
that demilitarization had an impact on violent crime or officer
lobbying or foreknowledge of the LEAs that would be impacted.
safety. Put differently, contrary to the claims of those who sup-
Second, the items recalled have operationally equivalent analogues that suggest
port the transfer of equipment, these data do not support the con- the LEAs that held this equipment at the time of the change were not unique
clusion that militarization ‘saves lives’—or that demilitarization among LEAs (Supplementary Table 8). The administration recalled bayonets,
risks them. but not combat knives—though some officers reported that bayonets were used
as “big, sturdy, knives”33. It prohibited .50 calibre weapons and ammo, but not
There are important limitations to this study and the conclu-
other cartridges widely used by the military but not law enforcement. It recalled
sions that can be drawn from it. The demilitarization examined
tracked vehicles, but allowed departments to retain mine-resistant vehicles with
was limited to several categories of items, and several hundred of similar exterior armour. The reforms at the time were criticized by advocates for
the roughly 6,000 departments participating in the 1033 Program demilitarization as insufficient—with the implication that the items were selected
(only accounting for less than half of the LEAs in the United States). for recall because of their appearance, rather than their use in the context of
policing. One scholar referred to the reforms as “nothing more than symbolic
This means that we cannot confidently state that this study provides
politics”33. Nonetheless, at the time of the order, the recall affected nearly 350
evidence against small (and for some outcomes, moderately) sized LEAs and $30.3 million in equipment. This necessarily means that this study does
effects. This is also a substantive scope condition for the present not speak to all types of demilitarization via weapons and equipment. The policy
study. It examines the effects of recalling specific types of weapons intervention was important for the LEAs that were impacted because it tended to
and equipment for participants of a particular government pro- be a large share of their 1033 inventory. But it was also limited in scope, in that
a small share of LEAs were demilitarized and several dozen items were recalled.
gram—not demilitarization, in general.
Recalling different types of equipment with more impacted departments could, of
These limitations notwithstanding, this study provides valu- course, result in different effects.
able evidence for those considering reform. Numerous comparable This approach to estimating the effect of demilitarization assumes that the
weapons, vehicles and types of equipment remain in circulation Obama Administration’s directive achieved full compliance from affected LEAs.
today. In companion with evidence about reputational costs of But executive orders are non-justiciable, which implies that a private citizen
cannot sue their police department because it did not comply34. This renders the
militarization15,20, these findings suggest that the downside risks
most common legal enforcement mechanism moot. However, active inventories
of demilitarization would not be detectable for similar policy of recalled and banned equipment from 2014 to 2020 demonstrate that near full
interventions. compliance was achieved. Figure 3 plots the drop in this equipment following the
Nature HumaN BeHaviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NATurE HumAN BEHAvIOur
release of the final recommendations. Recalled items that remain in circulation are Data availability
concentrated in local branches of federal agencies still permitted to retain them. The data supporting the findings reported in this study, along with the underlying
In addition, there were 88 departments that retained recalled property for either 1033 Program inventory records, have been deposited in the Harvard Dataverse
one or two additional quarters. But this delayed demilitarization is not associated and can be found at https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/XCTPNR.
with any observed feature of agencies or jurisdictions (Supplementary Tables 4
and 5 and Fig. 5). There is no corresponding re-militarization after the revocation Code availability
of these restrictions in 2017, which can be explained by differences in the public
Replication code for the findings reported in this study has been deposited in the
management strategies of each administration (see Supplementary Methods
Harvard Dataverse and can be found at:https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/XCTPNR.
section). Thus, it is appropriate to compare affected and unaffected agencies over
the available time series.
I link military equipment records with monthly policing outcomes recorded Received: 7 February 2020; Accepted: 24 September 2020;
by the FBI’s Uniform Crime Reporting Program from 2014 to 2017 (refs. 35,36). Published: xx xx xxxx
Most LEAs that appear in the 1033 data can be matched, but the majority of
LEAs nationwide do not participate (Supplementary Table 2). Note that this is an references
additional source of error for studies that aggregate to county or other geographic
1. Kraska, P. B. Enjoying militarism: political/personal dilemmas in studying
level. I then acquire a vector of pre-treatment covariates on which to prune the
U.S. police paramilitary units. Justice Q. 13, 405–429 (1996).
data into matched sets of demilitarized and comparable unaffected agencies.
2. Balko, R. Rise of the Warrior Cop: The Militarization of America’s Police Forces
Specifically, I have available data on department size and 1033 inventory, as well
(Public Affairs, 2013).
as plausibly relevant data from the 2010 Census and 2014 American Community
3. C.J. Coyne & A.R. Hall Tyranny Comes Home: The Domestic Fate of U.S.
Survey: jurisdiction population size, demographics (for example, percentage
Militarism (Stanford Univ. Press, 2018).
African American or Hispanic), median household income, and unemployment.
4. Phillips, S.W. Police Militarization: Understanding the Perspectives of Police
I also match LEAs to measures of jurisdiction political ideology: the average
Chiefs, Administrators, and Tactical Officers (Routledge, 2018).
Democratic presidential candidate voteshare over the previous four elections, and
5. Trump, D. J. Executive Order 13809–restoring state, tribal, and local law
multilevel regression with post-stratification estimates of conservatism37.
enforcement’s access to life-saving equipment and resources. Fed. Regist. 82,
I use coarsened exact matching38 to reweight agencies in these data with
45–59 (2017).
recalled equipment at the time of the order and comparable LEAs. To ensure
6. Meeks, D. Police militarization in urban areas: the obscure war against the
that the results are not sensitive to this step, I iteratively impose additional
underclass. Black Scholar 35, 33–41 (2015).
covariates and coarsening strategies to produce three comparison sets, which
7. Bates, A. Trump’s decision on military-style weapons will harm communities.
I label ‘inclusive’, ‘baseline’ and ‘restrictive.’ The purpose of these three sets is
USA Today (31 August 2017).
illustrative. There are numerous potential matching strategies, but I have found
8. Haynes, J.B. Jr. & McQuoid, A.F. Bringing war home: violent crime, police
the results to be mostly insensitive to the choice of matched set. The reported
killings and the overmilitarization of the US police. Preprint at SSRN https://
results are meant to demonstrate that imposing additional matching restrictions
doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2851522 (2018).
does not alter the main findings. I present matching diagnostics and additional
9. O. Ajilore. Is there a 1033 effect? Police militarization and aggressive policing.
descriptive information about the matched sets and procedure in the
Munich Personal RePEc Archive 82543 https://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.
Supplementary Results section.
de/82543/ (2017) .
In general, matching on the basis of these characteristics renders more plausible
10. Haynes, J. B. Jr. & McQuoid, A. F. The thin blue line: police militarization
the parallel trends assumption necessary for valid DiD estimates. In this instance,
and violent crime. NY Econ. Rev. 49, 26–62 (2018).
their are two concerns worth noting. First, the 1033 Program represents only one
11. Carriere, K.R. & Encinosa, W. The risks of operational militarization:
avenue for the acquisition of military weapons and equipment. Departments may
increased confllict against militarized police. Peace Econ. Peace Sci. Public
obtain similar weapons through other federal grants, or with their own budgets.
Policy 23, 1–13 (2017).
Second, banned equipment itself might be associated with policing jurisdictions
12. Bove, V. & Gavrilova, E. Police officer on the frontline or a soldier? The effect
with trends in violent crime that diverge from others. Put differently, there may
of police militarization on crime. Am. Econ. J. Econ. Policy 9, 1–18 (2017).
be different patterns of unobserved error in agencies that did and did not have
13. Delehanty, C., Mewhirter, R., Welch, R. & Wilks, J. Militarization and police
recalled equipment. Thus, the most credible set of comparisons will attempt to
violence: the case of the 1033 program. Res. Politics 4, 1–7 (2017).
select agencies with similar program take-up and similar jurisdictions to police.
14. Gunderson, A., et al. Counterevidence of crime-reduction effects from federal
The inclusive set matches agencies within state on the basis of LEA size and
grants of military equipment to local police. Nat. Hum. Behav. (in the press).
the total value of their 1033 inventory. All departments are matched within state
15. Mummolo, J. Militarization fails to enhance police safety or reduce crime but
since transfers are thought to occur through state coordinators. Department
may harm police reputation. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 11, 1–6 (2018).
size, measured as the number of sworn officers, and the present value of their
16. Kraska, P. B. & Kappeler, V. E. Militarizing American police: the rise and
1033 inventory help ensure comparisons across units with similar levels of
normalization of paramilitary units. Soc. Prob. 44, 1–18 (1997).
demand for equipment. Importantly, this present inventory value is not subject
17. Koslicki, W. SWAT mobilization trends: testing assumptions of police
to the measurement error concerns laid out in the previous section. Matching
militarization. Policing 40, 733–747 (2017).
within state will also approximate match on the basis of distance to relevant
18. Obama, B. H. Executive Order 13688–federal support for local law
distribution centres. In addition to these variables, the baseline set matches on
enforcement equipment acquisition. Fed. Regist. 8, 45–59 (2015).
the basis of percentage African American and Hispanic in jurisdiction, since
19. Simmons, J. P., Nelson, L. D. & Simonsohn, U. False-positive psychology:
the distribution of particular types of equipment has been linked to the policing
undisclosed flexibility in data collection and analysis allows presenting
of minority communities6,39. The restrictive set adds median household income
anything as significant. Psycol. Sci. 22, 1359–1366 (2011).
and Democratic presidential voteshare to the set of matching covariates. Income
20. Lockwood, B., Doyle, M. & Comiskey, J. Armed, but too dangerous? Factors
has well-established associations with crime rates. I have shown that there is
associated with citizen support for the militarization of the police. Crim. Just.
no association between Democratic voteshare and time to compliance, but it is
Stud. 31, 113–127 (2018).
possible that some other, unobservable aspect of compliance (for example, usage or
21. Kraska, P. B. Militarization and policing—its relevance to 21st century police.
actual deployment) might be associated with local-level political preferences.
Policing 1, 501–513 (2007).
Figure 4 locates the set of demilitarized and baseline control LEAs. Agencies in
22. Bieler, S. Police militarization in the USA: the state of the field. Policing 39,
the South and Midwest held most recalled equipment. This differs from the overall
586–600 (2016).
distribution of equipment, which—in addition to representing city centres—
23. Rizer, A. & Hartman, J. How the War on Terror has militarized the police.
also shows concentrations in border counties that have no recalled equipment
The Atlantic Monthly (2011). https://www.theatlantic.com/national/
(Supplementary Fig. 13). The spatial distribution may be partly determined by the
archive/2011/11/how-the-war-on-terror-has-militarized-the-police/248047/.
storage location of recalled equipment.31 Many armoured units, for example, are
24. Hall, A. R. & Coyne, C. J. The militarization of U.S. domestic policing. Indep.
stationed in the South (for example, Georgia, North Carolina and Texas).
Rev. 17, 485–504 (2013).
Though the parallel trends assumption is unverifiable, initial diagnostic
25. Paul, J. & Birzer, M. L. The militarization of the American police force: a
checks in the pre-treatment period among matched agencies are reassuring.
critical assessment. Crit. Issues Just. Politics 1, 15–30 (2008).
Supplementary Figs. 6 and 7 report mean outcome values by group and quarter
26. Balko, R. Overkill: the Rise of Paramilitary Police Raids in America (Cato
along with bootstrapped confidence intervals. In addition, Supplementary Table 7
Institute, 2006).
reports coefficients for time and treatment group interactions for the pre-treatment
27. Phillips, S. W. & Kim, D.-Y. The effect of police paramilitary unit raids on
period. While demilitarized and unaffected agencies tend to have different baseline
crime at micro-places in Buffalo, New York. Int. J. Police Sci. Manage.18,
levels of crime, trends in each outcome do not differ across treated and matched
206–219 (2016).
sets during the pre-treatment period.
28. Moule, R. K. Jr., Parry, M. M. & Fox, B. Public support for police
Reporting Summary. Further information on research design is available in the use of SWAT: examining the relevance of legitimacy. J Crime Just. 42,
Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article. 45–59 (2019).
Nature HumaN BeHaviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NATurE HumAN BEHAvIOur Articles
29. Iacus, S. M., King, G. & Porro, G. Causal inference without balance checking: acknowledgements
coarsened exact matching. Polit. Anal. 20, 1–24 (2012). The author received no specific funding for this work. The author thanks K. Crabtree,
30. Mosher, C.J., Hart, T.C. & Terance, T.D. The Mismeasure of Crime C. Davenport, J. Mummolo, J. Rogowski, B. Schneer, M. Sen, Y. Shiraito, S. Streeter,
(Sage, 2011). Y. Zhukov and seminar audiences at the University of Michigan and Harvard University
31. Harris, M. C., Park, J., Bruce, D. J. & Murray, M. N. Peacekeeping force: for comments and suggestions. J. Beckman, A. Eldes, J. Fortney, S. Patel, B. Vomastek
effects of providing tactical equipment to local law enforcement. Am. Econ. J. and J. Walden provided helpful research assistance.
Econ. Policy 9, 291–313 (2017).
32. Law Enforcement Equipment Working Group. Recommendations Pursuant to
author contributions
Executive Order 13688 Federal Support for Local Law Enforcement Equipment
Acquisition. https://bja.ojp.gov/sites/g/files/xyckuh186/files/publications/ K.L. designed and performed the research, analysed the data and wrote the paper.
LEEWG_Report_Final.pdf (Bureau of Justice Assistance, 2015).
33. McCarthy, T. & Gambino L. Obama ban on police military gear falls short as Competing interests
critics say it’s a ‘publicity stunt’. The Guardian (1–6 May 2015).
The author declares no competing interests.
34. Newland, E. Executive orders in court. Yale Law J. 124, 2026–2099 (2015).
35. Kaplan J. Uniform crime reporting program data: offenses known and
clearances by arrest, 1960–2017 OpenICPSR https://doi.org/10.3886/ additional information
E100707V8 (2019).
Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/
36. Kaplan J. Uniform crime reporting program data: law enforcement officers
s41562-020-00986-6.
killed and assaulted (LEOKA) 1960–2017. OpenICPSR https://doi.org/10.3886/
E102180V6 (2019). Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to K.L.
37. Tausanovitch, C. & Warshaw, C. Measuring constituent policy preferences in Peer review information Primary handling editor: Aisha Bradshaw.
Congress, state legislatures, and cities. J. Politics 75, 330–342 (2013).
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
38. Iacus, S., King, G. & Porro, G. Causal inference without balance checking:
software for coarsened exact matching. J. Stat. Softw. 30, 1–24 (2012). Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
39. Ajilore, O. The militarization of local law enforcement: is race a factor? published maps and institutional affiliations.
Appl. Econ. Lett. 22, 1089–1093 (2015). © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2020
Nature HumaN BeHaviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
1
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
April
2020
Corresponding author(s): Kenneth Lowande
Last updated by author(s): Sep 14, 2020
Reporting Summary
Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency
in reporting. For further information on Nature Research policies, see our Editorial Policies and the Editorial Policy Checklist.
Statistics
For all statistical analyses, confirm that the following items are present in the figure legend, table legend, main text, or Methods section.
n/a Confirmed
The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
A statement on whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided
Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.
A description of all covariates tested
A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
A full description of the statistical parameters including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient)
AND variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)
For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted
Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.
For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated
Our web collection on statistics for biologists contains articles on many of the points above.
Software and code
Policy information about availability of computer code
Data collection All data collection and manipulation was conducted in R.
Data analysis All data analysis was conducted in R. Details regarding packages, versions, and custom code can be found in the deposited data and
replication code.
For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors and
reviewers. We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Research guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.
Data
Policy information about availability of data
All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable:
- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets
- A list of figures that have associated raw data
- A description of any restrictions on data availability
The data supporting the findings reported in this study, along with the underlying 1033 program inventory records, have been deposited in the Harvard Dataverse,
and can be found at: https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/XCTPNR
2
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
April
2020
Field-specific reporting
Please select the one below that is the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.
Life sciences Behavioural & social sciences Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences
For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/documents/nr-reporting-summary-flat.pdf
Behavioural & social sciences study design
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
Study description The study is a quantitative, and estimates difference-in-differences among a set of matched units.
Research sample Law enforcement agencies participating in the 1033 program.
Sampling strategy To prune the sample to comparable agencies, units were matched on a set of pre-treatment covariates. These are described in detail
in the methods section of the study. The sample sizes were determined to be sufficient to detect a 0.1 SD increase or decrease in the
dependent variables with 80% power, according to the power simulation we detail in the Supplementary Information.
Data collection All data is publicly available from the Law Enforcement Support Office of the Defense Logistics Agency, and from the FBI crime
statistics reporting system.
Timing The earliest data begin December 2014, and the latest were collected in March of 2020.
Data exclusions The sample excludes statewise agencies, tribal agencies, and special districts.
Non-participation There was no non-participation.
Randomization There was no randomization.
Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods
We require information from authors about some types of materials, experimental systems and methods used in many studies. Here, indicate whether each material,
system or method listed is relevant to your study. If you are not sure if a list item applies to your research, read the appropriate section before selecting a response.
Materials & experimental systems Methods
n/a Involved in the study n/a Involved in the study
Antibodies ChIP-seq
Eukaryotic cell lines Flow cytometry
Palaeontology and archaeology MRI-based neuroimaging
Animals and other organisms
Human research participants
Clinical data
Dual use research of concern