Articles
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-019-0804-2
Quantum reinforcement learning during human
decision-making
Ji-An Li 1,2, Daoyi Dong 3, Zhengde Wei1,4, Ying Liu5, Yu Pan6, Franco Nori 7,8 and
Xiaochu Zhang 1,9,10,11*
Classical reinforcement learning (CRL) has been widely applied in neuroscience and psychology; however, quantum reinforce-
ment learning (QRL), which shows superior performance in computer simulations, has never been empirically tested on human
decision-making. Moreover, all current successful quantum models for human cognition lack connections to neuroscience. Here
we studied whether QRL can properly explain value-based decision-making. We compared 2 QRL and 12 CRL models by using
behavioural and functional magnetic resonance imaging data from healthy and cigarette-smoking subjects performing the Iowa
Gambling Task. In all groups, the QRL models performed well when compared with the best CRL models and further revealed the
representation of quantum-like internal-state-related variables in the medial frontal gyrus in both healthy subjects and smok-
ers, suggesting that value-based decision-making can be illustrated by QRL at both the behavioural and neural levels.
O
riginating from early behavioural psychology, reinforce- explained well by quantum probability theory9–16. For example, one
ment learning is now a widely used approach in the fields work showed the superiority of a quantum random walk model over
of machine learning1 and decision psychology2. It typi- classical Markov random walk models for a modified random-dot
cally formalizes how one agent (a computer or animal) should take motion direction discrimination task and revealed quantum-like
actions in unknown probabilistic environments to maximize its aspects of perceptual decisions12. Another study proved the superi-
total reward. The agent selects actions according to value functions ority of one quantum model over the standard prospect model for
that describe the expectations for alternative decisions (value-based a two-stage gambling task using the Bayesian factor model com-
decision-making) and are influenced by reward, penalty and its parison11. In these works, the mathematical structure of quantum
beliefs about the current situation. probability theory was emphasized, rather than the physical expla-
Recently, quantum computation techniques were successfully nations for quantum mechanics. The assumption of low-level quan-
applied in the field of machine learning3. Based on the quantum tum physics processes is not necessary in these cases.
superposition principle and quantum parallelism, quantum rein- Although these quantum models were successful for some kinds
forcement learning (QRL) was proposed4, combining quantum of human decision-making, value-based decision-making17 (the
theory and reinforcement learning. This approach was later applied central issue of decision neuroscience and neuroeconomics18–20 and
to robot navigation5,6 and quantum machine learning7,8. Computer a hallmark of high-level cognition) has not yet been tackled using
simulations4,5 showed that QRL performs better on a large search quantum frameworks. Over the past decades, neuroscientific and
space, learns faster and balances better between exploration and psychological research on value-based decision-making has con-
exploitation compared with classical reinforcement learning (CRL). verged on the standard model of CRL2,21,22, providing highly fruit-
It was shown theoretically that QRL can achieve quadratic improve- ful explanations and surprisingly accurate predictions. Due to some
ments in learning efficiency and exponential improvements in per- seemingly quantum-like features of value-based decision-making
formance for a broad class of learning problems8. This algorithm (in real life, making a choice per se can influence one’s subjective
was also generalized to better adjust weights on favourable actions6, values for the alternatives) and the theoretical efficiency of quan-
which further demonstrated the robustness of this framework. tum learning algorithms, we aimed to test whether the QRL frame-
In a similar way to the introduction of quantum-inspired tech- work could also be useful and insightful for modelling value-based
niques in machine learning, quantum-inspired frameworks have decision-making.
also been introduced in psychology. There is evidence supporting Moreover, previous quantum models for human behaviour were
quantum models for human behaviour: in the last decade, several mainly supported by behavioural data. Only a few of them were
cognitive scientists found that some behavioural paradoxes and supported by evidence from electroencephalography (EEG) analy-
effects (for example, the conjunction fallacy and the order effect) sis, lacking spatial resolution and locality information23. We have
that resist explanations from classical probability theory could be little knowledge about how these quantum-like mechanisms are
1Eye Center, Dept. of Ophthalmology, the First Affiliated Hospital of USTC, Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at the Microscale, School of
Life Sciences, Division of Life Sciences and Medicine, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China. 2Department of Statistics and Finance,
School of Management, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China. 3School of Engineering and Information Technology, University of New
South Wales, Canberra, Australian Capital Territory, Australia. 4Shanghai Key Laboratory of Psychotic Disorders, Shanghai Mental Health Centre, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China. 5The First Affiliated Hospital of USTC, Division of Life Sciences and Medicine, University of
Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China. 6Key Laboratory of Applied Brain and Cognitive Sciences, School of Business and Management, Shanghai
International Studies University, Shanghai, China. 7Theoretical Quantum Physics Laboratory, RIKEN Cluster for Pioneering Research, Wakoshi, Japan.
8Department of Physics, The University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. 9Hefei Medical Research Centre on Alcohol Addiction, Anhui Mental Health
Centre, Hefei, China. 10Academy of Psychology and Behaviour, Tianjin Normal University, Tianjin, China. 11Centres for Biomedical Engineering, University of
Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China. *e-mail: zxcustc@ustc.edu.cn
NAture HumAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTuRe HuMaN BeHavIouR
implemented in the brain (for example, which brain area might par- The QSPP model performed well. After a careful search of the lit-
ticipate in quantum-like processes). erature, we implemented 12 CRL models designed to break down
Our goal is to explore quantum-like aspects of processes under- the IGT performance into subcomponents. Roughly speaking, all of
lying value-based decision-making. To this end, we applied QRL them contained three stages30 (Fig. 2a; see also Supplementary Fig. 2):
to value-based decision-making and studied how this quantum
1. Evaluate the outcome (for example, the value plus perseverance
framework could be implemented at both the behavioural and the
(VPP) rule).
neural levels.
2. Update the expectancy (for example, the Decay learning rule).
First, we collected behavioural and functional magnetic reso-
3. Make a choice (for example, the trial-independent choice
nance imaging (fMRI) data from 58 healthy subjects (control
(TIC) rule).
group) and 43 nicotine addicts (smoking group) performing
the Iowa Gambling Task (IGT)24. This is a value-based decision- Most of these models were developed in past works30–32, some of
making task that is well known among psychiatrists and neurosci- which were very successful in understanding the mechanisms
entists, designed to evaluate the degree of decision-making defects. and defects of decision-making32–35.
Its complexity and high ecological validity endow it with the abil-
ity to capture important components (motivational, learning and Using the principles of QRL, we developed two additional QRL
choice processes) underlying real-life decision-making. In previous models (Fig. 2b; see also Supplementary Fig. 2), the QSL model
works, many CRL models for the IGT were developed25 to break and the QSPP model, by replacing each classical component in the
down single task performance into these components. Some of CRL models with its quantum counterpart (see also Supplementary
these models were very successful in illustrating the subprocesses Table 1):
of value-based decision-making and explaining the behavioural dif-
1. The CRL models use the set-theoretic representation a, a,
ferences between healthy people and patients with decision-making 1 2
a, a to describe four actions (selecting each deck), while the
defects, such as drug addicts and brain-damaged populations. The 3 4
QRL models use the geometric representation |a〉, |a〉, |a〉,
smoking group was chosen based on the following considerations: 1 2 3
|a〉, with the four eigenvectors spanning an action space
smokers were reported to show impaired decision-making in the 4
(Hilbert space).
IGT26,27; the results from the smoking group could further vali-
2. The CRL models use the classical probability p(t) to describe
date the conclusions about the mechanisms of decision-making in j
the tendency of selecting action a, while the QRL models use
healthy people; and, by means of behavioural modelling and model- j
the quantum probability amplitude ψ such that the internal
based fMRI analysis, the mechanisms of addiction disorders were j
state can be represented as a superposition state in the action
better understood25. 4
Second, we developed two additional QRL models (quantum space, ∣ψ⟩=∑ j=1ψ j ∣a j⟩.
superposition state learning (QSL) and quantum superposition 3. The CRL models evaluate actions explicitly by value functions,
state plus perseverance (QSPP)) for the IGT and compared them to while the QRL models evaluate actions implicitly by the prob-
several well-established CRL models. We found that, in all groups, ability amplitude.
the QSPP model provided goodness-of-fit and simulation perfor- 4. The CRL models learn value functions from outcomes using
mance comparable to the best CRL models. We further replicated various learning rules, while the QRL models learn the proba-
these results in 504 healthy subjects (super group) from an online bility amplitude from experience using an amplitude-updating
IGT data pool28. algorithm (Grover iteration, Û ).
G
Third, we executed fMRI analyses to compare the neural sub- 5. The CRL models generate actions according to various choice
strates relevant to the learning processes in the QSPP model and the rules, while the QRL models generate actions by superposition
best-fitting CRL model. Because learning involves the updating of state collapse. Therefore, the QRL models work in a quantum-
outcome-evaluation-based internal states29, we proposed and ana- like manner different from the CRL models.
lysed several internal-state-related variables (generalized quantum
distance and uncertainty-related interaction in the QSPP model) We proposed a geometric and algebraic explanation for the main
that are important in the QRL models and found that they were rep- operator Û in the QRL framework (Fig. 2c; see also Supplementary
G
resented in the medial frontal gyrus (MeFG). Figs. 3 and 4 and the Further explanations of the quantum operator
Altogether, our findings support the idea of quantum-like pro- Û section in the Supplementary Methods). On the Bloch sphere,
G
cesses during value-based decision-making at both the behavioural in each trial, the north pole z ̂ = |a〉 represents the chosen action
and neural levels and provide the fMRI evidence connecting quan- and the south pole |a 〉 represents the unchosen actions. The vector
⊥
tum cognition to neuroscience. z′̂ = |ψ〉 is the internal superposition state, while its closeness to the
poles reflects the weights on actions. If |ψ〉 moves to the north pole,
results the agent will choose the same action in the next trial, but if |ψ〉 is
Task design and subject performance. Healthy (control group) rotated to the south pole, the agent will never choose the same action
and smoking (smoking group) subjects were recruited to perform in the next trial. During learning, the main operator Û =Q̂ Q̂ takes
G 2 1
the IGT24 in an fMRI scanner (Fig. 1a). In this task, the subjects a two-step rotation: Q̂ first rotates |ψ〉 into |ψ′〉 around z ̂= |a〉 (blue
1
selected one of four decks in each trial to obtain potential reward circle) and then Q̂ rotates |ψ′〉 into |ψ′′〉 around z′̂ = |ψ〉 (purple
2
or penalty points. They were required to learn the goodness of each circle), changing the closeness of the state vector to the two poles.
deck to maximize their total rewards. Regardless of which group The rotation angles are computed from the outcome (a linear map-
they were in, subjects chose the good decks significantly more ping from utility to rotation angles).
often in the last 20 trials than in the first 20 trials (control group For simplicity, the VPP models (models with the VPP rule) and
(two-tailed paired t test): t(57) = 17.84, P < 0.001, Cohen’s d = 3.52, the QSPP model are considered to be two-term models, while the
95% confidence interval: 0.54, 0.68; smoking group: t(42) = 10.02, others are considered to be one-term models, based on whether the
P < 0.001, Cohen’s d = 2.20, 95% confidence interval: 0.39, 0.60), perseverance part is included.
meaning that most of them gradually learned the task (Fig. 1b,c). These models were fitted using the optimization algorithm to
In addition to these two groups, we also analysed behavioural data maximize the log likelihood (LL) of each subject’s choice sequence.
from an online IGT data pool (super group of 504 healthy subjects; To test the feasibility of the QRL models, we performed model
see also Supplementary Fig. 1). comparisons based on the goodness-of-fit criterion and the
NAture HumAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTuRe HuMaN BeHavIouR Articles
a
b
10
5
0
Control group
–5
Smoking group
1 3 5 7 9
simulation method30 (see also Supplementary Results, section II for variable and estimating the distribution over model space38. Based
statistical test results). on the AICc and BIC, we obtained the expected model likelihood,
For the goodness-of-fit criterion, the corrected Akaike’s producing consistent results (Fig. 4). The QSPP model also showed
Information Criterion (AICc)36 and the Bayesian Information an inferred frequency larger than any other CRL models. The two
Criterion (BIC)37 provide a direct assessment of one-step-ahead QRL models together provided an exceedance probability larger
predictions. Smaller AICc or BIC values represent better fits. The than 0.99 in all cases.
mean AICc values for all of the models in each group are presented Unlike the goodness-of-fit criterion, the simulation method30
in Fig. 3a–c. Here all models outperformed the baseline model, was designed to assess the accuracy of one model generating pre-
which assumes that the agent chooses each deck at a fixed prob- dictions for entire choice sequences according to model parameters,
ability. The QSL model provided better fits than all of the one-term without relying on the subjects’ choice history. Based on the simu-
CRL models (red bars) in the smoking and super groups and was lated sequences, we computed the mean square errors (MSEs) of the
comparable to the best one-term CRL PVLDecayTDC model in proportion of choice (PoC; Fig. 5a–c) and the MSEs of each deck
the control group. The QSPP model provided better fits in all three selection (EDS; Fig. 5d–f). Here all the QRL models (orange bars)
groups than all other CRL models, including the VPPDeltaTIC had a performance comparable to (or even better than) the best
model, which was reported to be the best-fitting model among CRL CRL models (red or blue bars) in all groups. Additional checks of
models in former works32. The BIC values for all models provide the above distances between the behaviour of subjects and models
similar results (Fig. 3d–f). In addition to frequentist model com- are presented in Supplementary Fig. 5.
parison, we further applied Bayesian model comparison based on In conclusion, all comparison results indicate that the QSPP
the variational Bayesian method, treating the model as a random model is comparable to (or even better than) the CRL models at
kced
dab
–
dooG
snoitceles
1.0
0.5
0
0 0.5 1.0
Fraction correct in the first block
kcolb
tsal
eht
ni
tcerroc
noitcarF
Run I Run II Run III
Task Task Task Task Task Task Task Task Task
Rest Rest Rest Rest Rest Rest Rest Rest Rest Rest Rest Rest
Rest block
fixation 30 s Task block
Decision-making 4 s
Outcome 1 s
Good deck identification 6 s
Rest block
fixation 24 s
1 trial × 20
c
Fig. 1 | task diagram and task performance. a, An IGT diagram and fMRI scan processes. There were three 7-min fMRI scan runs, separated by intervals
of about 1 min. Each scan consisted of one 30-s rest block and three 106-s task and 24-s rest cycles. The last 6 s of each task block were designed for good
deck identification, which was not analysed in this study. The first 100 s contained 20 trials and each trial was divided into two events: during the decision-
making phase, 4 s were provided for card selection, and a random selection was made if no decision had been made during this period; during the outcome
phase, the reward and penalty were presented on the screen for 1 s. There were no inter-trial intervals. The blue bar above the decks showed the initial
3,000 points throughout the task and the orange bar showed the current accumulated points. b, The proportion of good minus bad deck selections in the
20-trial blocks. The shaded regions indicate the standard error. c, Subjects chose the good decks significantly more often in the last 20 trials than in the
first 20 trials. The markers are slightly jittered to show all subjects (blue circle, control group; orange triangle, smoking group). The dashed diagonal line
represents the equality line.
NAture HumAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTuRe HuMaN BeHavIouR
a Generalized quantum distances were represented at the neural
Utility Prospect utility level. To illustrate the learning process formalized by the QSPP
model, we factorized the main unitary operator Û and acquired
G
Decay learning rule one of the most important properties of this unitary operator:
quantum transition amplitudes (see the Quantum transition ampli-
tudes and probabilities section in the Supplementary Methods).
Outcome Perseverance Expectancy
Just as electrons can jump between energy levels when absorbing
or releasing energy, the agent’s preference can change between the
Valuation unchosen actions and the chosen action when acquiring informa-
tion from the environment (learning from outcomes). Another
TIC rule
way to depict the learning-induced change is the quantum distance
Probability
between superposition states in two adjacent trials. Such distances
b are pervasive and meaningful in the field of quantum informa-
Utility tion39, providing an approach to evaluate the distinguishability
of different states (how close two states are). In our case, this dis-
Amplitude tance evaluates to what degree the state is influenced by learning
updating
through unitary iteration (see the Quantum distances section in
the Supplementary Methods).
Superposition
Outcome Perseverance
state Although the transition amplitude and the quantum distance
Choice rule Collapse have different definitions, meanings and concrete values, we
Probability II Probability I found that there is a mathematical duality between the transition
amplitude and the quantum distance (see the Relations between
quantum transition amplitudes and quantum distances section in
Probability
the Supplementary Methods), similar to the two sides of a coin.
Therefore, we defined the generalized quantum distance as the
c ∣a〉
geometric average of these two signals, catching the overall effect
of Û . We computed the generalized quantum distance for each
∣ψ′〉 G
Q˄ ∣ψ〉Q˄ trial (Supplementary Fig. 6) and found that, on average, there was
1 2
θ ∣ψ′′〉 a downtrend over time, which means that the transition of prefer-
ences and the change of states induced by outcome learning are
y˄
reduced gradually by accumulated knowledge about the task rule.
φ We then executed model-based fMRI analysis40, which can relate
x˄
model predictions to fMRI data to locate hypothesized decision-
making processes in the brain and discriminate competing hypoth-
eses. We analysed the generalized quantum distance based on the
–z˄ = ∣a ⊥〉 blood-oxygen-level dependent (BOLD) data at the outcome period
in two groups (see generalized linear model (GLM) 3 in the fMRI
Fig. 2 | Diagrams of model architecture. a, The VPPDecayTIC model. data analyses section in the Methods). All reported voxels sur-
VPPDecayTIC31 is a CRL model containing three stages: (1) evaluate the vived the family-wise error correction at a cluster level threshold of
outcome with the VPP rule; (2) update the expectancy with the Decay P < 0.05, with P < 0.001.
uncorrected
learning rule; and (3) make a choice with the TIC rule. b, The QSPP In the control group, the generalized quantum distance signifi-
model. QSPP is a QRL model; the perseverance part is absent in one-term cantly activated the MeFG/anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), the
CRL models and in the one-term QRL model (QSL). Model details and precentral gyrus, the insula, the precuneus, the left fusiform gyrus,
comparisons can be found in the main text. c, A geometric explanation of the inferior parietal lobule (IPL), the middle frontal gyrus (MiFG)
Û G that adjusts the weights of the chosen action and unchosen actions. and the right inferior temporal gyrus (ITG)/fusiform gyrus (Fig. 6;
The north pole zẑ = |a〉 on the surface of the unit sphere is the chosen see also Supplementary Table 2), showing a unique quantum-like
action and the south pole |a ⊥〉 is the unchosen one. The vector zẑ′ = |ψ〉 neural mechanism for how the internal state is changed due to
is the internal state, while its closeness to the poles reflects the weights external information.
on the actions. The spherical coordinate parameters (polar angle θ and In addition, we did not find activation related to generalized
azimuthal angle φ) and the rectangular coordinate axes (xx̂ and yŷ) are quantum distances in the smoking group, indicating that their rep-
determined by the Bloch sphere representation for our QRL models. During resentation might be impaired in smokers.
learning, the main operator Û G first rotates |ψ〉 into |ψ′〉 around zẑ = |a〉
(blue circle) and then rotates |ψ′〉 into |ψ′′〉 around zẑ′ = |ψ〉 (purple circle), Neural substrates related to uncertainty revealed by the QSPP
changing the closeness of the state vector to the two poles (for details, model. Uncertainty might be another useful variable to study to
see the section “Further explanations of the quantum operator Û G” in the better understand the differences between the learning processes
Supplementary Methods). reflected by the VPPDecayTIC and QSPP models. Uncertainty
about internal states, an important task-related variable represented
at the neural level41,42, reflects the external unstable environment,
the behavioural level, proving the QRL to be a powerful frame- interacts with outcomes43 and assists learning44,45. We computed the
work to describe value-based decision-making behaviour. For the uncertainty provided by the two models (see the Uncertainty sec-
following analyses, we mainly concentrated on our QSPP model tion in the Supplementary Methods). Uncertainty decreased over
and the best-fitting VPPDecayTIC model as the representatives of time (Supplementary Fig. 7), meaning that the subjects’ uncertainty
the QRL and CRL models, respectively. We analysed the similar- about the task rule dropped gradually. We then performed another
ity in their parameters, showing that the VPPDecayTIC model was model-based fMRI analysis, studying uncertainty and the interac-
a reasonable counterpart of the QSPP model (see Supplementary tion of uncertainty and penalty/reward based on the BOLD data
Results, section III). (see GLM4–5 in the fMRI data analyses section in the Methods,
NAture HumAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTuRe HuMaN BeHavIouR Articles
fMRI results of uncertainty in Supplementary Results, section VI In the control group, the difference (control QSPP − control
and Supplementary Table 3). Penalty and reward were separated VPPDecayTIC) in the effects of the uncertainty × penalty interac-
because they were reported to have different roles in IGT process- tion showed significant activation in the right MeFG, the left orbital
ing and performance46. frontal cortex (OFC), the left MeFG/ACC, the middle temporal
PPSQ LSQ CDTyaceDPPV CITyaceDPPV CDTatleDPPV CITatleDPPV CITyaceDLVP CITyaceDLVE CDTyaceDLVE CDTyaceDLVP CITatleDLVP CDTatleDLVP CITatleDLVE CDTatleDLVE enilesaB
200
100
0
PPSQ CDTyaceDPPV CITyaceDPPV CDTatleDPPV CDTyaceDLVP CITatleDPPV CITyaceDLVP CDTyaceDLVE CITyaceDLVE LSQ CITatleDLVP CDTatleDLVP CITatleDLVE CDTatleDLVE enilesaB
400
200
0
CIB CIB
PPSQ CDTyaceDPPV CDTyaceDLVP CITyaceDLVP CITyaceDPPV CDTatleDPPV CITatleDPPV CDTyaceDLVE LSQ CITyaceDLVE CDTatleDLVP CITatleDLVP CITatleDLVE CDTatleDLVE enilesaB
CIB
400
200
0
PPSQ LSQ CDTyaceDPPV CITyaceDLVP CITyaceDLVE CITyaceDPPV CDTatleDPPV CITatleDPPV CDTyaceDLVE CDTyaceDLVP CITatleDLVP CDTatleDLVP CITatleDLVE CDTatleDLVE enilesaB
200
100
0
PPSQ CDTyaceDPPV CITyaceDPPV CDTatleDPPV CITatleDPPV CDTyaceDLVP CITyaceDLVP LSQ CDTyaceDLVE CITyaceDLVE CITatleDLVP CDTatleDLVP CITatleDLVE CDTatleDLVE enilesaB
200
0
cCIA cCIA
PPSQ CDTyaceDPPV CITyaceDPPV CDTatleDPPV CITatleDPPV LSQ CDTyaceDLVP CITyaceDLVP CDTyaceDLVE CITyaceDLVE CDTatleDLVP CITatleDLVP CITatleDLVE CDTatleDLVE enilesaB
cCIA
a b c
400
200
0
d e f
Fig. 3 | the AiCc and BiC of each model, computed separately for each group. a, The AICc in the control group. b, The AICc in the smoking group.
c, The AICc in the super group, with a different range from the first two because there were fewer trials for the super group. d–f, The BICs in the control
(d), smoking (e) and super groups (f). The orange bars represent the QRL models, including the QSL (one-term) and the QSPP (two-term) models.
The light blue bars represent the two-term CRL models, while the red ones show the one-term CRL models. All panels demonstrate the good performance
of the QRL models. The error bars indicate the standard error.
PPSQ CDTyaceDPPV CITyaceDLVP CITyaceDPPV CITatleDLVP LSQ CITatleDPPV CDTyaceDLVP CDTatleDPPV CDTyaceDLVE CITyaceDLVE CITatleDLVE CDTatleDLVP CDTatleDLVE enilesaB
0.8
0.4
0
PPSQ LSQ CDTyaceDPPV CDTatleDPPV CITyaceDPPV CDTyaceDLVP CITatleDPPV CDTyaceDLVE CITyaceDLVE CITyaceDLVP CITatleDLVP CDTatleDLVP CITatleDLVE CDTatleDLVE enilesaB
0.8
0.4
0
PPSQ LSQ CDTyaceDPPV CDTyaceDLVP CDTyaceDLVE CITyaceDLVP CDTatleDLVE CITyaceDLVE CITatleDPPV CITyaceDPPV CITatleDLVP CDTatleDPPV CITatleDLVE CDTatleDLVP enilesaB
0.8
0.4
0
ytilibaborp
desab-CIB
PPSQ CITyaceDLVP LSQ CDTyaceDPPV CDTyaceDLVE CDTyaceDLVP CITyaceDPPV CITatleDPPV CDTatleDPPV CITatleDLVP CITyaceDLVE CITatleDLVE CDTatleDLVE CDTatleDLVP enilesaB
0.8
0.4
0
LSQ PPSQ CITyaceDLVP CITyaceDLVE CDTyaceDLVP CDTyaceDLVE CDTyaceDPPV CDTatleDPPV CDTatleDLVP CITatleDLVE CITatleDPPV CITyaceDPPV CITatleDLVP CDTatleDLVE enilesaB
0.8
0.4
0
PPSQ CDTyaceDPPV LSQ CITatleDPPV CDTatleDPPV CITyaceDPPV CITatleDLVP CITyaceDLVP CITyaceDLVE CDTatleDLVE CDTatleDLVP CITatleDLVE CDTyaceDLVP CDTyaceDLVE enilesaB
0.8
0.4
0
ytilibaborp
desab-cCIA
ytilibaborp
desab-cCIA
ytilibaborp
desab-CIB
ytilibaborp
desab-cCIA
ytilibaborp
desab-CIB
a b c
d e f
Fig. 4 | the inferred model probability of each model, computed separately for each group. a–c, The AICc-based inferred probability in the control
(a), smoking (b) and super groups (c). d–f, The BIC-based inferred probability in the control (d), smoking (e) and super groups (f). The orange bars
represent the QRL models. The light blue bars represent the two-term CRL models, while the red ones show the one-term CRL models. All panels
demonstrate the good performance of the QRL models; the dotted line shows the average level.
NAture HumAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTuRe HuMaN BeHavIouR
gyrus (MiTG) and the left MiTG/angular gyrus/posterior cingulate MiTG/angular gyrus in the control group (Fig. 7d; see also
gyrus (PCC)/precuneus (Fig. 7a,b; see also Supplementary Table 4). Supplementary Table 5). No significant difference was found
These results revealed distinct quantum-like mechanisms for how between the two models related to the interaction of uncertainty
learning from a penalty is modulated by uncertainty. and reward in the smoking group.
In the smoking group, we also found the difference (smoking
QSPP − smoking VPPDecayTIC) of effects of the interaction posi- Discussion
tively related to the left MeFG, left MiTG and left IPL (Fig. 7a,c). In the present study, we developed two additional QRL models for
The other areas activated in the control group showed no activation the IGT. We compared these two QRL models with 12 CRL models
in the smoking group. and found that the QSPP model was comparable to the best CRL
For the interaction of uncertainty and reward, we found acti- models. We also studied the generalized quantum distances and
vation in the left MeFG (nearly significant), left MiTG and left the uncertainty × penalty/reward interaction based on fMRI data
PPSQ LSQ CITatleDPPV CITyaceDPPV CITatleDLVP CDTatleDLVP CDTatleDPPV CDTyaceDPPV CITyaceDLVP CDTyaceDLVP CITatleDLVE CDTatleDLVE CITyaceDLVE CDTyaceDLVE
0.04
0.02
0
PPSQ LSQ CITatleDPPV CDTatleDPPV CITyaceDPPV CDTatleDLVP CITatleDLVP CDTyaceDPPV CITatleDLVE CDTatleDLVE CITyaceDLVP CDTyaceDLVP CITyaceDLVE CDTyaceDLVE
0.10
0.05
0
ESM
CoP
PPSQ LSQ CITyaceDPPV CITatleDPPV CDTyaceDPPV CITatleDLVP CDTatleDPPV CDTatleDLVP CITatleDLVE CDTatleDLVE CDTyaceDLVP CITyaceDLVP CDTyaceDLVE CITyaceDLVE
0.05
0
PPSQ LSQ CITatleDPPV CITatleDLVP CITyaceDPPV CDTatleDLVP CDTatleDPPV CDTyaceDPPV CITyaceDLVP CDTyaceDLVP CITatleDLVE CDTatleDLVE CDTyaceDLVE CITyaceDLVE
0.02
0.01
0
PPSQ LSQ CITatleDPPV CDTatleDPPV CDTatleDLVP CITyaceDPPV CITatleDLVP CDTyaceDPPV CITatleDLVE CDTatleDLVE CITyaceDLVP CDTyaceDLVP CITyaceDLVE CDTyaceDLVE
0.1
0
ESM
SDE
ESM
CoP
ESM
SDE
PPSQ CITyaceDPPV LSQ CITatleDPPV CDTyaceDPPV CITatleDLVP CDTatleDLVP CDTatleDPPV CITatleDLVE CDTatleDLVE CITyaceDLVP CDTyaceDLVP CITyaceDLVE CDTyaceDLVE
ESM
CoP
ESM
SDE
a b c
d e f
0.10
0.05
0
Fig. 5 | the simulation results of each model, computed separately for each group. a–c, The MSEs of the PoC in the control (a), smoking (b) and super
groups (c). d–f, The MSEs of EDS in the control (d), smoking (e) and super groups (f). All panels demonstrate the good performance of the QRL models.
All error bars indicate the standard error.
MeFG/ACC Left and right precentral gyrus
MeFG/ACC Precuneus
Left insula Right insula
x = –1 y = 10 y = –15 y = 66
ACC
IPL Left MiFG Right MiFG
Left fusiform
Left fusiform Right ITG/fusiform
y = 70 y = 50 z = 22 y = 55
Fig. 6 | Generalized quantum distance (computed by the QSPP model)-related activity in the control group. The generalized quantum distance
significantly activated the MeFG/ACC, the precentral gyrus, the insula, the precuneus, the left fusiform gyrus, the IPL, the MiFG and the right ITG/fusiform
gyrus. All coordinates (in mm) are plotted in RAI (right–anterior–inferior, also known as radiological coordinates) order (i.e., −right, +left; −anterior,
+posterior; −inferior, +superior).
NAture HumAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTuRe HuMaN BeHavIouR Articles
a
Left MeFG
Left MeFG
Left ACC
Right MiTG
Left MiTG
Left MiTG
x = 11 z = 3 x = 11 z = 3
b c
PCC/precuneus
Left IPL
Left MiTG/angular gyrus
Right MeFG
Left OFC
x = –19 x = 38 y = 66 x = 31
d
Left MiTG/angular gyrus
Left MiTG
z = 3 y = 66
Fig. 7 | fmri results of the uncertainty × penalty/reward interaction. a, The uncertainty × penalty interaction positively related to the left MeFG and
left MiTG in both the control group (left panel; control QSPP − control VPPDecayTIC) and the smoking group (right panel; smoking QSPP − smoking
VPPDecayTIC). b, The uncertainty × penalty interaction positively related to the right MeFG, left OFC and left MiTG/angular gyrus/PCC/precuneus in
the control group. c, The uncertainty × penalty interaction positively related to the left IPL in the smoking group. d, The uncertainty × reward interaction
positively related to the MiTG and the left MiTG/angular gyrus in the control group (control QSPP − control VPPDecayTIC). All coordinates are plotted
(in mm) in RAI order (i.e., −right, +left; −anterior, +posterior; −inferior, +superior).
in healthy subjects and smokers. We found several consistencies weights are implemented by value functions (the expectancy for
and differences in brain activity between the control and smoking decks), while in the QRL models, the weights are expressed by the
groups, which reveal the important brain regions for QRL; they are probability amplitude for each action (superposition state overall).
discussed below. Cognitively, during each trial’s learning period in the CRL mod-
To compare these models, we used the goodness-of-fit criterion els, the weight on the chosen action is updated (for example, by
and the simulation method. The goodness-of-fit criterion evalu- prediction errors) and the weights on unchosen actions decay or
ated the accuracy of the one-step-ahead predictions of the models. remain unchanged, independently of the chosen action. However,
Using the AICc and BIC, the QSPP model provided a better fit than in the QRL models, the superposition state can be visualized as a
all CRL models. Unlike one-step-ahead predictions, the simulation point (vector) on the surface of a three-dimensional sphere (Bloch
method produced whole selection sequences without relying on the sphere) and the adjustment of weights on each action is simulta-
subjects’ real choices. With two MSE indexes, the QSPP model kept neously reflected in the movement of the point location, which is
its good performance. More importantly, the QSPP model showed implemented as the rotation of the point (superposition state) on
superior performance in all three groups, indicating that this can be the sphere surface around an axis. In short, the CRL models we
generalized for more diverse subjects. used adjust the weights on the chosen action and unchosen actions
The superiority of the one-term Decay models over the one-term independently, separably and locally during the valuation process,
Delta models using the goodness-of-fit criterion was reversed with while our QRL models adjust the weights on the chosen action and
the simulation method (see Supplementary Results, section I). This unchosen actions dependently, inseparably and globally.
phenomenon was also reported in previous works; this could be In contrast to simple modifications of the CRL models (for
because the two rules have different reliances on past outcomes and example, adding or deleting components in the CRL models), our
past choices30,47. The Delta rule provides better long-term (whole QRL models provide us with a different perspective from traditional
sequence) predictions and the Decay rule makes better short-term ones and point out other possible directions for modelling, such as
(one-step-ahead) predictions. The QRL models achieved good per- geometric state representation, unitary state evolution and Grover
formance in both the goodness-of-fit criterion and the simulation iteration updating.
method, indicating that they make good predictions for both the The QRL models are also different from the original QRL frame-
long term and short term. work4,6, in which the cumulative value function (such as the expec-
Generally, the learning process in value-based decision-mak- tancy for decks in the IGT, the state value function V(s) and the
ing is the adjustment of the weights on each action (for example, state-action value function Q(s, a) in reinforcement learning) was
the preference/tendency for each deck). In the CRL models, the used for superposition state updating. In practice, we found that the
NAture HumAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTuRe HuMaN BeHavIouR
incorporation of cumulative value functions did not significantly undeveloped and have much potential. More importantly, the QRL
increase model performance. In the field of decision neuroscience, framework reveals a different perspective on human behaviour and
all reinforcement learning models involve the calculation of cumu- these two frameworks can reap a substantial number of benefits
lative values, while our QRL models do not assume the use of such from each other.
a component. It seems to be consistent with our daily life experi- This fMRI study supports the idea of quantum cognition at the
ences: we sometimes do not feel the existence of such a computa- neural level. For the learning process of unitary iteration in the
tional process during this kind of decision-making. Although we QSPP model, the quantum transition amplitude describes the tran-
can explain that this process is automatic, habitual and unconscious, sition between actions due to external information. The quantum
our QRL models provide a potential different way: cumulative value distance measures the distinguishability between two quantum
computation could be absent during value-based decision-making. states (that is, how close they are) and thus describes the influ-
Whether cumulative value functions are profitable in the QRL mod- ence on internal states by learning from outcomes. The generalized
els is an open question. In future research, it is worth investigating quantum distances take into consideration the duality between the
whether they can further improve the performance. quantum distance and the transition amplitude and thus catch the
Although the QRL models did not overwhelmingly outper- overall property of the main operator. The transition amplitude and
form the CRL models (for example, some behavioural effects can the quantum distance showed activation consistent with the gener-
be explained by only the QRL models), one should be aware that alized quantum distance, indicating the rationality of the definition
the QRL framework is still in its infancy and undoubtedly deserves of our generalized quantum distance (see Supplementary Results,
additional studies. Compared with the classical framework, the section V). The generalized quantum distance can be considered
QRL framework has several potential theoretical advantages: as the interaction between the internal superposition state and the
outcome, sharing a similar critical concept with the interaction of
1. Quantum probability theory, as a generalized probability the-
uncertainty and outcome (also discussed in the next paragraph). We
ory, provides a stronger representation for tasks and internal
found that the generalized quantum distances were represented in
states (such as allowing the internal states to be in an indefinite
the MeFG/ACC, the precentral gyrus, the insula, the MiFG, the pre-
state before an action is taken10).
cuneus, the IPL and the fusiform gyrus (because the MeFG is also
2. From the perspective of information processing, there are am-
activated for the uncertainty × penalty/reward interaction, which
ple quantum features (such as coherence and entanglement)
we discuss later). The MiFG, the precuneus and the fusiform gyrus
not (fully) utilized in the current models that could be benefi-
were reported to be activated in many decision-making tasks under
cial in the future.
uncertainty53–56. The IPL was reported to play a role in decision-
3. In principle, the Grover algorithm can have a quadratic speed-
making under uncertainty, updating the evaluation for actions56,57.
up (i.e., the improvement of time complexity from O(N) to
The precentral gyrus is related to the preparation and execution of
O(N1/2)) on learning over classical algorithms48. Recently, sev-
motor responses in decision-making55. The insula was implicated
eral theoretical works8,49 showed that quantum enhancement
in interoception, emotion and risky decision-making, such as risk
can be achieved in learning efficiency, learning performance
experience representation and prediction error representation55,56,58.
and meta-learning using the QRL framework.
Therefore, the activation in these brain areas reveals quantum-like
We also discuss the possible limitations of our QRL models, aspects of state representation, learning and other possible down-
point out areas for improving them and call attention to potential stream processes, such as evaluation and action generation related
future directions: to internal states.
Uncertainty is an internal-state attribute that reflects the exter-
1. The general QRL algorithms consist of two sequential stages:
nal environment; it is influenced by outcomes (penalty and reward).
mapping outcomes (reward or penalty) to learning factors and
Therefore, similar to generalized quantum distance, the uncer-
mapping learning factors to a parametric transformation (uni-
tainty × penalty/reward interaction revealed a unique quantum-
tary operator). In our models, we used the utility function in
like modulation effect of outcomes on the internal state, involving
the first stage and a two-step rotation on the Bloch sphere in
integration and learning. Consistent with previous results, we
the second stage, while a substantial number of function forms
found the same brain area (the MeFG) activated again in both the
remain largely unexplored.
control and the smoking groups, indicating that the quantum-like
2. The learning process of our QRL algorithm (and of previous
mechanisms in the MeFG may be the hub of quantum-like effects
QRL algorithms) is described by an equivalent two-dimen-
in valued-based decision-making, affecting well-known cognitive
sional subspace (spanned by the chosen action vector |a〉 and
processes (for example, uncertainty influenced by penalty) during
the unchosen action vector |a 〉) of the full four-dimensional
⊥ reinforcement learning. Our MeFG is a part of the medial frontal
space, enabling its visualization on the Bloch sphere. To show
cortex, which was reported to be involved in decision-making21,59–62,
more detailed information during high-dimensional learning,
such as the generation of internal voluntary action selection guided
new geometric visualization methods are required, such as the
by memory and endogenous cues. Therefore, the MeFG might par-
generalization of the Bloch sphere to higher dimensions50.
ticipate in state representation and collapse (action generation) in a
3. There are many other advanced techniques in quantum cogni-
quantum-like manner.
tion modelling51 (such as mixed state, von Neumann entropy
We also found that the uncertainty × penalty interaction acti-
and positive operator valued measures) and developments
vated the ACC, the OFC, the MiTG, the angular gyrus/MiTG and
in QRL algorithms (such as reinforcement learning using
quantum Boltzmann machines52) that may be enlightening the PCC/precuneus and that the uncertainty × reward interaction
activated the MiTG and the angular gyrus/MiTG. The ACC was
and useful.
reported to represent prediction errors and learning rate63 and mon-
4. We showed the superior performance of our models for only
itor and integrate outcomes44. The OFC was reported to represent
the IGT, while more decision-making tasks are worthy of future
prediction errors, update values64, evaluate the amount of uncer-
investigation. In addition, new value-based decision-making
tainty65,66, optimize learning rates under uncertainty54 and repre-
tasks should be designed to further explore the differences be-
sent abstract features of external outcomes63. The angular gyrus has
tween the QRL and CRL models.
been implicated in risky decision-making requiring visual atten-
We think it is too early to conclude that we should abandon one tion67. The PCC was reported to have functional connections with
framework and accept another one because they both remain largely the MeFG, the precuneus, the MiFG, the fusiform gyrus and the
NAture HumAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTuRe HuMaN BeHavIouR Articles
precentral gyrus during the IGT56, which were activated by gener- (smoking group: all men; mean age ± s.d.: 24.44 ± 2.34 yr; mean education ± s.d.:
alized quantum distances. These areas activated by the interaction 16.13 ± 1.92 yr; more than 10 cigarettes per day for at least 1 yr) participated in the
IGT and were included in the following behavioural modelling analysis. While
might reflect a role in monitoring learning processes and connect-
no statistical methods were used to predetermine sample sizes, previous works
ing relevant brain areas and functions. Altogether, these areas acti- on the IGT using fMRI used sample sizes typically between 15 and 30 (for example,
vated by internal-state-related variables, including the MeFG hub, see refs. 86–88) and our study had a reasonable number of subjects to produce
might work as a network in a quantum-like manner, representing stable results.
internal states, learning from the outcomes and generating actions. All subjects, with no prior knowledge of the task, were recruited by internet
advertisements. They had normal or corrected-to-normal vision and were
The MeFG and MiTG were also activated by uncertainty × pen-
right-handed. They did not have any major medical illnesses, major psychiatric
alty interaction in the smoking group, supporting the generalization disorders, neurological illnesses or a history of dependence on any drug (except
of our fMRI results. By contrast, the ACC, the OFC, the angular nicotine in the smoking group), or gross structural abnormalities in their
gyrus/MiTG and the PCC/precuneus showed quantum-like inter- T1-weighted images. Informed consent was collected from all subjects and the
study was authorized by the Research Ethics Committee of the University of
action-related activity in the control group but not in the smoking
Science and Technology of China and conformed to the tenets of the Declaration
group, meaning that they are more sensitive to smoking addiction.
of Helsinki.
This phenomenon indicates that the decreased decision-making
ability in smokers might relate to the inability of these regions to Procedure. Subjects were required to make repeated choices from four decks to
represent the interaction, although further work is warranted to gain or lose a certain number of points and were told that the final payment was
determine the exact causation. Combining these results and the dis- determined by their final scores. Next, subjects completed the training session for
the task outside the fMRI scanner; this lasted 5 min without any real payment.
cussion in the last paragraph indicates that the smokers were still
The session presented only equal pay-offs across all decks during the training
able to represent the internal states and generate actions in a quan- session of the IGT to avoid disturbance. All the subjects were told that there were
tum-like way, but show an injured ability to represent outcomes and ‘good decks’ and ‘bad decks’ that would give rise to a net gain or net loss in the
learn from experience. long term, respectively. Their purpose was to find out the invariable rule in the
In addition, the uncertainty × reward interaction showed only IGT through exploration from the beginning of the task and the training was just
to become familiar with the operational interface. The difference between the
nearly significant activation in the MeFG between the two models,
training and experimental sessions was clear to the subjects. After a 10-min break,
which might be because people are usually more sensitive to pen- the subjects executed three in-scanner runs of the IGT. They had 3,000 initial
alty than reward68. Moreover, the IPL was activated by the uncer- task points as the ‘start-up capital’ and received a payment corresponding to the
tainty × penalty interaction in the smoking group but not in the task points they obtained in the scanner. Every 100 points could be exchanged for
control group; this requires further studies. This activation in the 1 Chinese yuan (about USD 0.15). The 3,000 initial points were not included in
behavioural analyses.
IPL also indicates that the reduced activation in other areas in the
Data collection and analysis were not performed blind to the conditions of the
smoking group is not due to the number of subjects or our data experiments. There was no randomization in the data collection, the organization
quality, but reflects the effect of addiction. of the experimental conditions or stimulus presentations.
Although quantum frameworks are successful in modelling cog-
nition, how quantum-like mechanisms are feasible in the brain is still Task and stimuli. The IGT is exactly the same as in the previous studies27,56. In
this task, there were four decks of cards (decks A, B, C and D, presented from left
unclear69. Of course, unlike other quantum phenomena in biology70,
to right). On the front of each card there were gain points and possible loss points.
our fMRI results do not suggest that our brain is quantized. Even a
The subject would obtain net points (gain − loss) in each trial.
classical brain can generate quantum-like functions and behaviour Deck A gave 100 (gain) points for each card and −150, −200, −250, −300 and
following quantum principles. Many scientists believe that quantum −350 (loss) points for five cards, respectively, out of every ten cards. Deck B also
probability theory is usually more emphasized in quantum cogni- gave 100 (gain) points for each card and −1,250 (loss) points once out of every ten
tion than its physical counterpart71. Physicists showed that the clas-
cards. On average, ten choices of deck A or deck B resulted in −250 net points.
Deck C gave 50 (gain) points for every card and −25, −40, −50, −60 and −75
sical dynamic system might have quantum-like behaviour under (loss) points for five cards, respectively, out of every ten cards. Deck D also gave
coarse-grained measurements72–75 and that an artificial neural net- 50 (gain) points for every card but −250 (loss) points once out of every ten cards.
work can approximate the wave function of a system efficiently76. On average, ten choices of deck C or deck D resulted in 250 net points. Deck A and
There was also an existence proof that the common quantum prob- deck B were disadvantageous because they resulted in an overall loss, although they
gave a relatively larger gain in most trials. Deck C and deck D were advantageous
ability operators can be implemented in classical recurrent neural
because they resulted in an overall gain, despite giving a relatively smaller gain in
networks with neural oscillation and synchronization77. Based on most trials. To encourage as many subjects as possible to find the rule, the task was
these and our work, we could imagine a possible approach bridging extended to 180 trials from the original 100 trials.
quantum cognition and neural implementation (see Supplementary The 180 trials were separated into three scan runs. Each scan run included
Discussion, section II). three task blocks separated by a 24-s rest (fixation) block and each task block
consisted of 20 trials. Each trial contained a 4-s decision period and a 1-s
In conclusion, we have shown that the QRL framework can be
outcome period.
useful in the fields of decision neuroscience and neuroeconomics
and that it is a potential competitor of CRL. In view of the great Online data pool. There was an online IGT data pool28 of 617 healthy subjects
success achieved by CRL in studies of emotion78, psychiatric disor- from 10 studies. These subjects completed the IGT with 95–150 trials (95 trials:
ders such as addiction and depression79,80, social behaviour81, free 15 subjects from 1 study; 100 trials: 504 subjects from 7 studies; 150 trials:
will82 and many other cognitive functions, we hope that QRL will 98 subjects from 2 studies). We analysed only the data from the 504 subjects,
because the remaining 113 subjects performed IGT with a different number
also shed light on them. It is necessary to perform wider and deeper
of trials and the group of 504 subjects could already represent the whole
studies on the QRL framework. Since QRL is one type of quantum IGT data pool.
learning10, we also hope that other methods, including quantum
Bayesian learning83 and quantum neural network learning84, will be Computational modelling. The baseline model. This model serves as a baseline
explored in the future. Because of the marriage of QRL and deci- reference89. It assumes that the agent chooses each deck at a fixed probability. There
are three free parameters here, p , p and p, for the probability of choosing A, B
sion neuroscience, the possible resulting discipline could be termed A B C
as quantum neuroeconomics. “Is there a quantum neuroeconom- and C decks, respectively. p D = 1 − (p A + p B + p C) is the remaining probability.
ics?” asked Piotrowski and Sladkowski85. Now, we are approaching Expectancy valence learning (EVL) and prospect valence learning (PVL) models. The
the answer. architecture of these two types of model can be found in Supplementary Fig. 2a.
Utility function. The expectancy utility function simply assumes that the utility is
methods the weighted difference of current gain and loss90:
Participants. Fifty-eight healthy subjects (control group: 9 females; mean
age ± s.d.: 23.42 ± 2.36 yr; mean education ± s.d.: 16.58 ± 1.79 yr) and 43 smokers u(t)=(1−W)×gain(t)−W×∣loss(t)∣ (1)
NAture HumAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTuRe HuMaN BeHavIouR
where W (0 < W < 1) measures the weights for loss points against gain points. The choice probability here is also calculated by the SoftMax function but
The prospect utility function68 is believed to explain the gain–loss frequency with V(t):
j
effect91. The prospect utility u(t) is:
u(t)=  −x( λt ∣) xα
(t)∣α
ii ff x x((t t))≥ <00
(2)
Pr[δj(t)=1]=
∑
k4e =x 1p e{ xθ p(t {θ)V (tj( )t V) k}
(t)}
(10)
By replacing the TIC rule with the TDC rule, we similarly obtain the
where x(t) = gain(t) − |loss(t)| is the net outcome in trial t, α (0 < α < 2) is a shape
VPPDecayTDC and the VPPDeltaTDC models.
parameter of the utility function and λ (0 < λ < 10) is a loss-aversion parameter.
Raw pay-offs within data are divided by 100 (default scale)92.
The QSL model. The architecture of this model can be found in Supplementary
Fig. 2b.
Learning rules. The Delta learning rule, or the Rescorla–Wagner rule93, is widely
used in the fields of reinforcement learning and IGT studies89,90:
State representation and action selection. In the IGT, there are four actions
E j(t)=E j(t−1)+kδj(t−1)[u(t−1)−E j(t−1)] (3) r ae sp er le es men enti tn sg
o
t fh te
h
es e al ce tc it oio nn
s
eo tf
.
e Ta hc uh
s
d
,
e thc ek .
p
I rn
o
bth ae
b
ic ll ia tis es si c oa fl em aco hd e al cs t,
i
t oh ne y
fo
a rr me m
a
mod ee al sle ud
re
on the discrete action set, requiring the sum of all the probabilities to equal 1. If we
where E j(t) is the expectancy for deck j in trial t (t ≥ 2 and E j(1) = 0) and δj(t) is consider p(t) as the probability of choosing deck j in trial t, then the constraint is:
1 if deck j is chosen in trial t and 0 otherwise. Here k is the learning rate of the j
prediction error [u(t − 1) − E j(t − 1)]. 4
The Decay learning rule94 assumes that the expectancy about each deck will ∑p(t)=1 (11)
j
decay with time and the expectancy of the chosen deck in trial t is updated by u(t):
j=1
E j(t)=AE j(t−1)+δj(t−1)u(t−1) (4)
The QSL model allows the agent to be in an indefinite state (action state),
formally called the superposition state. The superposition state is a vector in a
where A (0 < A < 1) is a decay parameter describing the strength of D-dimensional Hilbert space (action space) spanned by D orthogonal basis vectors
expectancy discounting.
denoted by the symbol |a j〉, j = 1, …, D, if using the Dirac bra-ket notation. For the
Choice rules. A choice rule can be described as a balance between exploration and
IGT, D = 4 and these basis vectors, or eigenvectors, |a 1〉, |a 2〉, |a 3〉 and |a 4〉 represent
the actions of choosing the A, B, C or D deck, respectively. Then the superposition
exploitation. At first, agents explore the goodness of decks and after several trials
state of the agent in trial t is:
they exploit the knowledge acquired before, to maximize their overall pay-off.
A common choice rule is the Boltzmann exploration or SoftMax selection89: 4
Pr[δj(t)=1]=
4exp{θ(t)E j(t)}
(5)
∣ψ(t)⟩=∑
j=1
ψ j∣a j⟩ (12)
∑ k=1exp{θ(t)E k(t)}
where Pr[•] is the probability function. The sensitivity parameter θ(t) can be ψ j= a j|ψ(t) (13)
determined by a trial-independent choice (TIC) rule:
θ(t)=3c−1 (6)
w ach tie or ne ,ψ wj, hth ice
h
i n can ne r
b
p
e
r ao cd ou mct
p
o lef x|ψ n( ut) m〉 ban erd
.
|a j〉, is the probability amplitude of each
During the decision period, the superposition state |ψ(t)〉 collapses onto one
dw eh te er re
m
c
i
n(0
is
<
ti
cc <
ch
3 o)
i
cis
e
a
a
nco dn as sis mte an llc y
o
np ea r sa um gge et se tr s. A
a r
l aa nrg de
o
c
m
v ca hlu oe
i
cin e4d 7.icates a co of rt rh ee
s
pei og ne dn iv ne gc t ao mrs
p
| la itj〉 u,
d
w e.i t Th
h
t eh e
c
op lr lao pb sa eb pil rit oy
c
o esf
s
t h ise
t
s hq eu sa or -e cd
a
lm lea dg “n ai ctu tid oe
n
o sf
e
lt eh ce
t ion”:
The sensitivity parameter θ(t) can also be computed from a trial-dependent
choice (TDC) rule: Pr[δj(t)=1]=∣ψ j∣2 (14)
θ(t)=(t∕10)c (7)
Thus we have the corresponding constraint:
where the consistency parameter c (−5 < c < 5) indicates gradually more
4
deterministic choices if c > 0 (for example, because of confidence) and gradually ∑∣ψ∣2=1 (15)
more random choices if c < 0 (for example, because of boredom). j
j=1
Model description. By combining these two utility functions (EVL and PVL), two
learning rules (Delta and Decay) and two choice rules (TIC and TDC), we obtain This constraint, also called the normalization condition of the wave function,
the eight models30: EVLDeltaTDC, EVLDeltaTIC, EVLDecayTDC, EVLDecayTIC, keeps the norm of |ψ(t)〉 at unit length.
PVLDeltaTDC, PVLDeltaTIC, PVLDecayTDC and PVLDecayTIC. At the beginning of the IGT, the agent does not have any preference among the
four decks. Therefore, we assign an equal amplitude to each action in the first trial,
VPP models. The VPP model (VPPDeltaTIC) is an improved version of the as with the equal expectancies at the beginning of the CRL models:
PVLDeltaTIC model, incorporating the influence of perseverance31.
4
The VPPDeltaTIC model assumes that the agent will take the perseverative 1
strategy into consideration (Supplementary Fig. 2c). The perseverance strength
∣ψ(1)⟩=∑
2
∣a j⟩ (16)
P j(t) on deck j in trial t (t ≥ 2 and P j(1) = 0) is defined as: j=1
P
j(t)=    A Ap pe er rs sP Pj j( (t t− −1 1)
)+ϵp
i if
f
δδj j( (t t−−1 1) )==0
1 and x(t−1)≥0 (8)
P ser lo eb cta ib oi nli ,t y
h
ea m upp dli at tu ed se
h
u isp ed sa tt ii mng at. iA onft e or
f
t th he
e
a gg oe on dt
n
o eb ss se or fv e es
a
ct hh e
d
o eu cktc
.
o Tm hee uof
p
t dh ae
t
ia nc gt ion

 A persP j(t−1)+ϵn if δj(t−1)=1 and x(t−1)<0 algorithm, also known as the amplitude-amplification algorithm, lies at the core
of QRL. Amplitude amplification is a technique in quantum computing that
where A pers (0 < A pers < 1) is a free decay parameter on the perseverance strengths of generalizes the idea behind Grover’s search algorithm95 and gives rise to a family
aa nll dd e εc
n
k (−s. 1A 0l s <o ε, nε <p ( 1− 01 )0
i
s<
t
ε hp
e
<
in
1 f0 lu) eis
n
t ch ee
o
i fn tf hlu
e
e nn ec te
l
oo sf
s
t h one n pe et
r
sg ea vin
er
o an
n
cp ee .rseverance o uf
s
eq du 6a an ntu dm
fu
a rtlg ho er ri mth om ds i.
f
iH eder te o, o acn ce
o
s mpe mci of dic
a
v tee r os uio
r
n
ta
o sf
k
a .mplitude amplification was
The value V(t) is the weighted average of the expectancy E(t) and the We have two unitary operators based on the current chosen action |a〉:
j j
perseverance strength P(t):
j Q̂ 1=Î−(1−eiϕ1)∣a⟩⟨a∣ (17)
V j(t)=wE j(t)+(1−w)P j(t) (9)
where w is the reinforcement learning weight (0 < w < 1). A high w value indicates Q̂ 2=(1−eiϕ2)∣ψ(t)⟩⟨ψ(t)∣−Î (18)
that the agent prefers reinforcement learning rather than perseverative strategy
and vice versa. Note that E j(t) here is updated by the Delta learning rule for the where 〈a| in the dual space represents the complex conjugate (Hermitian
VPPDeltaTIC model and by the Decay learning rule for the VPPDecayTIC model. conjugate) of |a〉 and Î is the identity operator. The exponents ϕ1 and ϕ2 are the
NAture HumAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTuRe HuMaN BeHavIouR Articles
learning factors that control the amount of amplification or attenuation of the Statistical analyses. We used an alpha level of 0.05 for all behavioural statistical
amplitude in each trial. These matrices are the generalization of the oracle O in tests reported.
the Grover algorithm4. A unitary operator Û means Û†Û = ÛÛ† = Î. Thus, these
operators do not change the unit length of any normalized state vector. Maximum likelihood estimation. The parameters in each model were estimated by
The Grover operator is then the unitary transformation: maximizing the LL of each subject’s one-step-ahead predictions. The LL of subject
i and model m is defined as:
Û G=Q̂ 2Q̂
1
(19)
LL im = logPrm[dataforsubjecti]
After the unitary transformation operates L times, the amplitude vector in the T D
next trial becomes: = ∑∑δj(t)logPrm[δj(t)=1∣O i(1),⋯ ,O i(t−1)] (29)
∣ψ(t+1)⟩=Û GL ∣ψ(t)⟩ (20) t=1 j=1
where T is the number of trials, D is the number of decks and O(t) is the
i
The parameters ϕ1, ϕ2, and L are determined by the current utility u(t). actual choice and consequent outcome in trial t. We used an optimization
We have at least two approaches to deal with this. One is to fix ϕ1 and ϕ2 (usually method called Bayesian Adaptive Direct Search that showed a comparable
equal to π) and determine L using the current utility4. The other is to fix L = 1 and or even better performance than other common optimization methods for
calculate ϕ1 and ϕ2 from the current utility6. We chose the latter because the former behavioural modelling96.
approach has the disadvantage that the amplitude could jump only discretely.
However, the way we set ϕ1 and ϕ2 is different: Model comparison with the goodness-of-fit criterion. For the goodness-of-fit
criterion, the corrected AICc36 and the BIC37 provide a direct assessment of the
u(t)=  λgainx(t)α if x(t)≥0
(21)
one-step-ahead predictions. The AICc avoids the disadvantage of the Akaike’s
 −λloss∣x(t)∣α if x(t)<0 Information Criterion97 when facing a small sample size. The BIC more strongly
penalizes the number of parameters. For each model i, the AICc is:
i
aw fonh rd e
p
r λ ae lo
y
sx -s ( o(t 0 f)
f
< sis
i
λ st lh o ase ls
s
<n
o
e 2 ut )
s
o a eu r det c
h
to ehm re
e
e r
.
e,
T
wα
h
a( er0 nd < - ϕs α 1e ae< nk 1 i dn)
ϕ
gis 2a t anh rd ee l ds oh esa fs ip - nae ev dp e a r asr sia :om ne pte ar r, a λ mga ein t e(0 rs < . A λg sai cn a< le 2 ) AICc i=−2logL i+2K i+ T2K −i2 K+ i2 −K 1i (30)
ϕ 1=π[u(t)cosπη+b 1] (22) and the BIC i is:
BIC i=−2logL i+K ilogT (31)
ϕ 2=π[u(t)sinπη+b 2] (23)
where T is the total number of trials, L is the maximum LL for model i and K is the
i i
number of free parameters in the model. A smaller AICc or BIC value represents a
If we consider (ϕ1, ϕ2) as the vector-valued function of u(t), then (ϕ1, ϕ2)
better fit to the data. Average values for each model are calculated in each group.
delineates a line in two-dimensional Euclidean space, passing through the point
(b 1, b 2) with slope tanπη (−1 < η < 1). We refer to the free parameters η, b 1, and b 2 as Bayesian model comparison with variational Bayes method. We performed the
the learning parameters.
Bayesian model comparison using the variational Bayes algorithm38. In the
Bayesian graph, by treating the model as a random variable, the parameters from
The QSPP model. Inspired by the hybrid VPP models, we also implemented
a Dirichlet distribution over models was estimated. Given the parameters, the
a hybrid QSPP model that combined the QSL model and perseverance
distribution of a multinomial variable was used to describe the probability that one
(Supplementary Fig. 2d). The probability of choosing deck j in trial t is defined as:
specific model generated the data from one specific subject. We entered −AICc/2
Pr[δj(t)=1]=wPr QSL[δj(t)=1]+(1−w)Pr pers[δj(t)=1] (24) and −BIC/2 as the model log evidence into the estimation iteration process.
The expected likelihood measures how likely it is that one model will generate a
randomly selected subject’s behaviour, where the exceedance probability describes
where w (0 < w < 1) is the QRL weight. Pr QSL is the probability determined how one model is more likely than all other models.
by the QSL amplitude and Pr is the classical probability using the SoftMax
pers
trial-independent rule:
Simulation method. Unlike the goodness-of-fit criterion, the simulation method30
exp{P(t)} was designed to assess the accuracy of one model generating predictions for entire
Pr pers[δj(t)=1]= 4 j (25) choice sequences according to model parameters rather than the subjects’ choice
∑ k=1exp{P k(t)} history. The computer agent uses the parameters estimated from the subjects’
behaviour to perform the IGT several times according to the corresponding
model. Here, for each subject and each model, we used the best 10 combinations
Here, the perseverance strength P(t) on deck j is defined in a similar way
j of estimated parameters to run 100 simulations for total trials, producing 1,000
as above:
performing sequences. The combination of parameters that generated the best
P
j(t)=    A Ap pe er rs sP Pj j( (t t− −1 1)
)+ϵp
i if
f
δδj j( (t t−−1 1) )==0
1 and x(t−1)≥0 (26)
s t ewi rm ro ou rtl sya p wti eo es rn o
e
p f
c
e M ar lf cSo uEr
l
m af to ea r dn t c h ae me w s oea nss i
g
mc ah u lo ll s a se utn i bo jf n eo s cr .
t
sFth .oe r f ao ll ll to hw ei n Mg S a En sa dly es fe ins. e W d be et lh oe wn , d ste af nin de ad rd
  A persP j(t−1)+ϵn if δj(t−1)=1 and x(t−1)<0 First, we let B i0
,j
denote the frequency of selecting deck j averaging over all T
trials for subject i and Bm denote the frequency of selecting deck j averaging over
i,j
all T trials and 100 simulations for an agent using the parameters of model m
but here both εp and εn are not free parameters. They are now determined by e p and estimated from subject i. We have the MSE of the PoC for each deck:
e according to:
n
N D
ϵp=  

−3e 3p −− ep1
+1
ii ffe ep p≥ <00
(27)
MSEm PoC= N1
D
∑
i=1
∑
j=1
(B im ,j−B i0 ,j)2 (32)
where N is the number of subjects and D is the number of decks.
ϵn= 

−3e 3n −− en1
+1
i if fe en n≥ <0
0
(28) i es
s
tt ih mS ee afc tro ee dn q d u p, e
a
P n ri ac0 ,j my,b o eis f
t
et s rh e sle e
f
f c rr ote i mnq gu
s
e d un e bc c jy ek
c
o j
t
f d
i
.s u e Trl ie hnc egt i
M
n bg l So Ed c ke oc fbk
E
oj
D
fo a Sf n s
c
u uab g rj e ve n ec tt
i
sui dsd i eu n fr g ini n m eg do b d al seo :lc mk b w; iP ti hm ,j ,b
w pah re ar me ee tp e ( r− c5 i n< t oe p ε<
p
5 an) dan εd n. e n (−5 < e n < 5) are designed to absorb the consistency MSEm EDS= ND1
B
∑N ∑D ∑B (P im ,j,b−P i0 ,j,b)2 (33)
i=1 j=1 b=1
One-term and two-term models. For convenience, the VPP and QSPP models are
described as two-term models because they have both the reinforcement learning where B is the number of blocks (one block contains 20 trials).
part and the perseverance part, while the others (EVL, PVL and QSL) are described
as one-term models. The baseline, the EVL, the PVL, the QSL, the VPP and the fMRI data acquisition. Gradient echo-planar MRI data were acquired during the
QSPP models have 3, 4, 4, 6, 8 and 10 free parameters, respectively. whole task procedure using a 3 Tesla Siemens Magnetom Trio scanner (Siemens
NAture HumAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTuRe HuMaN BeHavIouR
Medical Solutions) in the Anhui Provincial Hospital. A circularly polarized 6. Fakhari, P., Rajagopal, K., Balakrishnan, S. N. & Busemeyer, J. R. Quantum
head coil was used. The fMRI images were collected using a T2*-weighted echo- inspired reinforcement learning in changing environment. New Math.
planar imaging sequence (repetition time = 2,000 ms, echo time = 30 ms, field of Nat. Comput. 9, 273–294 (2013).
view = 240 mm, matrix = 64 × 64, flip angle = 85°) with 33 axial slices (no gaps, 7. Wittek, P. Quantum Machine Learning: What Quantum Computing Means to
voxel size: 3.75 × 3.75 × 3.70 mm3) covering the whole brain. Before entering Data Mining (Academic Press, 2014).
the scanner, all subjects were asked to not move their head during all scans. 8. Dunjko, V., Taylor, J. M. & Briegel, H. J. Quantum-enhanced machine
Three functional scan runs of 420 s occurred during the IGT. Between each scan learning. Phys. Rev. Lett. 117, 130501 (2016).
run, there was an interval of about 1 min. High-resolution T1-weighted three- 9. Manousakis, E. Quantum formalism to describe binocular rivalry. Biosystems
dimensional gradient-echo images were also obtained (repetition time = 1,900 ms; 98, 57–66 (2009).
echo time = 2.26 ms; inversion time = 900 ms; 1-mm isotropic voxel; 250-mm field 10. Busemeyer, J. R. & Bruza, P. D. Quantum Models of Cognition and Decision
of view) for stereotaxic transformation. (Cambridge Univ. Press, 2012).
11. Busemeyer, J. R., Wang, Z. & Shiffrin, R. M. Bayesian model comparison
fMRI data preprocessing. The imaging data were analysed with Analysis of favors quantum over standard decision theory account of dynamic
Functional Neuroimages (AFNI-17.3.01)98. As in the previous study56,99, each inconsistency. Decision 2, 1–12 (2015).
subject’s raw data were corrected for temporal shifts between slices and for motion 12. Kvam, P. D., Pleskac, T. J., Yu, S. & Busemeyer, J. R. Interference effects of
using the midmost sub-brick as the base, spatially smoothed with a Gaussian choice on confidence: quantum characteristics of evidence accumulation.
kernel (full width at half maximum = 8 mm) and temporally normalized (for each Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 112, 10645–10650 (2015).
voxel, the signal of each sub-brick was divided by the temporally averaged signal). 13. Ashtiani, M. & Azgomi, M. A. A survey of quantum-like approaches to
Then images were normalized to the Talairach coordinate. decision making and cognition. Math. Soc. Sci. 75, 49–80 (2015).
Data from eight subjects in the control group and nine subjects in the smoking 14. Yukalov, V. I. & Sornette, D. Quantum probability and quantum decision-
group were discarded because of relatively large head movement in the MRI making. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A 374, 20150100 (2016).
scanner (more than 2 mm or 2°) or scanning technique issues. Therefore, data from 15. de Barros, J. A. & Oas, G. in The Palgrave Handbook of Quantum Models in
50 subjects in the control group and 34 in the smoking group were included in the Social Science (eds Haven, E. & Khrennikov, A.) 195–228 (Springer, 2017).
following fMRI whole-brain analysis. 16. Takahashi, T. Can quantum approaches benefit biology of decision making?
Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 130, 99–102 (2017).
fMRI data analyses. We implemented seven GLMs to analyse the fMRI data. In 17. Gold, J. I. & Shadlen, M. N. The neural basis of decision making.
GLM1, for the QSPP model, we included the regressor of the current quantum Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 30, 535–574 (2007).
transition amplitude at the outcome period. GLM1 also included two additional 18. Sanfey, A. G., Loewenstein, G., McClure, S. M. & Cohen, J. D.
regressors corresponding to the stimulus and the outcome display, six additional Neuroeconomics: cross-currents in research on decision-making.
regressors for head motion, one additional regressor for the reaction time and one Trends Cogn. Sci. 10, 108–116 (2006).
nuisance regressor for onsets of no-response trials. Standard GLM analysis was 19. Glimcher, P. W. Indeterminacy in brain and behavior. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 56,
performed using a gamma haemodynamic response function model. In GLM2, 25–56 (2005).
we included the regressor of quantum distance at the outcome period and also 20. Glimcher, P. W. & Fehr, E. Neuroeconomics: Decision Making and the Brain
other additional or nuisance regressors. In GLM3, we included the regressor of (Academic Press, 2013).
generalized quantum distance at the outcome period and also other additional or 21. Lee, D., Seo, H. & Jung, M. W. Neural basis of reinforcement learning and
nuisance regressors. decision making. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 35, 287–308 (2012).
In GLM4, we included the outcome, the loss (penalty), uncertainty, the 22. Daw, N. D. & Tobler, P. N. in Neuroeconomics 2nd edn (eds Glimcher, P. W. &
interaction of uncertainty and loss (penalty) and the current choice probability Fehr, E.) 283–298 (Academic Press, 2014).
as the regressors at the outcome period and also other additional or nuisance 23. Kornmeier, J., Friedel, E., Wittmann, M. & Atmanspacher, H. EEG correlates
regressors. The differences of each regressor between two models in the control of cognitive time scales in the Necker-Zeno model for bistable perception.
group (control QSPP − control VPPDecayTIC) and the smoking group (smoking Conscious. Cogn. 53, 136–150 (2017).
QSPP − smoking VPPDecayTIC) were calculated. In GLM5, we included the 24. Bechara, A., Damasio, A. R., Damasio, H. & Anderson, S. W. Insensitivity to
outcome, the gain (reward), the uncertainty, the interaction of uncertainty future consequences following damage to human prefrontal cortex. Cognition
and gain (reward), the current choice probability and also other additional or 50, 7–15 (1994).
nuisance regressors. In GLM6, we included the generalized quantum distance, the
25. Ahn, W. Y., Dai, J., Vassileva, J., Busemeyer, J. R. & Stout, J. C. in
uncertainty, the interaction of uncertainty and generalized quantum distance and
Progress in Brain Research Vol. 224 (eds Ekhtiari, H. & Paulus, M.)
also other additional or nuisance regressors. In GLM7, we included the reward
53–65 (Elsevier, 2016).
prediction error and the current action value provided by the VPPDecayTIC model
26. Buelow, M. T. & Suhr, J. A. Risky decision making in smoking and nonsmoking
as the regressors at the outcome period and also other additional or nuisance
college students: examination of Iowa Gambling Task performance by deck
regressors. The results of GLM3–5 are reported in the main text while the rest are
type selections. Appl. Neuropsychol. Child 3, 38–44 (2014).
in the Supplementary Results. All reported voxels survived the family-wise error
27. Wei, Z. et al. Chronic nicotine exposure impairs uncertainty modulation on
correction at a cluster level threshold of P < 0.05, with P uncorrected < 0.001 (two-sided reinforcement learning in anterior cingulate cortex and serotonin system.
threshold cluster size = 65). NeuroImage 169, 323–333 (2018).
28. Steingroever, H. et al. Data from 617 healthy participants performing the
Reporting Summary. Further information on research design is available in the
Iowa gambling task: a “many labs” collaboration. J. Open Psychol. Data 3,
Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.
340–353 (2015).
29. Rangel, A., Camerer, C. & Montague, P. R. A framework for studying
Data availability the neurobiology of value-based decision making. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 9,
All data are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request. 545–556 (2008).
30. Ahn, W.-Y., Busemeyer, J. R., Wagenmakers, E.-J. & Stout, J. C. Comparison
Code availability of decision learning models using the generalization criterion method.
Cogn. Sci. 32, 1376–1402 (2008).
All code used to generate the results central to the main claims in this study is
available from the corresponding author on reasonable request. 31. Worthy, D. A., Pang, B. & Byrne, K. A. Decomposing the roles of
perseveration and expected value representation in models of the Iowa
gambling task. Front. Psychol. 4, 640 (2013).
Received: 19 December 2018; Accepted: 2 December 2019;
32. Ahn, W. Y. et al. Decision-making in stimulant and opiate addicts in
Published: xx xx xxxx
protracted abstinence: evidence from computational modeling with pure
users. Front. Psychol. 5, 849 (2014).
references 33. Worthy, D. A. & Maddox, W. T. Age-based differences in strategy use in
1. Sutton, R. S. & Barto, A. G. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction, Vol. 1 choice tasks. Front. Neurosci. 5, 145 (2012).
(MIT Press, 1998). 34. Ahn, W.-Y., Krawitz, A., Kim, W., Busemeyer, J. R. & Brown, J. W. A
2. Niv, Y. Reinforcement learning in the brain. J. Math. Psychol. 53, model-based fMRI analysis with hierarchical Bayesian parameter estimation.
139–154 (2009). Decision 1, 8–23 (2013).
3. Biamonte, J. et al. Quantum machine learning. Nature 549, 195–202 (2017). 35. Byrne, K. A., Norris, D. D. & Worthy, D. A. Dopamine, depressive symptoms,
4. Dong, D., Chen, C., Li, H. & Tarn, T.-J. Quantum reinforcement learning. and decision-making: the relationship between spontaneous eye blink rate
IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. Pt B 38, 1207–1220 (2008). and depressive symptoms predicts Iowa Gambling Task performance.
5. Dong, D., Chen, C., Chu, J. & Tarn, T.-J. Robust quantum-inspired Cogn. Affect. Behav. Neurosci. 16, 23–36 (2016).
reinforcement learning for robot navigation. IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron. 36. Cavanaugh, J. E. Unifying the derivations for the Akaike and corrected
17, 86–97 (2012). Akaike information criteria. Stat. Probab. Lett. 33, 201–208 (1997).
NAture HumAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTuRe HuMaN BeHavIouR Articles
37. Schwarz, G. Estimating the dimension of a model. Ann. Stat. 6, 68. Tversky, A. & Kahneman, D. Advances in prospect theory: cumulative
461–464 (1978). representation of uncertainty. J. Risk Uncertain. 5, 297–323 (1992).
38. Stephan, K. E., Penny, W. D., Daunizeau, J., Moran, R. J. & Friston, K. J. 69. De Barros, J. A. & Suppes, P. Quantum mechanics, interference, and the
Bayesian model selection for group studies. NeuroImage 46, 1004–1017 (2009). brain. J. Math. Psychol. 53, 306–313 (2009).
39. Dajka, J., Łuczka, J. & Hänggi, P. Distance between quantum states in the 70. Lambert, N. et al. Quantum biology. Nat. Phys. 9, 10–18 (2013).
presence of initial qubit-environment correlations: a comparative study. 71. Busemeyer, J. R., Pothos, E. M., Franco, R. & Trueblood, J. S. A quantum
Phys. Rev. A 84, 032120 (2011). theoretical explanation for probability judgment errors. Psychol. Rev. 118,
40. O’Doherty, J. P., Hampton, A. & Kim, H. Model-based fMRI and its 193–218 (2011).
application to reward learning and decision making. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 72. beim Graben, P. & Atmanspacher, H. Complementarity in classical dynamical
1104, 35–53 (2007). systems. Found. Phys. 36, 291–306 (2006).
41. Ma, W. J. & Jazayeri, M. Neural coding of uncertainty and probability. 73. beim Graben, P., Filk, T. & Atmanspacher, H. Epistemic entanglement due to
Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 37, 205–220 (2014). non-generating partitions of classical dynamical systems. Int. J. Theor. Phys.
42. Bach, D. R., Hulme, O., Penny, W. D. & Dolan, R. J. The known unknowns: 52, 723–734 (2013).
neural representation of second-order uncertainty, and ambiguity. J. Neurosci. 74. Ivakhnenko, O. V., Shevchenko, S. N. & Nori, F. Simulating quantum
31, 4811–4820 (2011). dynamical phenomena using classical oscillators: Landau-Zener-Stückelberg-
43. Payzan-LeNestour, E., Dunne, S., Bossaerts, P. & O’Doherty, J. P. The neural Majorana interferometry, latching modulation, and motional averaging.
representation of unexpected uncertainty during value-based decision Sci. Rep. 8, 12218 (2018).
making. Neuron 79, 191–201 (2013). 75. Bliokh, K. Y., Bekshaev, A. Y., Kofman, A. G. & Nori, F. Photon trajectories,
44. Behrens, T. E. J., Woolrich, M. W., Walton, M. E. & Rushworth, M. F. S. anomalous velocities and weak measurements: a classical interpretation.
Learning the value of information in an uncertain world. Nat. Neurosci. 10, New J. Phys. 15, 073022 (2013).
1214–1221 (2007). 76. Carleo, G. & Troyer, M. Solving the quantum many-body problem with
45. Yu, A. J. & Dayan, P. Uncertainty, neuromodulation, and attention. Neuron artificial neural networks. Science 355, 602–606 (2017).
46, 681–692 (2005). 77. Busemeyer, J. R., Fakhari, P. & Kvam, P. Neural implementation
46. Singh, V. A potential role of reward and punishment in the facilitation of the of operations used in quantum cognition. Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 130,
emotion-cognition dichotomy in the Iowa Gambling Task. Front. Psychol. 4, 53–60 (2017).
944 (2013). 78. Phelps, E. A., Lempert, K. M. & Sokol-Hessner, P. Emotion and decision
47. Yechiam, E. & Ert, E. Evaluating the reliance on past choices in adaptive making: multiple modulatory neural circuits. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 37,
learning models. J. Math. Psychol. 51, 75–84 (2007). 263–287 (2014).
48. Chuang, I. L., Gershenfeld, N. & Kubinec, M. Experimental implementation 79. Hu, H. Reward and aversion. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 39, 297–324 (2016).
of fast quantum searching. Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 3408 (1998). 80. Chen, C., Takahashi, T., Nakagawa, S., Inoue, T. & Kusumi, I. Reinforcement
49. Dunjko, V., Taylor, J. M. & Briegel, H. J. Advances in quantum reinforcement learning in depression: a review of computational research. Neurosci.
learning. In Proc. 2017 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man, and Biobehav. Rev. 55, 247–267 (2015).
Cybernetics 282–287 (IEEE, 2017). 81. Sanfey, A. G. Social decision-making: insights from game theory and
50. Nielsen, M. A. & Chuang, I. L. Quantum Computation and Quantum neuroscience. Science 318, 598–602 (2007).
Information (Cambridge Univ. Press, 2010). 82. Roskies, A. L. How does neuroscience affect our conception of volition?
51. Yearsley, J. M. Advanced tools and concepts for quantum cognition: a tutorial. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 33, 109–130 (2010).
J. Math. Psychol. 78, 24–39 (2017). 83. Schack, R., Brun, T. A. & Caves, C. M. Quantum Bayes rule. Phys. Rev. A 64,
52. Crawford, D., Levit, A., Ghadermarzy, N., Oberoi, J. S. & Ronagh, P. 014305 (2001).
Reinforcement learning using quantum Boltzmann machines. Quantum Info. 84. Kouda, N., Matsui, N., Nishimura, H. & Peper, F. Qubit neural network and
Comput. 18, 51–74 (2018). its learning efficiency. Neural Comput. Appl. 14, 114–121 (2005).
53. Krain, A. L., Wilson, A. M., Arbuckle, R., Castellanos, F. X. & Milham, M. P. 85. Piotrowski, E. W. & Sladkowski, J. The next stage: quantum game theory. in
Distinct neural mechanisms of risk and ambiguity: a meta-analysis of Mathematical Physics Research at the Cutting Edge (ed. Benton, C. V.)
decision-making. NeuroImage 32, 477–484 (2006). 247–268 (Nova Science Publishers, 2004).
54. Hsu, M., Bhatt, M., Adolphs, R., Tranel, D. & Camerer, C. F. Neural systems 86. Ahn, W.-Y., Krawitz, A., Kim, W., Busemeyer, J. R. & Brown, J. W. A
responding to degrees of uncertainty in human decision-making. Science 310, model-based fMRI analysis with hierarchical Bayesian parameter estimation.
1680–1683 (2005). J. Neurosci. Psychol. Econ. 4, 95–110 (2011).
55. Litt, A., Plassmann, H., Shiv, B. & Rangel, A. Dissociating valuation and 87. He, Q. et al. Altered dynamics between neural systems sub-serving decisions
saliency signals during decision-making. Cereb. Cortex 21, 95–102 (2010). for unhealthy food. Front. Neurosci. 8, 350 (2014).
56. Wang, Y. et al. Neural substrates of updating the prediction through 88. Brevers, D., Noël, X., He, Q., Melrose, J. A. & Bechara, A. Increased
prediction error during decision making. NeuroImage 157, 1–12 (2017). ventral-striatal activity during monetary decision making is a marker of
57. Vickery, T. J. & Jiang, Y. V. Inferior parietal lobule supports decision making problem poker gambling severity. Addict. Biol. 21, 688–699 (2016).
under uncertainty in humans. Cereb. Cortex 19, 916–925 (2008). 89. Yechiam, E. & Busemeyer, J. R. Comparison of basic assumptions embedded
58. Xue, G., Lu, Z., Levin, I. P. & Bechara, A. The impact of prior risk in learning models for experience-based decision making. Psychon. Bull. Rev.
experiences on subsequent risky decision-making: the role of the insula. 12, 387–402 (2005).
NeuroImage 50, 709–716 (2010). 90. Busemeyer, J. R. & Stout, J. C. A contribution of cognitive decision models to
59. Haggard, P. Human volition: towards a neuroscience of will. Nat. Rev. clinical assessment: decomposing performance on the Bechara gambling task.
Neurosci. 9, 934–946 (2008). Psychol. Assess. 14, 253–262 (2002).
60. Nachev, P., Kennard, C. & Husain, M. Functional role of the 91. Erev, I. & Barron, G. On adaptation, maximization, and reinforcement
supplementary and pre-supplementary motor areas. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 9, learning among cognitive strategies. Psychol. Rev. 112, 912–931 (2005).
856–869 (2008). 92. Ahn, W.-Y., Haines, N. & Zhang, L. Revealing neurocomputational
61. Tanji, J. & Kurata, K. Contrasting neuronal activity in supplementary mechanisms of reinforcement learning and decision-making with the
and precentral motor cortex of monkeys. I. Responses to instructions hBayesDM package. Comput. Psychiatr. 1, 24–57 (2017).
determining motor responses to forthcoming signals of different modalities. 93. Wagner, A. R. & Rescorla, R. A. in Inhibition and Learning (eds Boakes, R. A.
J. Neurophysiol. 53, 129–141 (1985). & Halliday, M. S.) 301–336 (1972).
62. Okano, K. & Tanji, J. Neuronal activities in the primate motor fields of the 94. Erev, I. & Roth, A. E. Predicting how people play games: reinforcement
agranular frontal cortex preceding visually triggered and self-paced learning in experimental games with unique, mixed strategy equilibria.
movement. Exp. Brain Res. 66, 155–166 (1987). Am. Econ. Rev. 88, 848–881 (1998).
63. Rushworth, M. F. S. & Behrens, T. E. J. Choice, uncertainty and value in 95. Grover, L. K. A fast quantum mechanical algorithm for database search. In
prefrontal and cingulate cortex. Nat. Neurosci. 11, 389–397 (2008). Proc. 28th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing 212–219 (ACM,
64. Sul, J. H., Kim, H., Huh, N., Lee, D. & Jung, M. W. Distinct roles of rodent 1996).
orbitofrontal and medial prefrontal cortex in decision making. Neuron 66, 96. Acerbi, L. & Ji, W. Practical Bayesian optimization for model fitting
449–460 (2010). with Bayesian adaptive direct search. Adv. Neural Inf. Proc. Syst. 30,
65. Kepecs, A., Uchida, N., Zariwala, H. A. & Mainen, Z. F. Neural correlates, 1836–1846 (2017).
computation and behavioural impact of decision confidence. Nature 455, 97. Akaike, H. A new look at the statistical model identification. IEEE Trans.
227–231 (2008). Automat. Contr. 19, 716–723 (1974).
66. O’Neill, M. & Schultz, W. Coding of reward risk by orbitofrontal neurons is 98. Cox, R. W. AFNI: software for analysis and visualization of functional
mostly distinct from coding of reward value. Neuron 68, 789–800 (2010). magnetic resonance neuroimages. Comput. Biomed. Res. 29, 162–173 (1996).
67. Studer, B., Cen, D. & Walsh, V. The angular gyrus and visuospatial attention 99. Li, N. et al. Resting-state functional connectivity predicts impulsivity in
in decision-making under risk. NeuroImage 103, 75–80 (2014). economic decision-making. J. Neurosci. 33, 4886–4895 (2013).
NAture HumAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTuRe HuMaN BeHavIouR
Acknowledgements Author contributions
We thank Y. Yang, R. Zha, J. Besumeyer and N. Ma for their inspirational comments. L.J.-A., Y.P. and X.Z. conceived the study. Y.L. and Z.W. provided the devices and
We thank L. Acerbi, G. R. Yang, C. Gneiting, A. Miranowicz, X. Li, Z. Jin and X. Li collected the data. L.J.-A. built the models. L.J.-A. and Z.W. analysed the data.
for their helpful suggestions. This work was supported by grants from the National All authors participated in discussions. L.J.-A., D.D., Y.P., F.N. and X.Z. wrote
Key Basic Research Programme (grant nos. 2016YFA0400900 and 2018YFC0831101), the paper. X.Z. supervised the project and acquired funding.
the National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant nos. 31471071, 31771221,
61773360, 71671115, 71874170 and 71942003), the Fundamental Research Funds for Competing interests
the Central Universities of China, the MURI Center for Dynamic Magneto-Optics
The authors declare no competing interests.
via the Air Force Office of Scientific Research (AFOSR; grant no. FA9550-14-1-0040),
the Army Research Office (ARO; grant no. W911NF-18-1-0358), the Asian Office of
Aerospace Research and Development (AOARD; grant no. FA2386-18-1-4045), the Japan Additional information
Science and Technology Agency (JST; via the Q-LEAP programme and CREST grant no.
Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/
JPMJCR1676), the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS; JSPS–RFBR grant
s41562-019-0804-2.
no. 17-52-50023 and JSPS–FWO grant no. VS.059.18N), the RIKEN–AIST Challenge
Research Fund, the Templeton Foundation, the Foundational Questions Institute (FQXi) Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to X.Z.
and the NTT PHI Laboratory, the Australian Research Council’s Discovery Projects Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
funding scheme under Project DP190101566, the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
and the US Office of Naval Research. The funders had no role in study design, data
published maps and institutional affiliations.
collection and analysis, decision to publish or preparation of the manuscript. We thank
the Bioinformatics Centre of the University of Science and Technology of China, School Primary Handling Editor: Stavroula Kousta.
of Life Science for providing supercomputing resources for this project. © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2020
NAture HumAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
1
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Corresponding author(s): Xiaochu Zhang
Last updated by author(s): Nov 13, 2019
Reporting Summary
Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency
in reporting. For further information on Nature Research policies, see Authors & Referees and the Editorial Policy Checklist.
Statistics
For all statistical analyses, confirm that the following items are present in the figure legend, table legend, main text, or Methods section.
n/a Confirmed
The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
A statement on whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided
Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.
A description of all covariates tested
A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
A full description of the statistical parameters including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient)
AND variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)
For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted
Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.
For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated
Our web collection on statistics for biologists contains articles on many of the points above.
Software and code
Policy information about availability of computer code
Data collection The task was programmed in MATLAB-R2008 using Psychtoolbox (version 2.0).
Data analysis fMRI data were analyzed using AFNI-17.3.01. Behavioral data were analyzed using MATLAB-R2018a.
For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors/reviewers.
We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Research guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.
Data
Policy information about availability of data
All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable:
- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets
- A list of figures that have associated raw data
- A description of any restrictions on data availability
All data are available from the corresponding author upon request.
Field-specific reporting
Please select the one below that is the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.
Life sciences Behavioural & social sciences Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences
For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/documents/nr-reporting-summary-flat.pdf
2
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Life sciences study design
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
Sample size The previous works on the IGT using fMRI used sample sizes typically between fifteen and thirty (Ahn et al., 2011, He et al., 2014, Brevers et
al., 2016). This study had a reasonable number of subjects (58 for control group and 43 for smoking group) to produce stable results.
Data exclusions Data from eight subjects in the control group and nine subjects in the smoking group were discarded because of relatively large head
movement in the MRI scanner (more than 2 mm or 2 degrees) or scanning technique issues.
Replication The results of model comparison were replicated in all three subject groups.
Randomization The study does not require randomization.
Blinding The study does not require blinding.
Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods
We require information from authors about some types of materials, experimental systems and methods used in many studies. Here, indicate whether each material,
system or method listed is relevant to your study. If you are not sure if a list item applies to your research, read the appropriate section before selecting a response.
Materials & experimental systems Methods
n/a Involved in the study n/a Involved in the study
Antibodies ChIP-seq
Eukaryotic cell lines Flow cytometry
Palaeontology MRI-based neuroimaging
Animals and other organisms
Human research participants
Clinical data
Human research participants
Policy information about studies involving human research participants
Population characteristics Fifty-eight healthy subjects (control group: 9 females; mean age ± SD, 23.42 ± 2.36 years; mean education ± SD, 16.58 ± 1.79
years) and forty-three smokers (smoking group: all men; mean age ± SD, 24.44 ± 2.34 years; mean education ± SD, 16.13 ± 1.92
years; >10 cigarettes/d for at least one year) participated the Iowa Gambling Task (IGT) and were included in following
behavioral modeling analysis. They had normal or corrected-to-normal vision and were right-handed. They did not have any
major medical illnesses, major psychiatric disorders, neurological illnesses, or a history of dependence on any drug (except
nicotine in the smoking group), or gross structural abnormalities in their T1-weighted images.
Recruitment All subjects, with no prior knowledge of the task, were recruited by internet advertisements.
Ethics oversight The study was authorized by the Research Ethics Committee of the University of Science and Technology of China and
conformed to the tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki.
Note that full information on the approval of the study protocol must also be provided in the manuscript.
Magnetic resonance imaging
Experimental design
Design type Participants completed a series of task-based fMRI scanning while performing the Iowa Gambling Task.
Design specifications There were three 7 min fMRI scan runs. Between every two scans, an interval occurred of about 1 min. Each scan
consisted of one 30 s rest block and three 106s-task-and-24s-rest cycles. The last 6 s part of each task block was
designed for good deck identification, which was not analyzed in the present study. The former 100 s part contains 20
trials and each trial was divided into two events: (1) during the decision making phase, 4 s were provided for card
selection and a random selection would be made if no decision was made during the period, (2) during the outcome
phase, the gain and penalty were presented on the screen for 1 s. There were no inter-trial intervals.
Behavioral performance measures The key press and response times was recorded using a MRI compatible response-box. The number of missing response
was acceptable (mean = 0.97, sd = 1.55). The response time was reasonable (mean = 1.23 seconds, sd = 0.55 seconds).
3
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Acquisition
Imaging type(s) functional
Field strength 3T
Sequence & imaging parameters T2*-weighted echo-planar imaging sequence (TR (Repetition Time) = 2000 ms, TE (Echo Time) = 30 ms, FOV (Field of
View) = 240 mm, matrix = 64 * 64, flip angle = 85°) with 33 axial slices (no gaps, voxel size: 3.75 * 3.75 * 3.70 mm3)
covering the whole brain. High-resolution T1-weighted three-dimensional gradient-echo images were also obtained (TR
= 1900 ms; TE = 2.26 ms; TI (Inversion Time) = 900 ms; 1 mm isotropic voxel; 250 mm FOV) for stereotaxic
transformation.
Area of acquisition a whole brain scan
Diffusion MRI Used Not used
Preprocessing
Preprocessing software AFNI (Version: AFNI_17.3.01)
Normalization The statistical map was spatially normalized by an affine transformation of the data to the anatomic image followed
by nonlinear registration of the anatomic data to the N27 template (TT_N27).
Normalization template AFNI's N27 template.
Noise and artifact removal head movements in the six directions were entered as covariates.
Volume censoring No volume censoring was used to ensure each subjects had equal number of volumes.
Statistical modeling & inference
Model type and settings In the first level GLM, in addition to regressors of interest, we included two additional regressors corresponding to the
stimulus and the outcome display, six additional regressors for head motion, one additional regressor for the reaction
time and one nuisance regressor for onsets of no-response trials. Group analyses were conducted by one-sample t-test
or two-sample t-test using the 3ttest++ program in the AFNI. A mask of mean anatomical images was used during the
computation.
Effect(s) tested Beta values of regressors of interest.
Specify type of analysis: Whole brain ROI-based Both
Statistic type for inference All reported voxels survived the family-wise error correction at a cluster level threshold of p < 0.05, with uncorrected p
(See Eklund et al. 2016) < 0.001 (2-sided threshold cluster size = 65).
Correction FWE
Models & analysis
n/a Involved in the study
Functional and/or effective connectivity
Graph analysis
Multivariate modeling or predictive analysis