Opendata:N/A Editedby:E.M.Buchanan
Meta-Psychology,2020,vol4,MP.2019.2238 Openmaterials:N/A Reviewedby:D.Navarro,S.Farrell
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2019.2238 Openandreproducibleanalysis:N/A Analysisreproducedby:N/A
Articletype:Commentary Openreviewsandeditorialprocess:Yes AllsupplementaryfilescanbeaccessedatOSF:
PublishedundertheCC-BY4.0license Preregistration:N/A https://osf.io/2mdfj/
What factors are most important in finding
the best model of a psychological process?
Comment on Navarro (2019)
Nathan J. Evans
Department of Psychology, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands
School of Psychology, University of Queensland, Australia
Abstract
Psychology research has become increasingly focused on creating formalized models of psychological processes,
which can make exact quantitative predictions about observed data that are the result of some unknown psycho-
logical process, allowing a better understanding of how psychological processes may actually operate. However,
usingmodelstounderstandpsychologicalprocessescomeswithanadditionalchallenge: howdoweselectthebest
modelfromarangeofpotentialmodelsthatallaimtoexplainthesamepsychologicalprocess? Arecentarticleby
Navarro(2019;ComputationalBrain&Behavior)providedadetaileddiscussiononseveralbroadissueswithinthe
area of model selection, with Navarro suggesting that “one of the most important functions of a scientific theory is
... to encourage directed exploration of new territory” (p.30), that “understanding how the qualitative patterns in the
empiricaldataemergenaturallyfromacomputationalmodelofapsychologicalprocessisoftenmorescientificallyuseful
thanpresentingaquantifiedmeasureofitsperformance” (p.33),andthat“quantitativemeasuresofperformanceare
essentially selecting models based on their ancillary assumptions” (p.33). Here, I provide a critique of several of
Navarro’s points on these broad issues. In contrast to Navarro, I argue that all possible data should be considered
when evaluating a process model (i.e., not just data from novel contexts), that quantitative model selection meth-
odsprovideamoreprincipledandcompletemethodofselectingbetweenprocessmodelsthanvisualassessmentsof
qualitativetrends,andthattheideaofancillaryassumptionsthatarenotpartofthecoreexplanationinthemodel
isaslipperyslopetoaninfinitelyflexiblemodel.
Keywords: Modelselection,Science,Quantitativemodelcomparison,Cognitivemodels.
Over the past several decades, psychology research unknown psychological process, and by attempting to
hasbecomeincreasinglyfocusedoncreatingformalized see which models can best account for these observed
models of psychological processes (e.g., Ratcliff, 1978; data,wecanbetterunderstandhowthisunknownpro-
Brown & Heathcote, 2008; Usher & McClelland, 2001; cess may actually operate. However, using models to
Nosofsky & Palmeri, 1997; Shiffrin & Steyvers, 1997; understand psychological processes comes with an ad-
Osth & Dennis, 2015). These process models are cre- ditional challenge: how do we select the best model
atedbytakingverbalexplanationsofaprocess,andfor- fromarangeofpotentialmodelsthatallaimtoexplain
malizing them with an exact mathematical functional the same psychological process? This is an area of re-
form. Process models make exact quantitative predic- search known as model selection (Myung & Pitt, 1997;
tions about observed data that are the result of some Myung, 2000; Myung, Navarro, & Pitt, 2006; Evans,
2
Howard, Heathcote, & Brown, 2017; Evans & Annis, pletemethodofselectingbetweenprocessmodelsthan
2019), and is subject to ongoing debate, both at broad visualassessmentsofqualitativetrends,and3)theidea
levels (e.g., qualitative methods [Thura, Beauregard- ofancillaryassumptionsthatarenotpartofthecoreex-
Racine, Fradet, & Cisek, 2012] vs. quantitative meth- planationinthemodelisaslipperyslopetoaninfinitely
ods [Evans, Hawkins, Boehm, Wagenmakers, & Brown, flexible model. However, before providing my argu-
2017]) and specific levels (e.g., Bayes factors [Gronau ments, I would like to note that my arguments only re-
& Wagenmakers, 2019a] vs. out of sample prediction flectonesideofthecontentiousdebateoverhowmod-
[Vehtari,Simpson,Yao,&Gelman,2019]). elsofpsychologicalprocessesshouldbeevaluated–just
as Navarro’s arguments only reflected another side of
A recent article by Navarro (2019) provided a de-
thedebate. Therefore,Ibelievethatresearchersshould
tailed discussion on both specific and broad issues
readbothNavarro(2019)andmycommentwithanap-
within the area of model selection. Although this arti-
propriatelevelofscrutiny,inordertogainamorecom-
cle was a comment on the specific critique of Bayesian
pleteperspectiveonthebroadissueswithinthisdebate
leave-one-out cross-validation by Gronau and Wagen-
and decide how they believe models of psychological
makers (2019a), Navarro (2019) also made several
processesshouldbeevaluated.
broaderpointsonthephilosophyofmodelling,andhow
we should evaluate these formalized theories. These
What is the most important function of a process
broaderpointsmadebyNavarro(2019)appeartohave
model?
been the most impactful part of the entire debate so
far, with Navarro’s article currently (as of the 18th of
Most of Navarro’s (2019) perspectives regarding
January, 2019) having over 3,400 downloads and 122
modelselectionappeartobebasedaroundonekeyun-
shares, compared to the 678 downloads and 11 shares
derlying factor: what is the most important function of
of the original article by Gronau and Wagenmakers. In
a scientific theory (or in these cases, a formalized pro-
general, Navarro (2019) suggested that 1) “one of the
cessmodelthatencapsulatesascientifictheory)? From
most important functions of a scientific theory is ... to
Navarro’s perspective, “one of the most important func-
encourage directed exploration of new territory" (p.30),
tions of a scientific theory is ... to encourage directed
2)“understandinghowthequalitativepatternsintheem-
exploration of new territory”. More specifically, in the
piricaldataemergenaturallyfromacomputationalmodel
section “Escaping mice to be beset by tigers” (p.30–31)
ofapsychologicalprocessisoftenmorescientificallyuseful
Navarro appears to suggest that good process models
than presenting aquantified measure of itsperformance”
– the models that provide better representations of the
(p.33),and3)“quantitativemeasuresofperformanceare
unknown psychological process that we wish to under-
essentially selecting models based on their ancillary as-
stand – are the ones that make accurate predictions
sumptions” (p.33). Although Gronau and Wagenmak-
about novel contexts, and these novel predictions are
ers(2019b)providedareplytoallthreecommentaries
howprocessmodels–andmoregenerallyscientificthe-
made on their original article (Vehtari et al., 2019;
ories - should be evaluated. Although Navarro’s per-
Navarro, 2019; Chandramouli & Shiffrin, 2019), their
spectivemaybeapopularoneamongmanyresearchers,
response mostly focused on replying to Vehtari et al.
I believe that this is only a single perspective on a con-
(2019) with further limitations of Bayesian leave-one-
tentious issue. Within this section I present a different
out cross-validation. Their section replying to Navarro
perspective on what the most important function of a
(2019)brieflymentionedthatquantitativemethodsare
processmodelis,andhowweshoulddeterminethebest
useful as “the data may not yield a clear result at first
model(s)ofaprocess: that1)themostimportantfunc-
sight” (p.42), but focused on a more specific point,
tion of a process model is to explain the unknown psy-
which was regarding how useful simple examples (or
chologicalprocessaswellaspossible,2)processmodels
in the more critical terms of Navarro, “toy examples”)
shouldbeevaluatedbaseduponallknowndata,and3)
areinassessingtherobustnessofanalysismethods.
the most principled way of making these evaluations is
Here, I provide a critique of some of Navarro’s usingquantitativemodelselectiontechniques.
broader perspectives, such as the function of scien- Firstandforemost,IagreewithNavarro(2019)that
tific theories, the importance of qualitative patterns encouraging directed exploration of new territory can
compared to precise quantitative performance, and the be a useful function of a scientific theory, and making
distinction between core and ancillary assumptions. predictions about novel contexts (in Navarro’s word,
Specifically, I argue that 1) all possible data should be “humanreasoninggeneralization”;p.30)canhelpusef-
considered when evaluating a process model (i.e., not ficientlygainknowledgeaboutanunknownpsychologi-
just data from novel contexts), 2) quantitative model calprocess,especiallyifourknowledgeisquitelimited.
selection methods provide a more principled and com- Likeastate-of-the-artoptimizationalgorithminthecon-
3
text of estimating the parameter values of a model, a Rescorla-Wagner model to be the best explanation of
model that makes predictions for novel contexts pro- classicalconditioning(e.g., theexplanationweprovide
videsanefficientmethodofsearchingthroughthespace intextbooksforhowtheprocessoperates)ifitprovides
of all potential data. These novel predictions can help asubstantiallyworsepredictionsthanothermodelsfor
lead researchers to sources of data that are most infor- all of the data that we already know about? For me,
mativeinteasingapartdifferentmodels,whileavoiding this is a very clear ‘no’. In my opinion, Navarro (2019)
lessinformativesourcesofdata;alevelofefficiencythat hasconflatedtwouniquegoalsofprocessmodelsinthis
a giant ‘grid search’ through all possible data would be example: the ability to provide the best explanation of
unable to achieve. Providing an efficient search of the whatisactuallyhappening,andtheusefulnesstoguide
data space is where I believe predictions about novel us to new empirical discoveries that we may not have
contexts are most useful, as they provide clear direc- thought of exploring at otherwise (e.g., predictions for
tions for what experiments are most likely to discrimi- novelcontextsthatleadtonewempiricalphenomena).
natebetweencompetingmodelsmostclearly. While novel predictions are useful for guiding empiri-
cal discovery, evaluating models based on their ability
However, Ialsobelievethatthisiswherethelimited
to successfully make these predictions ignores all other
value of predictions about novel contexts ends. When
observationswehaveaboutthissameunknownprocess
researchers are trying to find the best explanation for
from other contexts. Therefore, assessing only novel
a process, predictions for novel contexts do not pro-
predictions provides a poor overall reflection of which
videanymoreinformationaboutwhichmodelprovides
model provides the best explanation of a psychological
the closest representation of the process than predic-
process.
tions for known contexts. From my perspective, data
aresimplyobservationsthatwemakeofsomeunknown
Are certain data of more “theoretical interest” than
process. Data are not inherently of “theoretical inter-
others?
est” (p.32), apart from in their ability to tell us which
model provides the closest representation of this un-
Throughout the section “Between the devil and the
known process – a process that we, as scientists, wish
deep blue sea” (p.31–33), Navarro (2019) makes nu-
to understand. Therefore, to be the best explanation
merous suggestions that some parts of the empirical
of a process, a model should provide the best predic-
data are of more “theoretical interest” (p.32) than oth-
tions across all possible data from all possible contexts
ers. Specifically,Navarrostatesthat“Tomywayofthink-
that we believe are observations of this same unknown
ing, understanding how the qualitative patterns in the
process, and not just the data that are from novel con-
empirical data emerge naturally from a computational
texts. Importantly, assessing which model makes the
model of a psychological process is often more scientifi-
best predictions across all available data is something
cally useful than presenting a quantified measure of its
that quantitative model selection methods have been
performance” (p.33), and makes numerous references
specifically designed to achieve (Myung & Pitt, 1997;
throughouttheconcreteexampleofHayes,Banner,For-
Evans & Brown, 2018). Quantitative model selection
rester, and Navarro (2018) to how the qualitative pat-
methods compare models in their ability to make accu-
ternsinthedataareofgreatervaluethanthequantita-
rate, yet tightly constrained (i.e., low flexibility), pre-
tivefits. However,whatexactlymakesthesequalitative
dictions about the data; factors that many have argued
patternsmorescientificallyusefulthanprecisequantita-
areimportantinfindingatheorythataccuratelyreflects
tive measurement? As I discussed previously, from my
theunderlyingpsychologicalprocess(Roberts&Pashler,
perspective data are just observations that we make of
2000;Myung,2000;Evans,Howard,etal.,2017).
someunknownpsychologicalprocess,andweusethese
As a concrete example of why predictions about observations to try and better understand this process.
novelcontextsaremostimportantintheoryevaluation, Therefore, it seems strange to me that some specific
Navarro(2019)eloquentlypointsoutthattheRescorla- partsofthedata(i.e.,thedatathatcomposethespecific
Wagnermodel(Rescorla&Wagner,1972)servedanim- qualitativepattern)wouldprovideamoretheoretically
portant purpose in research on classical conditioning, interestingansweraboutwhichmodelbestexplainsthe
withitsnovelpredictionspushingresearcherstoexplore psychologicalprocessofinterestthantheotherpartsof
new, specific directions. Exploring these novel predic- thedata(i.e.,thedatathatquantitativemodelselection
tions led to the discovery of many empirical phenom- methodswouldalsotakeintoaccount). BelowIcritique
ena–withtheRescorla-Wagnermodelmakingaccurate three general arguments for why qualitative patterns
predictions for many of these novel contexts – which are commonly thought to be more theoretically inter-
helped to further shape researchers’ understanding of estingthanquantifiedmeasuresofperformance. These
classicalconditioning. However,shouldweconsiderthe argumentsareeacheitherexplicitlystated,orappearto
4
bealludedto,byNavarro(2019),andinmyexperience tifiedmeasuresofperformancecanjustasclearlydistin-
are often the beliefs of researchers who prefer qualita- guishbetweenmodelsasqualitativetrends.
tiveassessmentsoverquantitativemodelselection. The
The‘qualitativetrendsareeasiertoobserveandunder-
argumentsthatIcritiqueare: that1)qualitativetrends
standthanquantitativedifferences’argument
are able to distinguish between models more clearly,
Another argument for qualitative trends being more
2) precise quantitative differences can be harder to ob-
theoretically interesting than precise quantified mea-
serveandunderstand, and3)qualitativetrendscanof-
sures of performance is that qualitative trends can be
ten avoid ancillary assumptions of the models, which
visually observed in a clear manner, whereas the more
model selection methods can heavily depend on. Note
precise quantitative differences can be harder to see,
that I give the third argument its own section (Where
anditcanbehardertounderstandwhyonemodelbeats
is the border between core and ancillary model assump-
another. Navarro(2019)statesintheexampleofHayes
tions?), as I believe that this is a more general point
et al. (2018) that “It is clear from inspection that the
aboutcoreandancillaryassumptionsinprocessmodels.
data are highly structured, and that there are systematic
The ‘qualitative trends often distinguish between the
patterns to how peoples judgements change across con-
modelsmoreclearly’argument
ditions. The scientific question of most interest to me
Oneargumentforqualitativetrendsbeingmoretheo- is asking what theoretical principles are required to pro-
reticallyinterestingthanprecisequantifiedmeasuresof duce these shifts. Providing a good fit to the data seems
performanceisthatqualitativetrendsareabletodistin- of secondary importance.” (p.32). Here, Navarro seems
guish between the models clearly. I think many would to suggest that the difference between the models can
argue that the ‘proof of the pudding is in the eating’ be clearly seen in the qualitative trends, making these
here, as qualitative trends have been one of the main trends of theoretical interest, and that accounting for
methodsinpsychologyfordecidingbetweencompeting the rest of the trends in the data, which the quantita-
models,andmanyoftheserobustqualitativetrendsend tivefitdetects,islessimportantasthesetrendsareless
up serving as benchmarks for new potential models to clear. IagreewithNavarro–andotherswhomakethis
meet before being taken seriously. However, this gen- general argument – to some extent here. Understand-
eral argument seems to imply that quantitative model ingwhyonemodelisbetterthanothersisanimportant
selection methods cannot distinguish between models scientific question that increases our understanding of
clearly,andthatqualitativetrendsareabletomagically a process, and provides us with future directions for
capture something that quantified measures of perfor- model development (e.g., ‘model X misfits data pat-
mancecannot. ternY,sotherefore,weshouldlookintomechanismZ
thatmaybeabletodealwithdatapatternY’).Gaining
First, it seems important to define what exactly is
insights into this ‘what went wrong?’ question is most
meantby‘distinguishing’betweenmodels. Ithinkarea-
easily achieved through visual assessments of qualita-
sonabledefinitionissomethingalongthelinesof‘situa-
tive trends, as we can clearly see that the certain mod-
tionswhereevidencecanbeshownforonemodelover
els miss certain trends, and that certain models cap-
another, to reduce ambiguity in which model provides
ture certain trends. However, ‘selecting the model that
a better explanation of psychological process of inter-
provides the best explanation of the unknown process’
est’. Ifthisisanaccuratedefinitionofwhatitmeansto
and‘understandingwhatspecifictrendsinthedatacer-
distinguishbetweenmodels,thenIbelievethatitiscat-
tain models cannot explain’ are two completely differ-
egoricallyfalsetosuggestthatquantitativemodelselec-
entgoals,andtheabilityofqualitativetrendstoachieve
tion methods cannot clearly distinguish between mod-
the latter does not make them better than quantitative
els, or that the distinction obtained through quantita-
modelselectionatperformingtheformer,incontrastto
tive model selection methods is in any way inferior to
whatNavarroappearstosuggest.
thedistinctionobtainedfromqualitativetrends. Forex-
ample, in the case of the Bayes factor (Kass & Raftery, More generally, I do not believe that being able to
1995),avalueof1indicatesnodistinctionbetweenthe visually observe a trend – based on the way that the
models,whereaslarger(orsmaller)Bayesfactorsreflect datahavebeenplotted–meansthattheobservedtrend
greater distinction between the models, until the evi- should have priority over all other possible qualitative
dencebecomesoverwhelminglyinfavourofonemodel and quantitative trends in the data. Realistically, there
over the other. Therefore, quantitative model selection are always likely to be several trends that can poten-
appears to both have the ability to reduce the ambigu- tially be visually observed in the data, which may be
ityinwhichmodelisbetter,andtoknowthestrengthof shown or obscured by different ways of visualizing the
evidenceforonemodelovertheother(i.e.,theamount data. A clear example of this can be seen in the com-
thattheambiguitywasreducedby),meaningthatquan- parisons of the diffusion model and the urgency gating
5
modelinEvans,Hawkins,etal. (2017),whoshowthat ancillary. However,whataretheimplicationsofstarting
only looking at certain trends in the data (such as in- toclassifycertainassumptionsasonesthatthemodelis
teractionsinsummarystatisticsoverconditions)canbe committed to, and others as ones that are flexible and
misleading, and plotting the entire distributions show interchangeable?
other, clearer trends that distinguish between the mod-
The idea of core and ancillary assumptions appears
els (see Figure 1 for a more detailed walk-through of
to come up quite regularly in theory and model devel-
this example). However, even in cases where we man-
opment. Models can have core assumptions, which are
age to plot the data in every way possible, and find ev-
fundamentalpartsofthemodel’sexplanationofthepro-
ery qualitative trend present in the data, how do we
cessthatcannotbechanged,andancillaryassumptions,
weight these different trends? As the number of trends
which are only made because they are required for the
increase, it seems unlikely that every trend will be best
formalization of the model (e.g., for simulation, or fit-
accounted for by a single model, making selecting a
ting). However, what exactly makes one assumption
modelbasedonqualitativetrendsdifficult. Incontrast,
core, and another ancillary? The distinction may seem
quantitativemodelselectionmethodsareabletosimul-
like common sense while speaking in abstract terms,
taneously account for all of the trends in the data that
but I believe that these different types of assumptions
they are applied to, and provide a principled approach
become much harder to distinguish between in prac-
for weighting for all of the trends together. Essentially,
tice. In practice, the lines between core and ancillary
quantitative model selection methods are able to take
assumptions can often be blurred, and declaring cer-
into account everything that visually assessing a finite
tain assumptions in a model as being ancillary allows
number of qualitative trends can, and more. The only
aresearchertostillfindevidenceinfavouroftheirpre-
reason that assessing qualitative trends can give differ-
ferred model – success that they attribute to the core
entresultstoquantitativemodelselectionisthatassess-
assumptions – and dismiss evidence against their pre-
ingonlyasubsetofthedata–asisthecasewhenassess-
ferred model – failure that they attribute to incorrect
ing qualitative trends – ignores all other aspects of the
ancillary assumptions. Importantly, being allowed to
data. Ifresearchersareonlyinterestedinexplainingthe
adjust these ancillary assumptions can make a model
single qualitative trend in the data, then I can see why
infinitelyflexible,evenifanyinstantiationofthemodel
onlyassessingthesinglequalitativetrendmakessense.
with a specific set of ancillary assumptions is not in-
However, in cases where researchers want to explain
finitely flexible. Jones and Dzhafarov (2014) provide
theentirepsychologicalprocess–whichIthinkismost
a clear example of this issue with the diffusion model,
situations – then only assessing these visually observed
where if the distribution of trial-to-trial variability in
qualitativetrendsislimitingpractice,ratherthanathe-
drift rate is considered an ancillary assumption of the
oreticallyinterestingone.
model – a common thought among researchers in the
field–thenthediffusionmodelhasinfiniteflexibilityin
Where is the border between core and ancillary
explainingchoiceresponsetimedistributions. However,
modelassumptions?
the diffusion model has been shown to be quite con-
strainedinitspredictionswhenassumingaspecificdis-
One last argument for qualitative trends being more
tribution of trial-to-trial variability in drift rate (Smith,
‘theoretically interesting’ than precise quantified mea-
Ratcliff, & McKoon, 2014; Heathcote, Wagenmakers, &
suresofperformanceisthatassessingqualitativetrends
Brown,2014),suchasthenormaldistribution(Ratcliff,
focusesonthecoreassumptionsofthemodels,whereas
2002), suggesting that the change in flexibility is cre-
model selection methods can heavily depend on the
atedbythechoiceofwhethertheassumptionislabelled
ancillary assumptions of the models. Navarro (2019)
ascoreorancillary. Thissuggeststhatbreakingmodels
states in the concluding paragraph that “it seems to me
into core and ancillary assumptions can be a slippery
thatinreallife,manyexercisesinwhichmodelchoicere-
slope,andtheflexibilityofamodelcanrapidlyincrease
lies too heavily on quantitative measures of performance
bylabellingcertainassumptionsasbeingancillary.
are essentially selecting models based on their ancillary
assumptions” (p.33). Here, Navarro seems to suggest In contrast to Navarro (2019), who wished to avoid
that we should only be interested in specific assump- makinginterpretationsbasedonancillaryassumptions,
tionsofmodels–deemedtobecoretotheexplanation I believe that when a formalized model of a process is
– and attempt to ignore other assumptions – deemed defined,thenthismodelrepresentsthecompleteexpla-
tobeancillarytotheexplanation. IagreewithNavarro nation of the process. There are no core and ancillary
thatallassumptionsinthemodelcanhavealargeinflu- assumptions of the model: just assumptions. This is
ence on quantitative model selection methods, and re- similartothepointmadebyHeathcoteetal. (2014)in
searchersmayconsidersomeoftheseassumptionstobe their reply to Jones and Dzhafarov (2014), where they
6
suggestthatJonesandDzhafarovtargetedastraw-man beingconsistentinhowitisappliedbeconsideredabad
definition of the diffusion model, and that the distribu- thing?
tional assumptions should not be considered ancillary. Generally, I would consider automation to often be
Therefore, I believe that the ability to remove the in- a good thing, and that the case of model selection is
fluence ancillary assumptions of the models does not no exception. Instead of calling these methods auto-
make qualitative trends more theoretically interesting mated, I would refer to them as principled. Quanti-
to assess, and instead, creates a slippery slope towards tative model selection methods are based on statisti-
infiniteflexibility. cal theory, are clearly defined, and follow a system-
Having said this, I can also understand why re- atic procedure that always compares the models in the
searchersmaybereluctanttocommittoallassumptions sameway. Frommyperspective,thisseemslikeagood
ofamodelasbeingcoretotheexplanation. AsNavarro thing;beingmethodicalisoftenwhatmakessciencero-
(2019) points out in the Hayes et al. (2018) exam- bust. In the context of experimentation, a lot of the
ple, there are often difficult decisions that need to be designs that researchers commonly use are essentially
made to create a formalized model, and some of these automated: these designs are based on methodological
choices can end up being somewhat arbitrary. How- theory (i.e., minimizing measurement error and poten-
ever, making each model a complete explanation with tialconfounds),areclearlydefined,andresearchersim-
onlycoreassumptionsdoesnotmeanthatassumptions plement them in an almost automatic, systematic fash-
that would normally be considered ancillary cannot be ion from experiment to experiment. However, I do not
tested. Specifically, multiple models can be proposed think that many researchers would argue that system-
as explanations of the unknown psychological process, atic experimentation using robust, well-developed ex-
with each model containing a different instantiation of perimentaldesignsisanegative. Sowhydoesthisprin-
these ancillary assumptions, and these models being cipled, systematic nature of science suddenly become a
compared using quantitative model selection methods. negative when it comes to our method of inference? I
However,eachmodelwithdifferentassumptionsisnow would instead suggest that automation is the natural
a different, separate explanation, and researchers can- next step after an approach becomes rigourously de-
notswitchbetweenthesedifferentmodelsfordifferent fined, and when a method cannot be automated, we
paradigmswhilestillclaimingthatthisrepresentsasuc- should question how rigourous the method actually is.
cess of a single explanation. I believe this presents a I believe that it is actually problematic that there is
principledwaytoaddresstheissueofancillaryassump- no automated process for visually assessing qualitative
tionsinmodels,providingtherobustnessagainstpoten- trends,wherethesameresultwouldalwaysbereached
tially arbitrary modelling choices desired by Navarro, byenteringthesameinformationatthebeginning,and
while preventing the ancillary assumptions from mak- thatthe lackofautomationsuggests thatthisapproach
ingmodelsinfinitelyflexible. lacksclearprinciplesinatleastsomeregard.
A brief digression: Is automation actually a bad AuthorContact
thing?
Correspondence concerning this article may be ad-
dressedto: NathanEvans: nathan.j.evans@uon.edu.au
OnefinalpointthatappearstobeimpliedbyNavarro
(2019) is that model selection methods being auto-
ConflictofInterestandFunding
matedisanegative. Althoughthisisn’tacentralpointof
Navarro, the statements “To illustrate how poorly even There are no potential conflicts of interest regarding
the best of statistical procedures can behave when used thecurrentarticle. NJEwassupportedbyanAustralian
to automatically quantify the strength of evidence for a Research Council Discovery Early Career Researcher
model”(p.31)and“Ifindmyselfatalossastohowcross- Award(DE200101130)andEuropeanResearchCouncil
validation,Bayesfactors,oranyotherautomatedmethod AdvancedGrant(UNIFY-743086).
cananswerit”(p.32)bothappeartoshowsomelevelof
negative connotation around the methods being auto- AuthorContributions
mated. I agree that there is a general issue with ‘black
NJE conceptualized the project, reviewed the rele-
box’ approaches, which can be applied and interpreted
vantliterature,andwrotethemanuscript.
incorrectly when users do not understand them prop-
erly. However, I believe that automated quantitative
OpenSciencePractices
modelselectionmethods,whichareappliedinaconsis-
tent manner from situation-to-situation, do not belong Thisarticleisacommentarywithoutdata,materialor
in this category. More generally, why would a method analysisofthetypethatcouldhavebeenpre-registered
7
andreproduced. Theentireeditorialprocess,including cross-validation. ComputationalBrain&Behav-
the open reviews, are published in the online supple- ior,2,35–47.
ment. Hayes, B., Banner, S., Forrester, S., & Navarro, D.
(2018). Sampling frames and inductive infer-
References encewithcensoredevidence.
Heathcote, A., Wagenmakers, E.-J., & Brown, S. D.
Brown, S. D., & Heathcote, A. (2008). The simplest (2014). The falsifiability of actual decision
complete model of choice response time: Lin- makingmodels. PsychologicalReview,121(4).
ear ballistic accumulation. Cognitive psychol- Jones, M., & Dzhafarov, E. N. (2014). Unfalsifiability
ogy,57(3),153–178. and mutual translatability of major modeling
Carland, M. A., Marcos, E., Thura, D., & Cisek, P. schemesforchoicereactiontime. Psychological
(2015). Evidenceagainstperfectintegrationof review,121(1),1.
sensoryinformationduringperceptualdecision Kass, R. E., & Raftery, A. E. (1995). Bayes factors.
making. Journal of neurophysiology, 115(2), Journal of the american statistical association,
915–930. 90(430),773–795.
Carland, M. A., Thura, D., & Cisek, P. (2015). The Kiani, R., Hanks, T. D., & Shadlen, M. N. (2008).
urgency-gatingmodelcanexplaintheeffectsof Bounded integration in parietal cortex un der-
early evidence. Psychonomic bulletin & review, lies decisions even when viewing duration is
22(6),1830–1838. dictated by the environment. Journal of Neu-
Chandramouli, S. H., & Shiffrin, R. M. (2019). Com- roscience,28(12),3017–3029.
mentaryongronauandwagenmakers. Compu- Myung, I. J. (2000). The importance of complexity in
tationalBrain&Behavior,2,12–21. model selection. Journal of mathematical psy-
Cisek, P., Puskas, G. A., & El-Murr, S. (2009). De- chology,44(1),190–204.
cisions in changing conditions: the urgency- Myung, I. J., Navarro, D. J., & Pitt, M. A. (2006).
gating model. Journal of Neuroscience, 29(37), Model selection by normalized maximum like-
11560–11571. lihood. Journal of Mathematical Psychology,
Evans, N. J., & Annis, J. (2019). Thermodynamic in- 50(2),167–179.
tegration via differential evolution: A method Myung, I. J., & Pitt, M. A. (1997). Applying occams
for estimating marginal likelihoods. Behavior razor in modeling cognition: A bayesian ap-
researchmethods,1–18. proach. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 4(1),
Evans, N. J., & Brown, S. D. (2017). People adopt op- 79–95.
timal policies in simple decision-making, after Navarro, D. J. (2019). Between the devil and the deep
practice and guidance. Psychonomic Bulletin & blue sea: Tensions between scientific judge-
Review,24(2),597–606. ment and statistical model selection. Compu-
Evans, N. J., & Brown, S. D. (2018). Bayes factors tationalBrain&Behavior,2,28–34.
for the linear ballistic accumulator model of Nosofsky, R. M., & Palmeri, T. J. (1997). An exemplar-
decision-making. Behavior research methods, based random walk model of speeded classifi-
50(2),589–603. cation. Psychologicalreview,104(2),266.
Evans, N. J., Hawkins, G. E., Boehm, U., Wagenmak- Osth, A. F., & Dennis, S. (2015). Sources of interfer-
ers, E.-J., & Brown, S. D. (2017). The compu- ence in item and associative recognition mem-
tations that support simple decision-making: A ory. Psychologicalreview,122(2),260.
comparisonbetweenthediffusionandurgency- Pilly, P. K., & Seitz, A. R. (2009). What a difference
gatingmodels. Scientificreports,7(1),16433. a parameter makes: A psychophysical compar-
Evans, N.J., Howard, Z.L., Heathcote, A., &Brown, S. ison of random dot motion algorithms. Vision
D. (2017). Model flexibility analysis does not Research,49(13),1599–1612.
measurethepersuasivenessofafit. Psychologi- Ratcliff, R. (1978). A theory of memory retrieval. Psy-
calreview,124(3),339. chologicalreview,85(2),59.
Gronau, Q. F., & Wagenmakers, E.-J. (2019a). Limita- Ratcliff, R. (2002). A diffusion model account of re-
tionsofBayesianleave-one-outcrossvalidation sponse time and accuracy in a brightness dis-
formodelselection. ComputationalBrain&Be- criminationtask: Fittingrealdataandfailingto
havior,2,1–11. fitfakebutplausibledata. Psychonomicbulletin
Gronau, Q. F., & Wagenmakers, E.-J. (2019b). Rejoin- &review,9(2),278–291.
der: MorelimitationsofBayesianleave-oneout Rescorla, R. A., & Wagner, A. R. (1972). A theory of
8
pavlovian conditioning: Variations in the ef-
fectiveness of reinforcement and nonreinforce-
ment. ClassicalconditioningII:Currentresearch
andtheory,2,64–99.
Roberts, S., & Pashler, H. (2000). How persuasive is a
goodfit? acommentontheorytesting. Psycho-
logicalreview,107(2),358.
Shiffrin, R. M., & Steyvers, M. (1997). A model for
recognition memory: Remretrieving effectively
from memory. Psychonomic bulletin & review,
4(2),145–166.
Smith, P. L., Ratcliff, R., & McKoon, G. (2014). The
diffusion model is not a deterministic growth
model: Comment on jones and dzhafarov
(2014). PsychologicalReview,121(4).
Thura, D., Beauregard-Racine, J., Fradet, C.-W., &
Cisek, P. (2012). Decision making by urgency
gating: theoryandexperimentalsupport. Jour-
nalofneurophysiology,108(11),2912–2930.
Tsetsos, K., Gao, J., McClelland, J. L., & Usher, M.
(2012). Using time-varying evidence to test
models of decision dynamics: bounded dif-
fusion vs. the leaky competing accumulator
model. Frontiersinneuroscience,6,79.
Usher, M., & McClelland, J. L. (2001). The time course
of perceptual choice: the leaky, competing ac-
cumulatormodel. Psychologicalreview,108(3),
550.
Vehtari, A., Simpson, D. P., Yao, Y., & Gelman, A.
(2019). Limitations of “limitations of Bayesian
leave-one-out cross-validation for model selec-
tion”. Computational Brain & Behavior, 2,
22–27.
Winkel, J., Keuken, M. C., van Maanen, L., Wagenmak-
ers, E.-J., & Forstmann, B. U. (2014). Early
evidence affects later decisions: Why evidence
accumulation is required to explain response
timedata. Psychonomicbulletin&review,21(3),
777–784.
9
Figure 1. An example of three different ways (A, B, C) that the data could be, and were, visualized in Evans,
Hawkins, et al. (2017). Evans, Hawkins, et al. (2017) attempted to compare the diffusion model (DDM; Ratcliff,
1978)andurgency-gatingmodel(UGM;Ciseketal.,2009)byusingarandomdotmotiontask(e.g., Pilly&Seitz,
2009; Evans & Brown, 2017), where the evidence for each alternative changed over the course of each trial. Each
trial began with a brief burst of ‘early evidence’, which was either the same as (congruent) or different to (incon-
gruent)the‘lateevidence’, creatingavariableof‘congruency’. Thelateevidenceeitherincreasedovertimeatone
of four rates (slow, medium, fast, very fast), or was not present (none), creating a variable of ‘ramp rate’. Panel A
plots a single qualitative trend, being the interaction between congruency and ramp rate on mean response time.
Both models appear to capture the overall pattern of the interaction, though the UGM is able to account for the
negligible effect of congruency on mean response time, whereas the DDM overpredicts the effect. Panel B plots a
single,butdifferent,qualitativetrend,beingthechangeinthedifferencebetweencongruentandincongruenttrial
accuracyovertime(i.e.,aconditionalaccuracyfunction;CAF)forthe‘none’condition. Again,bothmodelsappear
to capture the overall pattern of change over time, though the UGM is able to account for the quick decrease of
theCAFtozero,whereastheDDMunderpredictstherateofthedecrease. PanelCplotstheentirechoiceresponse
time distributions for the ‘none’ condition; data which includes both of the qualitative trends shown in A and B.
However,inthiscasetheDDMclearlyprovidesabetteraccountoftheentiredistributionsthantheUGM,withthe
UGMdisplaysizablemisfitinseveralaspectsofthedata. ThesesourcesofmisfitfortheUGMwereobscuredbythe
methodsofvisualizingthedatainAandB,whereAandBappearedtosuggestthatbothmodelsexplainedthedata
well, but the UGM did so somewhat better. Importantly, most previous studies comparing these models (Cisek et
al.,2009;Thuraetal.,2012;Winkeletal.,2014;Carland,Thura,&Cisek,2015;Carland,Marcos,etal.,2015)or
similarmodels(Kianietal.,2008;Tsetsosetal.,2012)hadonlyfocusedonthequalitativetrendsseeninAandB,
drawingintoquestionthevalidityofthefindingsofpreviousstudies.