Articles
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-020-0837-6
Portable art from Pleistocene Sulawesi
Michelle C. Langley 1 ✉, Budianto Hakim2, Adhi Agus Oktaviana 3,4, Basran Burhan 1,
Iwan Sumantri5, Priyatno Hadi Sulistyarto3, Rustan Lebe6, David McGahan 1 and Adam Brumm1
The ability to produce recognizable depictions of objects from the natural world—known as figurative art—is unique to Homo
sapiens and may be one of the cognitive traits that separates our species from extinct hominin relatives. Surviving examples
of Pleistocene figurative art are generally confined to rock art or portable three-dimensional works (such as figurines) and
images engraved into the surfaces of small mobile objects. These portable communicative technologies first appear in Europe
some 40 thousand years ago (ka) with the arrival of H. sapiens. Conversely, despite H. sapiens having moved into Southeast
Asia–Australasia by at least 65 ka, very little evidence for Pleistocene-aged portable art has been identified, leading to
uncertainties regarding the cultural behaviour of the earliest H. sapiens in this region. Here, we report the discovery of two small
stone ‘plaquettes’ incised with figurative imagery dating to 26–14 ka from Leang Bulu Bettue, Sulawesi. These new findings,
together with the recent discovery of rock art dating to at least 40 ka in this same region, overturns the long-held belief that the first
H. sapiens of Southeast Asia–Australasia did not create sophisticated art and further cements the importance of this behaviour
for our species’ ability to overcome environmental and social challenges.
T
he origin of modern cognition and the development of the endemism, especially among mammals. In Wallacea, ongoing
resulting cultural behaviours constitutes a crucial and hotly archaeological research is uncovering and elucidating the diverse
debated issue in human evolutionary studies1–3. Approached lifeways and symbolic material culture of the earliest modern
using a variety of techniques and methodologies, manifestations human colonisers. In the southwestern peninsula of Sulawesi, in the
of ‘symbolic’ behaviour have emerged as one of the only univer- near-coastal lowland limestone tower karst region of Maros, abun-
sally agreed upon forms of archaeological evidence able to provide dant archaeological evidence for these early human communities
direct insight into the changing cognitive capabilities of Homo1,4–6. has been recovered15, including at Leang Bulu Bettue (LBB), a cave
Archaeological residues central to these investigations include and rock-shelter complex with abundant rock art (hand stencils) of
used pieces of mineral colourants, objects of personal ornamenta- a stylistic form recently dated in the Maros area to at least 39.9 thou-
tion (such as beads), and abstract and figurative images found both sand years ago (ka; ref. 16; Fig. 1). It is at this site that the engraved
on rock-shelter walls and small fragments of bone, stone or other stone artefacts described here were discovered.
mobile artefacts4.
Although H. sapiens moved into and through Southeast Asia Results
(Sunda), Wallacea, and Australia–New Guinea (Sahul) at least 25 ka Archaeological context. At LBB, an annual programme of joint
(refs. 7,8) before the species penetrated Europe, the inventory of sym- Indonesian–Australian excavations between 2013–15 and 2017–18
bolic artefacts from this temporally and spatially expansive archaeo- has revealed a long sequence of archaeological deposits, the upper-
logical record has remained remarkably short until very recently. most portion of which is divisible internally and on stratigraphic
Most perplexing has been the apparent near-absence of a ‘classic’ and chronological grounds into two distinct human occupation
Palaeolithic art form—portable artefacts depicting recognisable phases: Phase II, historical (ad <1790) and Neolithic (1.7–1.6 cali-
items from the natural world—drawing intensive attention from brated (cal) ka bp); and Phase I, MIS 3/2 (~50–22 ka). Below the top-
researchers9–12. Indeed, some authorities have used their absence most Neolithic level, which is dated to 1.7–1.6 cal ka bp, are multiple
in Sunda–Wallacea–Sahul to argue that the first H. sapiens of this thin layers of hard, flowstone-cemented sediment that, combined,
region were less culturally ‘advanced’ than contemporary groups reach a total thickness of ~1 m. This sequence of culturally sterile
elsewhere in the Old World (especially Europe) and that traditions geogenic units is underlain by three distinct Pleistocene cultural
of material symbolic culture like portable art can be ‘lost’ when deposits: a 1.5 m-thick sequence of archaeologically rich silty clays
groups face challenging scenarios, particularly when colonising new (Layers 4a–e) spanning 29.5–14 ka; and underlying a 50-cm-thick
environments13,14. sandy clay layer (Layer 4f) preserved near the eastern wall of the
Sulawesi is the largest island in the Wallacean archipelago cave and spanning 40–30 ka; and below Layer 4f, a 50-cm-thick
(Wallacea), a biogeographically distinct region of oceanic islands sandy clay (Layer 5) containing sparse cultural remains and with an
spanning the divide between continental Asia (Sunda) and Australia estimated age of ~50–40 ka (ref. 17).
(Sahul), and which in terms of faunal distributions represents a The two engraved stone artefacts described here were excavated
transitional zone between these separate landmasses. Formerly in situ from the upper part of the stratified and undisturbed Layer
known as Celebes, Sulawesi is the world’s eleventh largest island 4a, a moderate yellowish brown (10YR5/4) slightly sandy ‘mud’
(~174,000 km2) and is renowned among biologists for its complex (silt, 50.3%; clay, 32.2%) that is up to 70-cm-thick and contains
history of in situ faunal evolution and extremely high rate of species rich cultural and faunal assemblages. The high-precision U-series
1Australian Research Centre for Human Evolution, Environmental Futures Research Institute, Griffith University, Brisbane, Australia. 2Balai Arkeologi
Sulawesi Selatan, Makassar, Indonesia. 3Pusat Penelitian Arkeologi Nasional (ARKENAS), Jakarta, Indonesia. 4Place, Evolution and Rock Art Heritage Unit,
Griffith Centre for Social and Cultural Research, Griffith University, Gold Coast, Australia. 5Archaeology Laboratory, Hasanuddin University, Makassar,
Indonesia. 6Balai Pelestarian Cagar Budaya, Makassar, Indonesia. ✉e-mail: m.langley@griffith.edu.au
NAtuRe HuMAN BeHAvIOuR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles Nature HumaN BeHaviour
a b
Philippines West wall (rock-shelter excavation) West wall (cave excavation)
+ –H2 + –G2 + –F2 + –E2 + –D2 + –C2 + –B2 + –A2 + A2 + B2 + 0 m
Sumatra Borneo New
Guinea
1
2
Une bx ac 1a u .7v lk –a 1t .6e id 1 2
Java Timor 3 13.7–10.3v 3 1 m
120° E 125° E 22.2–21.8ii
3 4a 4a 4a 25.3 2(+ 6L7 –. B0 2/ B– 45 - .I 6. )6i vii 4 4a b
0° Makassar Strait
SSuullaawweessii L Ta ok we
uti
0° 22 222 2
2
76 674 6
7
.. ... .
.
00 491 0
0
–– ––– –
–
22 222 2
2
65 573 5
6
.. ... .
.
15 845 6
2
ii iii i
i
ii iii i
i 4b
4a
4c
44 ed
544 bb
Roof-fall block
4 5b 2 3 54(2 8 9 1L 47 . . .(a .9 8 8L5. y6 B+± ± ±e-
9
B2 r .90 0
0
7 -/4 I. . .–. I1 2 6f 82 )) .i i ii4v v vi ii
i
5 2
3
m
m
5 Surface of layer 5
Key to stratigraphy
Leang Bulu
5° S Bettue Kabaena Buton 5° S L roim ofe -fs at lo l n be lo/s ct kalactite Cemented ashy deposit Tree root or root cavity Breccia/concretions Stratigraphic layer 4 m
Muna
120° E Selayar 125° E
Fig. 1 | Find context of the two engraved plaquettes. a, Location of Leang Bulu Bettue in southwest Sulawesi. b, Locations of finds for the anoa and
rayed-circle plaquettes. Dating methods used: (i) AMS radiocarbon (charcoal) in cal ka bp (95.4% probability); (ii) AMS radiocarbon (freshwater shell
(Tylomelania perfecta)) in cal ka bp (95.4% probability); (iii) post-infrared stimulated luminscence (pIRIR) on feldspars; (iv) laser ablation U-series analysis
of tooth; (v) solution U-series analysis of in situ stalagmite.
stalagmite chronology constructed for this portion of the deposi- a
tional sequences allows us to bracket the time-depth of Layer 4a to
between ~26 and 14 ka (refs. 17,18). The minimum age for Layer 4a is
based on a solution U-series date 13.7 ± 1.8 ka from the basal growth
layer of a vertical, still-emplaced stalagmite that had formed on the
upper surface of this sedimentary unit17. In an effort to more tightly
constrain the age of Layer 4a, and given the lack of preservation of
plant carbon in the deposit, accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS)
14C-dating of freshwater gastropod (Tylomelania perfecta) shells and
laser ablation U-series dating of a pig tooth were conducted17. Also 1 cm
carried out was AMS 14C-dating on two T. perfecta shells collected b
from laterally continuous exposures of Layer 4a revealed by exca-
vations inside the adjoining rock-shelter. These three independent
dating methods indicate a maximum age of ~26–22 ka for Layer 5 mm 5 mm
4a and the material culture recovered from that context. Specific
details of the dating methods described here, and further dating evi-
Eye
dence for Layer 4a and underlying strata, are provided elsewhere18.
Excavations in Layer 4a and underlying units conducted in 2015
and 2017–18 have yielded a diverse range of symbolic material cul- Muzzle
ture from the levels dating to around the time of the last glacial max-
imum (LGM); in particular, utilized colourants, a possible pigment
blowpipe for rock art creation, tool-stone with incised cortex, a bear
Fig. 2 | Stone plaquette featuring the engraved depiction of an endemic
cuscus phalange pendant and babirusa tooth disk-shaped beads18.
anoa (Bubalus sp.). a, Macrophoto of the plaquette is overlaid with tracing
Apparent examples of geometric ‘portable art’ previously recovered
of the incised and sculpted areas. Dark grey indicates the deepest incisions,
from the Pleistocene levels include small knapped chert artefacts
light grey the lowered areas. b, Microscope composites documenting
(n = 4) and a fragment of limestone incised with arrangements of examples of characteristic stone tool-made incisions and carved
lines forming abstract patterns. Until now, however, figurative por-
areas. Each composite image with the photographs was taken at ×12.6
table artworks have been absent. Current evidence suggests that this
magnification.
collection of symbolic artefacts was produced by the Pleistocene
foraging group responsible for creating the dated parietal rock art
(hand stencils and figurative animal paintings) in the karst caves suffered from post-depositional processes causing particulates to
and shelters of the Maros region. Despite increasing investigations begin dissolving, anthropogenic alterations remain clearly identifi-
throughout Wallacea and adjacent areas, the assemblage of LBB able and are restricted to one face. Stone tools are identified as the
remains unique both for its diversity and richness of early symbolic instruments used to make the image, as deduced from the charac-
material culture, raising questions about its role in the wider social teristic V-shaped cross-section with internal linear striations clearly
landscape of Maros and Pleistocene Wallacea generally. visible within the 17 artificial incisions (Fig. 2).
A single graphic element covers most of the surface of the small
The engraved plaquettes. The first engraved stone plaquette was stone slab and depicts the head of an endemic anoa shown in left
excavated from Layer 4a in 2017 (Fig. 1). It consists of a flat frag- profile, turned back towards its flank. Anoas (Bubalus sp.) are dwarf
ment of flowstone with maximum dimensions of 54.6 mm in width, bovids found only on Sulawesi19. They are the smallest of the world’s
51.7 mm in length and 13.4 mm in height (weight = 47.7 g). The extant wild cattle10. The taxonomic status of anoas is still debated;19,20
object is roughly square-shaped in plan form and, despite having however, these distinctive bovids with stout and rounded bodies21
NAtuRe HuMAN BeHAvIOuR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Nature HumaN BeHaviour Articles
a Back
Skin folds/
shoulder
Horns
b
Eye
Stomach
Nostril
Cheek
Mouth
c
1 cm
b c
Fig. 4 | Anoa in Sulawesi Pleistocene art. Typical paintings of anoa in
the Maros kasts of south Sulawesi (right; top painting has been flipped
horizontally for comparison purposes). The LBB plaquette depiction (top
left) shares stylistic choices observed in the painted versions: the face
and back horn are drawn using one continuous thick line, the muzzle is
trapezoidal and divided in two by a line representing the mouth and the
skin/body of the animal is shown using undulating lines. For comparison,
a photograph of an anoa in the same perspective depicted on the plaquette
Fig. 3 | Micro-Ct imaging of the anoa plaquette. a, Whole plaquette
is shown bottom left. Credit: Photograph reproduced with permission
inclined at a 10º angle. b, Incised groove creating underbelly. c, Sculpting of
from Zoo Leipzig.
jaw and cheek area.
and short limbs are separated on the basis of morphological charac- Fig. 10–12). Other artiodactyls depicted in Sulawesi’s Pleistocene
ters and geographical distribution into two species: lowland anoas parietal art and which also feature long skulls include the babirusa
(B. depressicornis) and mountain anoas (B. quarlesi)19,20. The for- (Babyrousa sp.), a primitive and endemic suid, and Sulawesi warty
mer, as the name suggests, predominately inhabit low-lying areas. pig (Sus celebensis). Neither of these wild suids has horns, however,
B. depressicornis is the largest species, with adults measuring and as there were no other horned animals present on the island
60–100 cm at the shoulder and attaining a body mass of <300 kg in the past 30 ka, the anoa is the only viable candidate. Further
(ref. 20). Adult males are relatively hairless and tend to be black narrowing of the species depicted (inferring whether the subject
in colour with whitish to yellow limb markings. The horns on represented may be the lowland (B. depressicornis) or mountain
mature individuals are long (271–373 mm in males), straight to (B. quarlesi) anoa in particular, or even the putative, extinct B. grovesi)
slightly curved, and backwardly directed, with a rugged texture19,21. is hampered by the restrictions of the raw material, state of tapho-
Mountain anoas are about half the size of lowland anoas in terms nomic deterioration of the piece and morphological similarities
of body mass (<150 kg) and usually, but not always, show a differ- between the species.
ent pelage in the form of a fairly thick and wooly, black to brown- Given the probable importance of anoas as a food (and possibly
ish coat20. B. quarlesi favours undisturbed rainforest habitats and is raw material) resource to Sulawesi’s early modern human popula-
mostly found in the mountainous terrain (up to 2,300 m above sea tions, it should not be surprising that this animal was selected for
level) that characterises much of Sulawesi’s rugged interior20. Adult depiction in visual art. That this piece was not part of an image
horns of B. quarlesi are shorter and smoother than in B. depressicornis originally engraved into the wall of LBB (and is then simply a fallen
and differ in cross-section morphology (they are conical in shape piece of parietal art) is clearly evident from the size and composi-
rather than triangular, as in lowland anoa). Although small, tion of the image, which essentially follows the natural outline of the
anoas of both species are widely reputed to attack fiercely when small stone slab.
disturbed. Recent investigation of pre-World War Two Dutch archae- The artist created the image of the anoa’s head (36.8 mm long)
ological assemblages from Holocene cave sites in South Sulawesi by scoring a single line to delineate the top of the head and right
suggests the existence of an earlier, now-extinct anoa (B. grovesi) horn, a stylistic choice also used in the rock wall paintings of this
that was about 30% larger in body size than B. depressicornis22. species (Figs. 2–4). The muzzle and cheek are sculpted, provid-
However, this species has been proposed on the basis of fragmen- ing three-dimensional detail to the face (Figs. 2 and 3). The area
tary fossil remains and its appearance relative to the two living under the chin and cheek has been lowered by scraping away at
anoas is poorly known. the surface of the flowstone, as have two areas at the top of the
Our identification of the engraved motif as an anoa is based on plaquette (shown in light grey in Fig. 2). Interestingly, while the
the resemblance not only to living animals today (notably, the elon- area under the chin/cheek has been levelled out, the two areas at
gated skull, large eyes, prominent muzzle with flaring nostrils, two the top of the plaquette show grooves and undulations, perhaps
slightly curved horns and wrinkled neck skin) but also the similari- suggesting that the piece was left unfinished. Facial features were
ties of the engraved image to the paintings of anoas which are a strik- carved into the stone, including a curved line for the mouth and
ing feature of dated Pleistocene rock art in Maros and elsewhere in nostril, which is anatomically correct. The eye is made up of three
the southwestern peninsula of Sulawesi (Fig. 4 and Supplementary curved incisions—one starting at the left and moving up and to
NAtuRe HuMAN BeHAvIOuR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles Nature HumaN BeHaviour
e
a b
c d
Fig. 5 | engraving of a rayed circular form. a–e, The tracing shown below the artefact in the middle (e) indicates where each incision overlapped as well
as the location of red colourant traces (red dots). a, Red colourant traces. b–d, Examples of line details showing characteristic lithic tool marks. Scale bars,
1 mm (a–d) and 1 cm (e), with photographs taken at magnifications ×32 (a), ×20 (b), ×12.6 (c) and ×12.6 (d).
the right to create the top of the eye. The second incision is ori- This artefact differs notably from the decorated tool-stone
ented in the opposite direction, creating the bottom of the eye, pieces previously reported for LBB18. Specifically, the images found
while a third small c-shaped notch in between these two lines on the cortex of four stone flakes and a fragment of limestone are
depicts the pupil. Just above the eye, a brow-line moving over extremely shallow, being created with a single draw of a sharp edge
the nose has been carved. The left horn (again depicted using a across the surface and the designs consist of single oblique lines,
single line made through repeated drawing of a stone tool over consecutive parallel lines, or crosses. These geometric ‘sketches’ are
the stone surface) is thicker at the horn base and tapers to a point difficult to see without the help of a directed light source and traces
finishing at the right edge of the plaquette. The flank of the ani- of colourant are only found on the working edge of one of the flakes
mal is outlined by three deeply cut lines, creating an arched back (suggesting that it was used to produce ochre powder)18. No evidence
and flat stomach. No legs are visible, although two scalloped lines for the tracing or smearing of ochre over these linear designs is
on the neck area suggest wrinkled skin, a distinctive character- present. Thus, the deeply engraved and red-traced image in a form
istic of anoas (see Supplementary Figs. 10 and 11), or the right commonly referred to as a ‘sun-burst’ or ‘rayed-circle’ in rock art
shoulder. Photographs of live anoas standing towards the viewer studies23–28 is strikingly different from the shallow cortex markings.
with their head turned to the side (as in Fig. 4) provide a com- ‘Sun-burst’ patterns in rock art are widespread both temporally
mon perspective from which this animal would be viewed and and spatially being observed in both pictographs and petroglyphs
reveals careful attention to detail and skill in the executed artwork across the Australian, African and American continents23–28. While
(Supplementary Fig. 12). researchers usually go to some effort to clarify that the meaning
The second engraved stone plaquette was excavated in situ from of such rayed motifs are essentially unknown, interpretations are
the upper surface of Layer 4a in 2018 (Fig. 1). It is made on a small, proffered based on consultation with indigenous communities and
angular piece of fine-grained limestone and has maximum dimen- range from celestial entities such as the Sun (or other stars) to small
sions of 29.5 mm in width, 50.3 mm in length and 27.2 mm in height animals such as a starfish23,25. Given that the LBB artefact has been
(weight = 57 g). As with the first artefact, the motif covers only one carefully crafted (unlike the faintly incised, non-figurative mark-
side of the stone. Seven deeply incised lines emanate from a cen- ings found on cortical surfaces of some artefacts), has been traced
tral, facetted, oval form that dominates the engraved image (Fig. 5). over with a red colourant, and is a form widely acknowledged to
The radiating lines and those comprising the circle-like form in the represent a physical entity (whatever that may be), we argue that
centre are all deeply etched (~2 mm) into the stone surface, with it probably constitutes a second example of portable figurative
striations from the repeated use of a stone burin-type edge clearly art at this site.
evident in their cross-section profiles (Supplementary Fig. 16). The
circumference of the oval has been further altered, with its distal Discussion
edge bevelled-off to produce a rounded appearance to this central Portable art may be central to the effective linking not only of
focal point. Microscopic examination of the initiation and termina- people with technology but also of people with people, a behav-
tion of each incision found that the oval was inscribed in a clockwise iour that is argued to have allowed H. sapiens to out-perform (or at
direction. The ‘rays’ were then added to the image. A red mineral least outlast) archaic hominin populations wherever they encoun-
residue is visible within the incisions located on the left side of the tered them across the Old World29,30. Images facilitate the storage
motif (Fig. 5), suggesting that the image was traced or painted over and communication of huge amounts of information, supporting
with red pigment, perhaps to more clearly distinguish the incised increased efficiency in information transmission between individu-
lines—no red pigment residue was observed on any other part of als, groups and generations29,31. Indeed, information flow is pro-
the artefact surface. posed to have been essential to the successful colonization of new
NAtuRe HuMAN BeHAvIOuR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Nature HumaN BeHaviour Articles
landscapes29,32–34, through allowing groups of ‘explorers’ (popula- developments in Western Europe and Sulawesi, in which case the
tions or communities moving into previously uninhabited envi- role of changing environments (the LGM) and increasing popula-
ronments) to maintain contact with ancestor populations while tion densities in how humans internalize, communicate and inter-
simultaneously building strategies to move through and exploit pret the world around them requires further academic attention. If
novel resources and habitats35. these similarities did, in fact, constitute evidence for connections
The appearance of abstract, but in particular, figurative images, between the east and west of the Eurasian continent around the time
in the archaeological record is generally agreed to attest to the pres- of the LGM, such information would have important ramifications
ence of a modern human mind, and consequently the complete for understanding human technological developments.
absence of portable versions of such realistic art from Pleistocene While it has become well established that behavioural plasticity
Southeast Asia–Wallacea–Australia has drawn intensive attention was essential for the successful dispersal of our species around the
and debate9–12. Controversially, researchers have inferred that this globe43, it is also apparent that producing mobile imagery (combin-
region was either left behind or left out of the ‘human revolution’ ing visual and tactile memory cues) was an important strategy for
occurring in Africa and Eurasia during the Late Pleistocene36. carrying modern communities through stressful social and envi-
Indeed, there has been much centred around how such a key ronmental conditions. The ability of figurative art to coalesce and
modern behaviour could seemingly disappear, and whether the transmit enormous amounts of information gathered across gen-
stress of moving into and through new environments could result erations is a powerful technology, driven by a distinctively human
in great cultural and technological losses13,14. From the LBB pla- form of cognitive behaviour. It now seems that modern humans in
quette finds, it is now evident that the apparent absence of portable Sulawesi around the time of the LGM used these tools to under-
images along the southern arc route towards Sahul does not reflect stand and mould their environment and themselves, in a manner
the inability to conceive of or use this particular communicative that is similar to their counterparts in Palaeolithic Eurasia.
technology (owing either to the inability to do so from a cogni-
tive perspective, or the loss of knowledge of this form of symbolic Methods
expression within colonizing populations) but is rather owing to These artefacts were recovered during the 2018 field season at LBB (Sulawesi) and
a host of other factors, including researchers simply not having were taken to Griffith University (Nathan campus, Brisbane, Australia) for analysis.
There, macrophotography of each artefact was undertaken using a Canon digital SLR
attained large enough sample sizes to find these almost invariably
camera, with these photographs serving as the basis for tracings and illustrations.
rare archaeological objects9,11. A Zeiss Stemi 508 stereomicroscope fitted with an Axiom 105 camera was used to
Artworks such as these—small enough (palm-sized) to be por- examine all surfaces of the artefacts. Measurements and photography used the Zeiss
table and depicting recognizable images of empirical categories ‘Zen’ (Blue Edition) software. Photographs taken on the Zeiss were stitched together
from the natural world—were previously assumed to have been using the Canvas XII illustrating software. Micro-computed tomography (micro-CT)
images were created by the X-ray Computer Tomography Laboratory, operated
a unique and characterizing feature of Upper Palaeolithic Europe
by the Department of Applied Maths at the Australian National University (ANU,
(beginning in the Aurignacian)30,37,38 and, to a lesser extent, early Canberra). The X-ray detector is a 16-bit, scintillator-coupled 3,040 × 3,040 pixel
modern human cultures in the Levant, where the earliest exam- CCD camera mounted on a linear rail. The radiographic data were translated with
ple is dated to ~23–16 ka (ref. 33; see Supplementary Fig. 18). In the ANU Supercomputer facility and rendered with Drishti software. Gross artefact
Pleistocene African contexts, despite the deep evolutionary his-
metrics were obtained using Mitutoyo CD-6ʺ CX digital calipers, their metal arms
coated with a thin plastic layer to protect the artefacts from scratches.
tory of H. sapiens on this continent, the oldest known instance of
figurative portable art only dates to ~27.5 ka (refs. 39,40). Thus, the Reporting Summary. Further information on research design is available in the
LBB plaquettes of Indonesia are comparable in age to the earliest Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.
examples from Levant and Africa, but most importantly, they are
the first of Pleistocene age anywhere in the extensive Southeast Data availability
Asia–Wallacea–Australia region. The artefacts reported here are currently curated at the Australian Research Centre
for Human Evolution, Griffith University, Nathan, Australia. They will return
Furthermore, the anoa plaquette is, as far as we are aware, the
to Indonesia at the conclusion of the project where they will be given accession
only other Pleistocene-aged use of the bas-relief method in image
numbers and be curated in Makassar by Balai Arkeologi Sulawesi Selatan.
creation outside of Europe. Bas-relief, an advanced method of image
creation through carving away or adding material to make a figure Received: 1 May 2019; Accepted: 12 February 2020;
more prominent than its background, first appears in Aurignacian Published: xx xx xxxx
Europe some 40–35 ka (refs. 41,42). Continuing in use throughout the
European Upper Palaeolithic, its appearance in Sulawesi ~26–13 ka References
represents a distance of at least 11,000 km from its closest com- 1. McBrearty, S. & Brooks, A. S. The revolution that wasn’t: a new interpretation
of the origin of modern human behavior. J. Hum. Evol. 39, 453–563 (2000).
parisons at similar time periods. Notably, there are several other
2. Shea, J. J. Homo sapiens is as Homo sapiens was. Curr. Anthropol. 52,
similarities between the LBB anoa plaquette and broadly contem-
1–35 (2011).
poraneous pieces from Western Europe. Specifically, the uneven 3. Colagè, I. & d’Errico, F. Culture: the driving force of human cognition. Top.
treatment of the head (more detailed) as against the flank (only Cogn. Sci. 11, 1–19 (2018).
preliminarily sketched out) is an occurrence found for several ani- 4. d’Errico, F. et al. Archaeological evidence for the emergence of language,
symbolism, and music—an alternative multidisciplinary perspective. J. World
mal representations from Upper Palaeolithic contexts, including a
Prehist. 17, 1–70 (2003).
well-known bison depiction recovered from the French Pyrenean
5. Kuhn, S. L. & Stiner, M. C. in Rethinking the Human Revolution: New
site of Isturitz (Supplementary Fig. 19)42. Another similarity is the Behavioural and Biological Perspectives on the Origin and Dispersal of Modern
choice of depicting the animal with its head turned back towards its Humans (eds. Mellars, P., Boyle, K., Bar-Yosef, O. & Stringer, C.) Chapter 4
rump. This posture is found on several famous artefacts dating to (MacDonald Institute of Archaeology, 2007).
6. Mellet, E. et al. Neuroimaging supports the representational nature of the
the Magdalenian period (21–14 ka cal), notably the ‘licking bison’
earliest human engravings. R. Soc. Open Sci. 6, 190086 (2019).
from La Madeleine (Dordogne, France) and ‘ibex with bird’ spear- 7. Clarkson, C. et al. Human occupation of northern Australia by 65,000 years
thrower-butt series from Bédeilhac, Isturitz and Mas d’Azil (French ago. Nature 547, 306–310 (2017).
Pyrenees)—all made on reindeer antler (Supplementary Fig. 17). 8. Westaway, K. et al. An early modern human presence in Sumatra
While of note, these similarities clearly do not provide grounds 73,000–63,000 years ago. Nature 548, 322–325 (2017).
9. Brumm, A. & Moore, M. W. Symbolic revolutions and the Australian
for repeated long-distance contact between European Palaeolithic
archaeological record. Camb. Archaeol. J. 15, 157–175 (2005).
communities and those located in Island Southeast Asia. Instead, 10. Dennell, R. & Porr, M. Southern Asia, Australia and the Search for Human
these similarities could reflect independent but coinciding artistic Origins (Cambridge Univ. Press, 2014).
NAtuRe HuMAN BeHAvIOuR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles Nature HumaN BeHaviour
11. Langley, M. C., Clarkson, C. & Ulm, S. From small holes to grand narratives: 36. Habgood, P. J. & Franklin, N. The revolution that didn’t arrive: a review of
the impact of taphonomy and sample size on the modernity debate in Pleistocene Sahul. J. Hum. Evol. 55, 187–222 (2008).
Australia and New Guinea. J. Hum. Evol. 61, 197–208 (2011). 37. Conard, N. J. Palaeolithic ivory sculptures from southwestern Germany and
12. Wright, D., Langley, M. C., Litster, M., & May, S. K. in The Archaeology of the origins of figurative art. Nature 426, 830–832 (2003).
Portable Art: Southeast Asian, Pacific, and Australian Perspectives (eds. Langley, 38. Bourrillon, R. et al. A new Aurignacian engraving from Abri Blanchard,
M. C., Litster, M., Wright, D. & May, S. K.) Chapter 1 (Routledge, 2018). France: implications for understanding Aurignacian graphic expression in
13. Mellars, P. Going east: new genetic and archaeological perspectives on the Western and Central Europe. Quat. Int. 491, 46–64 (2018).
modern human colonization of Eurasia. Science 313, 796–800 (2006). 39. Yaroshevich, A. et al. A unique assemblage of engraved plaquettes from Ein
14. Mellars, P., Gori, K. C., Carr, M., Soares, P. A. & Richards, M. B. Genetic and Qashish South, Jezreel Valley, Israel: figurative and non-figurative symbols
archaeological perspectives on the initial modern human colonization of of Late Pleistocene hunters-gatherers in the Levant. PLoS ONE 11,
southern Asia. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 110, 10699–10704 (2013). e0160687 (2016).
15. Glover, I. C. Leang Burung 2: an Upper Palaeolithic rock shelter in south 40. Richter, D. et al. The age of the hominin from Jebel Irhoud, Morocco, and the
Sulawesi, Indonesia. Mod. Quat. Res. SE Asia 6, 1–38 (1981). origins of the Middle Stone Age. Nature 546, 293–296 (2017).
16. Aubert, M. et al. Pleistocene cave art from Sulawesi, Indonesia. Nature 514, 4 1. White, R. Prehistoric Art: The Symbolic Journey of Humankind
223–227 (2014). (Abrams, 2003).
17. Li, B. et al. IRSL dating of fast-fading sanidine feldspars from Sulawesi, 42. Graziosi, P. Palaeolithic Art (Faber and Faber, 1960).
Indonesia. Anc. TL 34, 1–13 (2016). 43. Wedage, O. et al. Specialized rainforest hunting by Homo sapiens ~45,000
18. Brumm, A. et al. Early human symbolic behavior in the Late Pleistocene of years ago. Nat. Commun. 10, 739 (2019).
Island Southeast Asia. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 114, 4105–4110 (2017).
19. Groves, C. & Grubb, P. Ungulate Taxonomy (Johns Hopkins Univ. Press, 2011). Acknowledgements
20. Burton, J. A., Hedges, S. & Mustari, A. H. The taxonomic status, distribution
The 2017–2018 excavations at LBB were supported by an Australian Research Council
and conservation of the lowland anoa Bubalus depressicornis and mountain
(ARC) Future Fellowship grant (no. FT160100119) awarded to A.B., along with
anoa Bubalus quarlesi. Mammal Rev. 35, 25–50 (2005).
generous funding from Griffith University. The funders had no role in study design,
21. Groves, C. Systematics of the Anoa (Mammalia, Bovidae). Beaufortia 17,
data collection and analysis, decision to publish or preparation of the manuscript. For
1–12 (1969).
authorizing the Indonesian field research, we thank Director of ARKENAS, I. Made
22. Rozzi, R. A new extinct dwarfed buffalo from Sulawesi and the evolution of
Geria, Head of Balai Arkeologi Makassar, I. Mahmud and Head of Balai Pelestarian
the subgenus Anoa: an interdisciplinary perspective. Quat. Sci. Rev. 157,
Cagar Budaya, L. Aksa, along with the State Ministry of Research and Technology, which
188–205 (2017).
issued the relevant research permits.
23. Davidson, D. S. Notes on the pictographs and petroglyphs of Western
Australia and a discussion on their affinities with appearances elsewhere on
Author contributions
the continent. Proc. Am. Philos. Soc. 96, 76–117 (1952).
24. Schobinger, J. The Ancient Americans Vol. 1 (Routledge, 2002). A.B. directed the excavation of LBB with B.H., A.A.O., B.B., I.S., P.H.S. and R.L. acting as
25. Willcox, A. R. The Rock Art of Africa (Croom Helm, 1984). counterparts and collaborators on the investigation of the Sulawesi sites being explored.
26. Diaz-Granados, C. & Duncan J. R. The Rock-Art of Eastern North America D.M. created the micro-CT images included in this manuscript. M.C.L. undertook the
(Univ. of Alabama Press, 2004). qualitative and quantitative analysis of the presented artefacts. M.C.L. and A.B. wrote the
27. Flood, J. Rock Art of the Dreamtime (Angus and Robertson, 1997). manuscript, with contributions from the other authors.
28. Orton, J. Geometric rock art in western South Africa and its implications for
the spread of early herding. S. Afr. Archaeol. Bull. 68, 27–40 (2013). Competing interests
29. Sterelny, K. From hominins to humans: how sapiens became behaviourally The authors declare no competing interests.
modern. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 366, 20100301 (2011).
30. Conard, N. J. A female figurine from the basal Aurignacian of Hohle Fels
Cave in southwestern Germany. Nature 459, 248–252 (2009). Additional information
31. Donald, M. Origins of Modern Mind (Harvard Univ. Press, 1991). Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/
32. Gamble, C. The Palaeolithic Societies of Europe (Cambridge Univ. Press, 1999). s41562-020-0837-6.
33. Noble, W. & Davidson, I. The evolutionary emergence of modern human
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to M.C.L.
behaviour. Man 26, 223–253 (1991).
34. Veth, P., Stern, M., McDonald, J., Balme, J. & Davidson, I. in Information and Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
its Role in Hunter-Gatherer Bands (eds. Whallon, R., Lovis, W. A. & Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
Hitchcock, R. K.) Chapter 9 (Cotsen Institute of Archaeology Press, 2011). published maps and institutional affiliations.
35. Balme, J., Davidson, I., McDonald, J., Stern, N. & Veth, P. Symbolic behaviour
Editor recognition statement Primary Handling Editor: Stavroula Kousta.
and the peopling of the southern arc route to Australia. Quat. Int. 202,
59–68 (2009). © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2020
NAtuRe HuMAN BeHAvIOuR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
1
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Corresponding author(s): Langley, M. C.
Last updated by author(s): 14/10/2019
Reporting Summary
Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency
in reporting. For further information on Nature Research policies, see Authors & Referees and the Editorial Policy Checklist.
Statistics
For all statistical analyses, confirm that the following items are present in the figure legend, table legend, main text, or Methods section.
n/a Confirmed
The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
A statement on whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided
Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.
A description of all covariates tested
A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
A full description of the statistical parameters including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient)
AND variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)
For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted
Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.
For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated
Our web collection on statistics for biologists contains articles on many of the points above.
Software and code
Policy information about availability of computer code
Data collection Zeiss Stemi 508 stereomicroscope fitted with an Axiom 105 camera using the Zeiss "Zen (Blue Edition)" was utilised to examine and
measure features of interest on both artefacts.
Data analysis No software was used.
For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors/reviewers.
We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Research guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.
Data
Policy information about availability of data
All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable:
- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets
- A list of figures that have associated raw data
- A description of any restrictions on data availability
The artefacts reported herein are currently curated at the Australia Research Centre for Human Evolution, Griffith University, Nathan, Australia. They will return to
Indonesia at the conclusion of the project where they will be given accession numbers and be curated by in Makassar by Balai Arkeologi Sulawesi Selatan.
2
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Field-specific reporting
Please select the one below that is the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.
Life sciences Behavioural & social sciences Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences
For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/documents/nr-reporting-summary-flat.pdf
Behavioural & social sciences study design
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
Study description Examination and analysis of archaeological samples -- stone artefacts -- using a qualitative analysis of anthropogenic features.
Research sample High-resolution study of two artefacts -- only examples bearing figurative engravings thus far recovered from excavations in Sulawesi by
Adam Brumm.
Sampling strategy These two artefacts are currently the only examples bearing figurative engravings thus far recovered from excavations in Sulawesi by
Adam Brumm -- therefore both were extensively examined.
Data collection These artefacts were recovered during the 2018 field season at Leang Bulu Bettue (Sulawesi), and were taken to Griffith University
(Nathan campus) for analysis. There, macrophotography of each artefact was undertaken using a Canon digital SLR camera, with these
photographs serving as the basis for tracings and illustrations. A Zeiss Stemi 508 stereomicroscope fitted with a Axiom 105 camera was
used to examine all surfaces of the artefacts. Measurements and photography utilised the Zeiss "Zen" (Blue Edition) software.
Photographs taken on the Zeiss were stitched together using the Canvas XII illustrating software. MicroCT images were created X-ray
Computer Tomography laboratory, operated by the Department of Applied Maths at the Australian National University (Canberra). The X-
ray detector is a 16-bit, scintillator-coupled 3040x3040 pixel CCD camera mounted on a linear rail. The radiographic data were translated
with the ANU Supercomputer facility, and rendered with Drishti software. Gross artefact metrics were obtained using Mitutoyo CD-6” CX
digital calipers, their metal arms coated with a thin plastic layer to protect the artefacts from scratches.
Timing The 2018 Sulawesi excavation began on the 9th July 2018, with the in laboratory analysis completed in early June 2019.
Data exclusions No data was excluded from this analysis.
Non-participation NA
Randomization NA
Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods
We require information from authors about some types of materials, experimental systems and methods used in many studies. Here, indicate whether each material,
system or method listed is relevant to your study. If you are not sure if a list item applies to your research, read the appropriate section before selecting a response.
Materials & experimental systems Methods
n/a Involved in the study n/a Involved in the study
Antibodies ChIP-seq
Eukaryotic cell lines Flow cytometry
Palaeontology MRI-based neuroimaging
Animals and other organisms
Human research participants
Clinical data