Articles
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-019-0732-1
Brain regulation of emotional conflict predicts
antidepressant treatment response for depression
Gregory A. Fonzo1,9, Amit Etkin 2,3,4,9*, Yu Zhang 2,3,4,9, Wei Wu 2,3,4, Crystal Cooper5,
Cherise Chin-Fatt5, Manish K. Jha5, Joseph Trombello 5, Thilo Deckersbach6, Phil Adams7,
Melvin McInnis8, Patrick J. McGrath7, Myrna M. Weissman 7, Maurizio Fava 6 and
Madhukar H. Trivedi 5
The efficacy of antidepressant treatment for depression is controversial due to the only modest superiority demonstrated over
placebo. However, neurobiological heterogeneity within depression may limit overall antidepressant efficacy. We sought to
identify a neurobiological phenotype responsive to antidepressant treatment by testing pretreatment brain activation during
response to, and regulation of, emotional conflict as a moderator of the clinical benefit of the antidepressant sertraline versus
placebo. Using neuroimaging data from a large randomized controlled trial, we found widespread moderation of clinical ben-
efits by brain activity during regulation of emotional conflict, in which greater downregulation of conflict-responsive regions
predicted better sertraline outcomes. Treatment-predictive machine learning using brain metrics outperformed a model trained
on clinical and demographic variables. Our findings demonstrate that antidepressant response is predicted by brain activity
underlying a key self-regulatory emotional capacity. Leveraging brain-based measures in psychiatry will forge a path toward
better treatment personalization, refined mechanistic insights and improved outcomes.
M
ajor depression is a common, chronic and disabling dict treatment outcome with an antidepressant versus with placebo
medical condition1, whose treatment mainstay over the (that is, moderate the clinical effect).
past four decades has been monoaminergic antidepres- The ability to respond to and regulate brain responses to con-
sant medications2. As a result, roughly one in eight in the United flicting emotional cues is a critical component of wellbeing11–13.
States takes an antidepressant3. Nonetheless, large meta-analyses Emotional conflict engages cognitive and emotion-related brain
have found only a small overall advantage of antidepressants over circuitry, including the lateral prefrontal cortices, anterior cingu-
placebo (Cohen’s d ≈ 0.3) when used in an unselected population late, insula and amygdala14–16. Conflict can be regulated dynami-
of patients with depression, with clinical significance only in the cally11,15,16, a process that engages the rostral anterior cingulate and
most severe patients4–8, a severity level the vast majority of patients dampens activity in the conflict-responsive regions noted above15–17.
with depression never reach1. The small advantage of antidepres- Patients with a range of emotional disorders (for example, depres-
sants over placebo has led to a prevalent view that these drugs are sion, generalized anxiety, panic or bipolar disorder) have perturba-
not effective in the treatment of depression4. An alternative explana- tions in their ability to regulate conflict-related brain activity18–22,
tion, however, is that the drugs are effective for at least some indi- which mirrors the broad disturbance in emotional self-regulatory
viduals, but the degree of neurobiological heterogeneity inherent capacities in these disorders. This conflict regulatory capacity has
to the diagnosis of depression9 diminishes overall rates of efficacy. also been hypothesized to be of direct relevance to antidepressant
Put differently, it may be that for some patients with a particular treatment efficacy23. Thus, neuroimaging this process may yield
neurobiological phenotype, antidepressants are clearly superior to observable patterns of brain activity that discriminate likelihood
placebo, while for others there is no differential benefit10. Objective of subsequent favourable antidepressant response, thereby yield-
measures that indicate for whom clinically significant superiority ing both mechanistic insight and predictive biomarkers. Here,
of antidepressants over placebo will be observed and under what we sought to determine whether variation in treatment outcome
conditions are termed moderators10. The identification of modera- among patients with depression reflects individual brain response
tors is a critical first step towards personalized medicine for mental patterns to emotional conflict and/or in the individual’s ability to
disorders. Here, we sought to address this central question about regulate conflict-related brain activity. Addressing this question has
the biology of depression and how it affects antidepressant treat- the potential for determining (1) whether a specific medication-
ment. Specifically, we tested whether the response to or regulation responsive phenotype exists in depression, (2) what the neural
of emotional conflict—a neural function relevant for depression— mechanism driving this phenotype may be and (3) to what degree it
could elicit phenotypic brain characteristics that differentially pre- represents a disease abnormality or an intact capacity.
1Department of Psychiatry, Dell Medical School, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA. 2Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences,
Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA. 3Wu Tsai Neurosciences Institute, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA. 4Sierra Pacific Mental Illness Research,
Education and Clinical Center in the Veterans Affairs Palo Alto Healthcare System, Palo Alto, CA, USA. 5Department of Psychiatry, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA. 6Department of Psychiatry, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. 7New York State Psychiatric
Institute and Department of Psychiatry, College of Physicians and Surgeons of Columbia University, New York, NY, USA. 8Department of Psychiatry,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. 9These authors contributed equally: Gregory A. Fonzo, Amit Etkin, Yu Zhang. *e-mail: amitetkin@stanford.edu
NATurE HuMAN BEHAvIour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTUre HUmaN BeHaviOUr
Previous antidepressant prediction studies examining cognitive the postincongruent incongruent (iI) minus postcongruent incon-
or emotional functioning have suggested that better adaptive pre- gruent (cI) contrast; see Supplementary Methods). The task pro-
frontal activation and lower amygdala responses to emotional cues duced the expected overall behavioural effects. Conflict resulted in
predict better treatment outcome24–27. We therefore hypothesized a reaction time slowdown (incongruent minus congruent (I–C) dif-
that response to antidepressant treatment, compared to placebo, will ference: M = 58.3 ms, s.d. 40.8; one-sample t-test, t = 25.6; P < 0.001,
be moderated by an intact neural capacity for managing emotional Cohen’s d = 1.43; 95% confidence interval, 1.25–1.60), and conflict
conflict. Unfortunately, all previous studies lacked a placebo con- regulation resulted in mitigation of that slowdown (iI–cI difference:
trol arm, which is a critical limitation. Thus, it is unknown whether M = −16.6 ms, s.d. 48.4; t = 6.1; P < 0.001; Cohen’s d = −0.34; 95%
previous findings are specific to medication effects (that is, they confidence interval,−0.47 to −0.22).
may moderate between antidepressants and placebo) or are non-
specifically predictive across medication and placebo interventions. Emotional conflict task-related brain activation. We began our
For example, extensive previous work using electroencephalogra- investigation of the imaging data by examining task-dependent
phy (EEG) has found that rostral anterior cingulate theta power is main effects across the entire randomized depressed sample to ver-
predictive of antidepressant treatment outcome28. However, analy- ify that the task was inducing the expected patterns of brain activ-
sis of data from the Establishing Moderators and Biosignatures of ity. As expected from previous work16, the main effect of the brain
Antidepressant Response in Clinic Care (EMBARC) study29, from response to conflict (voxel-level one-sample t-test of I–C contrast
which we draw our neuroimaging data, found that cingulate theta values with voxel-level false discovery rate (FDR) correction of
power was equally and non-specifically predictive of outcome with q < 0.05 within whole-brain grey matter mask optimized to study
either an antidepressant or placebo. Previous work also suggests sample (see Methods); Supplementary Table 3) was characterized
that treatment-predictive brain signals often do not differ between by robust activation of the conflict response network, including the
patients and healthy controls (that is, they do not demonstrate diag- dorsomedial and dorsolateral prefrontal cortices, ventrolateral pre-
nosis-wise differences)24,25,30. As such, we also compared our mod- frontal cortex and anterior insulae. Deactivation was observed in
erators between patients with depression and controls. the ventromedial prefrontal cortex and anterior medial prefrontal
To test our hypothesis, we examined functional magnetic reso- cortex as well as the posterior cingulate, precuneus, hippocampus
nance imaging (fMRI) data on a previously characterized emo- and parahippocampal gyri.
tional conflict task15,16 as part of EMBARC29. This is the largest We next assessed brain response to the regulation of emo-
neuroimaging-coupled placebo-controlled randomized clinical tional conflict, which in this task occurs via an implicit process
trial (RCT) of depression to date and the only one using fMRI when conflict trials are preceded by other conflict trials11,13,15,16 and
measures. EMBARC randomized 309 medication-free outpatients results in a dampening of activation in conflict-responsive regions
with depression to receive either the selective serotonin reuptake (noted above) and, in healthy individuals, an increase in activation
inhibitor sertraline or placebo for 8 weeks (Supplementary Fig. 1). in the rostral cingulate and/or ventromedial prefrontal cortex15,16.
In this unique RCT, analysis of pretreatment neuroimaging data for This conflict regulation-related rostral cingulate engagement has
moderators was done in a full intent-to-treat framework across the been demonstrated to be absent in major depression21, even in the
entire brain. Doing so minimizes potential for bias and maximizes absence of a deficit in conflict regulatory behaviour. Consistent with
the likelihood of replicating effects. Individual-level prediction of previous work, we observed a robust and widespread dampening
treatment outcome was furthermore assessed with a cross-validated of activation across the entire conflict response network (including
machine-learning analysis, also on whole-brain data, to test the the dorsal cingulate, dorsomedial and dorsolateral prefrontal cor-
potential for this brain metric to be developed in the future into a tex, anterior insulae and amygdalae; voxel-level one-sample t-test
potentially useful prognostic tool. of contrast values for iI versus cI (il–cl) trials with voxel-level FDR
correction of q < 0.05 within whole-brain mask; Supplementary
results Table 4) when contrasting activation for iI–cI. Notably, we found no
Overall effect of sertraline versus placebo. As expected from pre- evidence for a significant increase in activation in the rostral cingu-
vious meta-analyses6,7, a linear mixed model on our primary clinical late or ventromedial prefrontal cortex for the contrast of iI–cI trials,
outcome (Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression (HAMD )) across consistent with previous work noting a deficit in this response in
17
the entire EMBARC sample revealed a small advantage of sertra- major depression21.
line (n = 122) over placebo (n = 129) (linear mixed model treatment
arm × time effect: F(1,1471) = 4.6, P = 0.032; Cohen’s d = 0.27; 95% Relationships between emotional conflict regulatory behaviour
confidence interval,0.02–0.52), consistent with expectations from and brain activity. Previous work has demonstrated that individual
previous meta-analyses4–8 (Fig. 1 and Supplementary Fig. 2). differences in emotional conflict regulatory behaviour (that is, the
difference in reaction times for iI–cI trials, in which values are typi-
Emotional conflict task behavioural effects. We next assessed the cally negative due to the mitigation of the conflict effect occurring
reaction times from the emotional conflict task to verify the expected on iI trials) scale with patterns of brain activity during the iI–cI
patterns of effects. As detailed in previous work15,16, incongruent tri- contrast20,21, reflecting a coherent relationship between brain and
als induce a conflict effect between the facial affect (the target of behaviour in this context. We therefore attempted to use these dem-
detection) and the incongruent overlaid emotional word, inducing a onstrated brain-behaviour relationships between individual differ-
slowdown in reaction times relative to congruent trials in which the ences in emotional conflict regulatory behaviour and concomitant
facial affect and word reflect the same emotion. In this task, emo- brain activation to better ground any observed moderating effects
tional conflict can be regulated on a trial-to-trial basis when conflict of brain activation on sertraline versus placebo responses in a maxi-
trials are preceded by other conflict trials. That is, while emotional mally informative context. In other words, understanding how
conflict results in slowing of reaction times, this effect can be miti- potential moderating patterns of brain activation relate to success-
gated in incongruent trials that follow incongruent trials (iI trials), ful (or unsuccessful) performance of this paradigm provides greater
compared to incongruent trials that follow congruent trials (cI tri- inferential power regarding their behavioural significance. Thus, we
als)15,16. This trial-to-trial adaptive regulation of emotional conflict examined how individual differences in emotional conflict regula-
reflects an active process by which the brain increases emotional tion behaviour (individual subject mean reaction time differences
control in response to previous trial conflict, which then benefits for iI–cI trials) related to whole-brain activation patterns during
regulation of emotional conflict on the subsequent trial (captured by the iI–cI contrast across the entire randomized depressed sample,
NATurE HuMAN BEHAvIour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTUre HUmaN BeHaviOUr Articles
20 50
16 40
12
30
8
20
4
10
0
0 2 4 6 8
0
controlling for site/scanner effects. Using a voxel-wise robust lin- mixed model results, we divided the depressed sample with a median
ear model to relate an individual subject’s iI–cI reaction time dif- split based on iI–cI activation levels for several brain regions (that
ferences to individual’s iI–cI brain activation contrast values, is, as an illustrative but not a statistically meaningful split). Doing
controlling for scanners, we observed that better emotional conflict so revealed that a more favourable effect of sertraline over placebo
regulation (more negative iI–cI mean reaction time differences) on HAMD symptom reductions was evident for individuals who
17
was positively associated (whole-brain voxel-level FDR-corrected better dampened activation during conflict regulation in regions
q < 0.05 for iI–cI reaction time robust linear model coefficient) with such as the dorsal anterior cingulate (Fig. 3a), frontopolar cortex
a greater dampening (that is, more negative iI–cI contrast values) of (Fig. 3b) and anterior insula (Fig. 3c) (see also Supplementary Fig.
activation in regions of the conflict response network, including the 3). Many of these significant moderation effects overlapped (par-
dorsal cingulate, dorsomedial and dorsolateral prefrontal cortices, ticularly in the dorsal cingulate, dorsolateral prefrontal cortices,
and anterior insulae (Supplementary Table 5). In contrast, an ante- anterior insulae and frontopolar cortices) with the significant task
rior region of the ventromedial prefrontal cortex showed the oppo- effect for emotional conflict regulation as well as the significant
site effect, such that increasing activation (that is, less negative and/ brain-behaviour relationships between emotional conflict regula-
or more positive iI–cI contrast values) was associated with better tory behaviour and task-related activation (see Fig. 4 for the con-
behavioural regulation of emotional conflict (that is, more negative junction of brain maps and Supplementary Fig. 4 for the union of
iI–cI mean reaction time differences). This finding parallels previ- brain maps; all used whole-brain voxel-level FDR-corrected q < 0.05
ous work demonstrating a unique role of ventral prefrontal activa- effect maps). Moreover, a comparison of whole-brain moderation
tion in mediating successful emotional conflict regulation15,16. Thus, effects for brain activity during iI and cI conditions separately (that
more successful emotional conflict regulation behaviour in major is, linear mixed model F statistics for the treatment arm × time
depression is associated with a more pronounced canonical (that is, × brain activation interaction for iI and cI activation separately)
healthy) emotional conflict regulatory neural phenotype, which is revealed that the majority of iI–cI moderation effects (5,895 of 8,769
characterized by dampening of the conflict response network and voxels) were statistically stronger (that is, had larger F statistics for
engagement of the ventral prefrontal cortex15,16. the treatment arm × time × brain activation effect) for brain activ-
ity during the iI than the the cI condition (see Supplementary Fig.
Emotional conflict moderators of treatment outcome. We next 5 for a brain image comparison of statistical moderation effects),
assessed our two a priori brain and behavioural measures of inter- particularly in the anterior insula, dorsal cingulate/dorsomedial
est for capacity to moderate antidepressant treatment response: the prefrontal cortices and dorsolateral prefrontal cortices. Results for
response to conflict (I–C contrast; Fig. 2a) as well as the trial-to- all clusters are reported in Supplementary Tables 7–10. Thus, we
trial regulation of conflict-related brain activation (iI–cI contrast). found strong support for our hypothesis that greater reductions in
The most striking results came when examining emotional conflict HAMD with sertraline versus placebo will be moderated by better
17
regulation (iI–cI) and thus are presented first. Statistically signifi- brain regulation of emotional conflict. Interestingly, the direction
cant moderation effects (whole-brain voxel-level FDR-corrected of the fMRI response in these patients responsive to sertraline was
q < 0.05 for the treatment arm × time × brain activation linear consistent with, and for some patients of greater magnitude, that
mixed model interaction effect) were observed in canonical con- seen in healthy individuals (Fig. 3a–c), indicating that these charac-
flict response regions including the bilateral dorsolateral prefrontal teristics probably represent an intact capacity. Unlike brain activity,
and frontopolar cortices, dorsal anterior cingulate and insula, as there was no significant moderation effect of iI–cI reaction time dif-
well as the hippocampus, visual cortex and cerebellum (Fig. 2b and ferences on HAMD symptom reductions (treatment arm × time ×
17
Supplementary Tables 7–10). To easily convey some of the linear reaction time linear mixed model effect: F = 0.48, P = 0.49).
)
DMAH(
ytireves
noisserpeD
71
)%(
etar
noissimeR
a b
PBO SER PBO SER
Time (weeks)
Fig. 1 | response across all patients to sertraline (n = 122) versus placebo (n = 129) independent of emotional conflict task brain activation. a,
Predicted HAMD 17 scores from the linear mixed model (treatment arm by time interaction F(1, 1,471) = 4.6, P = 0.032; Cohen’s d = 0.27; 95% confidence
interval, 0.02–0.52). b, Remission rates (HAMD 17 score at study endpoint < 7) (number needed to treat (NNT) = 8.4). Note no data distributions are
present for the bar plots as these are simply point estimates indicating percentage of sample remitted (HAMD 17 < 7) at endpoint. Error bars on line graphs
show ±1 s.e.m. See Supplementary Fig. 2 for a depiction of these data with box and whisker plots. SER, sertraline; PBO, placebo.
NATurE HuMAN BEHAvIour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTUre HUmaN BeHaviOUr
a b S Y = –32
Congruent
L R
Z FDR I
1.96 2.86
A
Incongruent
L R
Z = –22 P
Fig. 2 | Moderation by emotional-conflict-regulation-related brain activity of the antidepressant effect of sertraline (n = 122) vs placebo (n = 129). a,
Example congruent and incongruent stimuli. b, Whole-brain significant moderation results (colour map shows whole-brain voxel-level FDR-corrected
q < 0.05 effects for the treatment arm × time × brain activation interaction effect from the linear mixed model on a template brain surface and in cross-
sectional brain slices of the Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) standard-space T1-weighted average anatomical map, displayed as FDR z-transformed
F values, which are thus all positive). Effects by treatment arm for individual peaks are reported in Supplementary Tables 4–6. A, anterior; L, left; I, inferior;
P, posterior; R, right; S, superior. Credit: a, Photo by Nick Huizinga on Unsplash
Interestingly, we found no evidence that activation in the rostral did not yield a significant prediction of HAMD change (corre-
17
anterior cingulate during conflict regulation moderated treatment lation between model-predicted HAMD changes and observed
17
outcome (whole-brain voxel FDR-corrected q > 0.05). However, HAMD changes: r = −0.06, P = 0.48; Fig. 5b). Moreover, predic-
17
we found that iI–cI activation in the rostral anterior cingulate pre- tion of sertraline outcome was significantly greater than prediction
dicted outcome similarly across both arms (whole-brain voxel-level of placebo outcome (Fisher’s z-test for difference in correlation
FDR-corrected q < 0.05 for time × brain activation effect from lin- strengths: z = 4.5, P < 0.001).
ear mixed model on HAMD symptom reductions; Supplementary Interestingly, an RVM model trained on iI–cI brain activa-
17
Table 10). In this case, lower regulation-related iI–cI activation was tion data in the placebo arm to predict placebo outcome did not
associated with larger HAMD symptom reductions across both yield significant correlations between model-predicted symptom
17
arms (Supplementary Fig. 6). changes and observed symptom changes in either the placebo or
In our second a priori brain measure of interest, responses to sertraline arms (r = 0.11, P > 0.20; Supplementary Fig. 9). Thus,
emotional conflict (I–C contrast) also yielded significant whole- the model developed on sertraline outcome reflects a sertraline-
brain moderation effects (whole-brain voxel-level FDR-corrected specific signal that explains a meaningful percentage of variance
q < 0.05 for the treatment arm × time × brain activation linear in treatment effects, separate of treatment effects that include (but
mixed model interaction effect), albeit in vastly fewer regions than are not limited to) placebo responses, which are inherent to both
the iI–cI contrast and not in those typically associated with response treatment arms31.
to conflict (Supplementary Fig. 7 and Supplementary Table 11). I–C Regional weights driving the sertraline-predicting model are
reaction time differences moderated outcome (treatment arm × shown in Fig. 5c; they demonstrate a similar spatial pattern to that
time × reaction time interaction effect from linear mixed model: of the whole-brain moderation analysis in Fig. 1b. Although positive
F = 6.0, P = 0.014). However, I–C reaction time differences did not and negative signs on feature weights cannot be easily interpreted as
yield a significant interaction with time on HAMD symptom reflecting a per unit positive or negative relationship with treatment
17
scores within either arm alone (time × reaction time interaction response, respectively, because of the combinatorial nature of the
effects from linear mixed model within each treatment arm sepa- model, the absolute magnitude of the weights gives an indication of
rately: F < 1.7, P > 0.19). the degree of ‘importance’ of that feature in predicting the outcome
measure. Features with larger weights thus contribute more to the
Individual-level prediction through machine learning analy- model-predicted outcome.
sis. To assess the ability of emotional conflict regulation-related The unique value of iI–cI activation in predicting sertraline
activation to predict treatment outcome at the level of individual outcome was likewise seen in comparison to the much less accu-
patients, we used relevance vector machines (RVMs) to build a rate prediction of outcome using I–C activation, as also expected
regression model for the prediction of pre- minus post-treatment from the mixed model results above (correlation between symptom
change in HAMD , using iI–cI activation (see training and cross- change predicted by RVM model trained on I–C contrast values and
17
validation approach in Supplementary Fig. 8). This assessment observed symptom changes: r = 0.003, P = 0.98; Fisher’s z-test com-
was done in a data-driven manner by use of a parcellation of the paring correlation between I–C model-predicted symptom changes
cortex and subcortex and a (10 × 10)-fold cross-validation for and observed symptom changes versus iI–cI model-predicted symp-
prediction performance evaluation, separately for each treatment tom changes and observed symptom changes; z = 4.0, P < 0.001;
arm. An RVM model trained on sertraline outcome yielded sig- Fig. 5d,e). Hence, the process by which the brain regulates, but not
nificant cross-validated prediction of observed treatment change responds to, emotional conflict is what defines the drug-sensitive
scores (correlation between model-predicted HAMD changes phenotype within the broad clinical diagnosis of depression. This
17
and observed HAMD changes: r = 0.49, P < 0.001, permutation result argues, as well, against overfitting having occurred in the iI–cI
17
testing verified with 1,000 permutations P < 0.001; Fig. 4a). When analysis, as both analyses include the same number of brain activity
applied to the placebo arm, however, the sertraline-trained model features but yielded drastically different results.
NATurE HuMAN BEHAvIour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTUre HUmaN BeHaviOUr Articles
Symptoms change
ROI fMRI response (iI–cI β): Symptoms (HAMD ): Remission (%): (Before – after HAMD )
a 17 17
2 * 20 Below Above PBO SER 12 50 10
1 16
40 8
12 0 30 6
8
–1 4 20 4
0 10 2
–2 0 2 4 6 8 0 2 4 6 8 0 0
Healthy Below Above Week Time (weeks) Below Above 0 20 40 60 80 100
fMRI response percentile
b 2
Below Above PBO SER 12
20 1 50 10
16
40 8
0 12
30 6
8
–1 4 20 4
–2 0 10 2
Healthy Below Above 0 2 4 6 8 0 2 4 6 8 0 0
Time (weeks) Time (weeks) Below Above 0 20 40 60 80 100
fMRI response percentile
c
2 20 Below Above PBO SER 12 1 16 50 10
0 12 40 8
–1 8 30 6
–2 4 20 4
0 10 2
–3 Healthy Below Above 0 2 4 6 8 0 2 4 6 8 0 0
Time (weeks) Time (weeks) Below Above 0 20 40 60 80 100
** Below/above = median split on regional fMRI response fMRI response percentile
Relationship of treatment-predictive emotional conflict regula- We also found no significant differences between patients with
tion signals with clinical severity measures and patient-control depression (as a whole) and healthy controls in conflict regula-
differences. To ascertain whether our findings reflected compo- tion-related brain activation (whole-brain threshold free cluster
nents of disease severity, we correlated conflict regulation-related enhancement with 5,000 permutation tests: P > 0.05). Likewise,
brain activity in the iI–cI contrast with several measures of base- when applying the sertraline predictive RVM model to iI–cI acti-
line clinical severity, including our HAMD primary measure, the vation data from healthy controls, we did not find any significant
17
Quick Inventory of Depressive Symptoms (QIDS)32, the Spielberger difference in the degree to which the RVM model pattern was
State-Trait Anxiety Inventory33, as well as the anxious arousal, anhe- expressed (two-sample t-test of iI–cI RVM model predictions for
donic depression and general distress subscales of the Mood and depressed versus healthy controls: t = 0.08, P = 0.93). Thus, the
Anxiety Symptom Questionnaire34. However, no significant rela- treatment-predictive emotional conflict regulation phenotype was
tionships survived Type I error correction (all whole-brain voxel- not significantly related to either the diagnosis of depression or its
level FDR-corrected robust linear model coefficient q > 0.05 relating clinical severity.
each symptom scale score to iI–cI contrast values, controlling for Finally, using brain activation to characterize the degree to
scanners) for each scale, providing no evidence that our treatment- which an individual manifests a sertraline-responsive phenotype
moderating brain activation findings are simply a marker of clinical may not be feasible in practice if lower-cost measures such as clini-
severity. Moreover, the sertraline RVM model itself did not show cal severity scores, emotional conflict task behaviour, demographic
significant relationships with clinical severity, as each individual’s variables or historical factors like childhood trauma exposure35
model-predicted HAMD symptom change was not correlated with could usefully predict outcome. This did not prove to be the case,
17
baseline HAMD , QIDS, Spielberger State-Trait Anxiety Inventory however, as entering all of these into an RVM analysis did not yield
17
or Mood and Anxiety Symptom Questionnaire subscale scores significant prediction of HAMD symptom changes with sertraline
17
(r < 0.10, P > 0.12). (correlation between demographic/clinical severity model-pre-
β
Ic–Ii
β
Ic–Ii
β Ic–Ii
DMAH
DMAH
DMAH
71
71
71
dettimer
egatnecreP
dettimer
egatnecreP
dettimer
egatnecreP
DMAH
retfa–erofeB
DMAH
retfa–erofeB
DMAH
retfa–erofeB
71
71
71
Fig. 3 | Decomposing emotional-conflict-regulation-related brain activity moderation of the antidepressant effect of sertraline (n = 122) vs placebo
(n = 129). a–c, Shown in columns from left to right: the ROI whose effects are shown (left-hand column). Second column: its fMRI signal (iI–cI contrast
values, i.e., beta coefficient) during conflict regulation comparing patients below and above the median of fMRI activity in that region, as well as healthy
individuals for comparison. Third column: weekly depression severity (predicted HAMD scores from the linear mixed models) for patients below and
17
above the median of fMRI activity in that region. Fourth column: predicted remission rates (HAMD 17 < 7 at study endpoint) (for patients below and above
the median of fMRI activity in that region, split by sertraline (SER) and placebo (PBO)). Note that this median split is used to illustrate effects detected by
the linear mixed model analyses of brain activation as a continuous measure and is not statistically meaningful in itself. Last column: before minus after
predicted symptom change in sliding window 20-patient bin averages illustrates the continuous nature of the moderation effect across different degrees
of brain activation and complements the median split plots (x axis reflects percentile for the centre of the 20-patient bin with respect to fMRI signal in the
regions noted). a, Dorsal anterior cingulate (below median group remission NNT = 3.4, endpoint symptom difference Cohen’s d = 0.76). b, Left frontopolar
cortex (NNT = 3.1, d = 0.86). c, Left anterior insula (NNT = 5.8, d = 0.58). For the box and whisker plots, the centre line indicates the median; the lower
bound of the box indicates the median of the bottom 50% (first quartile), while the top bound of the box indicates the median of the top 50% (third
quartile); the whiskers indicate the lower and upper ends of observed data values within 1.5 times the interquartile range below the first quartile (lower
whisker) and above the third quartile (upper whisker); dots indicate outliers, that is, observed data points that lie outside the bounds established by 1.5
times the interquartile range below the first quartile (dots below the bottom whisker) or above the third quartile (dots above the top whisker). For line plots,
error bars show ± 1 s.e.m.. See Supplementary Fig. 3 for depiction with box and whisker plots.
NATurE HuMAN BEHAvIour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTUre HUmaN BeHaviOUr
a Symptoms (HAMD 17): Brain behavior
12 80 Below 12 80 Above 11 05 00 4 3
2
16 16 50
1 14 14 0 0
12 12 –50 –1
10 10 –100 –2
8 8 –150 –3
6 0 2 4 6 8 6 0 2 4 6 8 –200 –4
–4 –2 0 2
5
4
3
2
1
0
–1
–2
–3
4
3
2
1
0
–1
–2
–3
–4
dicted HAMD changes and observed HAMD changes: r = 0.08, behavioural metrics alone. Moreover, we identified this phenotype
17 17
P = 0.39). The relationship between demographic/clinical severity in both linear mixed model moderation analyses and at the indi-
model-predicted symptom changes and observed symptom changes vidual patient level, using cross-validated sparse machine-learning
with sertraline was also significantly weaker than the relationship models.
between iI–cI brain activation-based RVM model-predicted symp- Together, these findings delineate a specific neurobiological
tom changes and observed symptom changes (Fisher’s z-test; z = 3.4, profile driving whether a patient will respond to an antidepressant
P < 0.001). differently from placebo, and they contradict assertions that anti-
depressants are universally ineffective. Rather, our findings argue
Discussion that heterogeneity in disease mechanisms inherent in the clinical
We identified a medication-responsive neural phenotype within definition of depression obscures the detection of antidepressant
the broader clinical diagnosis of depression, which was related to efficacy, which can be defined by a specific treatment-relevant neu-
the degree to which the brain could adaptively regulate emotional ral phenotype. Moreover, mechanistically meaningful stratification
conflict above and beyond the brain’s response to conflict itself. It may be possible in depression by relating biological characteristics
was also a better predictor of treatment outcome than clinical and to placebo-controlled treatment outcome. Indeed, we found no evi-
TR
Ic–Ii
TR
Ic–Ii
TR Ic–Ii
β
Task effect
b
150
20 Below 20 Above 100
18 18 50
16 16 14 14 0
12 12 –50
10 10 –100
8 8 –150
6 6 –200
0 2 4 6 8 0 2 4 6 8
–2.5 –0.5 1.5
β
iI–cI β
iI–cI β
c
150
Below Above
20 20 100
18 18 50
16 16 0 14 14
12 12 –50
10 10 –100
8 8 –150
6 6 0 2 4 6 8 0 2 4 6 8 –200
–2.5 –0.5 1.5
PBO SER iI–cI β
β
cI iI
cI iI
cI iI
DMAH
DMAH
DMAH
71
71
71
Fig. 4 | overlap of treatment-moderating conflict-regulation-related brain activation, task-dependent brain activation and brain–behaviour
relationships. a–c, Conjunction of emotional conflict regulation task effect, brain-behaviour relationship effect and treatment moderation effect in the
dorsal cingulate–dorsomedial prefrontal cortex (a); the left anterior insula (b); and the right frontopolar cortex (c). Shown in columns from left to right are
(leftmost) the ROI whose effects are shown; (second column) weekly depression severity (predicted HAMD scores from the mixed models) for patients
17
below and above the median of fMRI activity in that region, split by sertraline (SER; n = 122) and placebo (PBO; n = 129) (note that this median split is used
to illustrate effects detected by the linear mixed model analyses of brain activation as a continuous measure and is not statistically meaningful in itself; no
statistical inference used here so as to avoid circular analyses); (third column) continuous relationship between iI–cI fMRI activity (x axis) in the depicted
region and iI–cI reaction time (RT) behaviour differences (y axis), with a linear trend line, across the entire randomized depressed sample to display the
positive relationship (no statistical test used here, so as to avoid circular analyses); and (rightmost column) mean fMRI activity for iI and cI conditions in
the depicted region at baseline across the entire randomized sample. For the box and whisker plots, the centre line indicates the median; the lower bound
of the box indicates the median of the bottom 50% (first quartile), while the top bound of the box indicates the median of the top 50% (third quartile);
the whiskers indicate the lower and upper ends of observed data values within 1.5 times the interquartile range below the first quartile (lower whisker)
and above the third quartile (upper whisker); dots indicate outliers, that is, observed data points that lie outside the bounds established by 1.5 times the
interquartile range below the first quartile (dots below the bottom whisker) or above the third quartile (dots above the top whisker). For line plots, error
bars show ±1 s.e.m.
NATurE HuMAN BEHAvIour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTUre HUmaN BeHaviOUr Articles
controls, our findings are of clinical importance as they illustrate
how the efficacy of an intervention for depression may be strongly
SER influenced by individual neurobiological differences between
a b patients.
25
Although previous findings and theoretical considerations
15 15 regarding emotional conflict regulation (and its behavioural and
neural deficits) in depression have focused primarily on the ros-
5 tral/ventral ACC and its lack of activation in response to emotional
0 conflict regulation21, the current findings indicate that the most
–5 treatment-relevant aspects of the ongoing neurocircuitry pro-
cesses mediating regulation of emotional conflict in major depres-
–15 –15
sion do not necessarily reflect this previous theoretical framework.
–15 0 15 –15 0 15
True HAMD change Moreover, we detected no functional brain differences between
17
(before – after) depressed individuals and healthy comparison subjects during
emotional conflict regulation, which diverges with previous find-
ings for a rostral/ventral ACC activation failure21. However, the
healthy comparison group used here was much smaller than the
group of individuals with major depression, which may have lim-
ited power to detect such differences, if present. Taken together, the
lack of activation differences observed here as well as the fact that
dampening of the conflict response network during conflict regu-
lation was the most relevant to differentiating subsequent antide-
pressant versus placebo responses (and not increasing activation in
the rostral–ventral regions of the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC)
and prefrontal cortex) suggests that this previous theoretical and
neurocircuitry framework regarding emotional conflict regulation
in major depression may need to be revised to better account for
the current findings in a much larger sample with a rigorous RCT
methodology. We therefore recommend that the theoretical and
neurobiological understanding of brain emotional conflict regula-
tion abnormalities in depression continue to be probed with large
samples and roughly equivalent groups of patients and healthy com-
30 30 parison subjects, all acquired on the same scanner setup, and with
exploration of how clinical heterogeneity in the patient population
15 15
may contribute to heterogeneity in neural phenotypes.
0 0 The impact of our conclusions is further reinforced by the size
and methodological rigour of EMBARC, which is the only neuroim-
–15 –15 aging-coupled placebo-controlled antidepressant RCT designed for
identification of moderators to date, as well as the whole-brain data-
–30 –30 driven intent-to-treat framework used for all of our analyses. We
–30 –15 0 15 30 –30 –15 0 15 30
took this whole-brain approach given the uniqueness of EMBARC
(thus minimizing the potential of bias in reporting restricted results)
and because it was unknown whether previous non–placebo-con-
trolled treatment prediction findings would be likely moderators or
non-specific predictors across both arms. This point is illustrated,
for example, by our rostral anterior cingulate findings, as noted
below. Likewise, we complemented voxel-wise linear mixed model
analyses with whole-brain cross-validated machine learning analy-
ses to underscore the potential future clinical utility of this metric.
The mechanistic insights into this sertraline-responsive depres-
sion phenotype tie in more broadly to a specific aspect of self-
regulatory emotional capacity. Regions such as the dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex and dorsal anterior cingulate are responsive to
both emotional and non-emotional conflict14,15, and similar trial-to-
trial regulation of emotional and non-emotional conflict occurs and
involves reduction of activation in dorsal anterior cingulate conflict
signals36. Hence, it may be that greater trial-to-trial regulation of
any type of conflict underpins the sertraline-responsive phenotype.
Future work in this area should attempt to differentiate whether the
dence that the treatment-predictive phenotype could be identified treatment-predictive conflict regulatory dampening observed here
if simply comparing emotional conflict regulation in patients and is specific to emotional conflict versus general conflict process-
controls or examining clinical severity differences between patients. ing, which unfortunately could not be ascertained with the current
This finding is consistent with previous non-placebo-controlled design. The specificity of this predictive signal to sertraline versus
treatment-predictive efforts in depression, which similarly note no other antidepressants (or other empirically supported treatments
group differences in treatment-predictive neural signals24,25,30. As such as psychotherapy or brain stimulation) is also an area of high
such, despite no evidence for differentiating between patients and priority for future investigations. Furthermore, the fact that the
egnahc
DMAH
detciderP
71
)retfa
–
erofeb(
R = 0.49, P < 0.001
True HAMD change
17
(before – after)
egnahc
DMAH
detciderP
71
)retfa
–
erofeb(
Conflict regulation (iI–cI)
SER SER PBO
R = –0.06, P = 0.48
Train Test Train Test
SER SER SER PBO
d e
True HAMD change
17 (before – after)
egnahc
DMAH
detciderP
71
)retfa
–
erofeb(
R = 0.003, P = 0.98
True HAMD change
17 (before – after)
egnahc
DMAH
detciderP
71
)retfa
–
erofeb(
c
Sparse weights
–2 ±0.1 2
Conflict response (I–C)
R = –0.12, P = 0.19
Fig. 5 | Machine learning selectively predicts response to sertraline
(n = 122) with conflict-regulation-related fMrI activity. a, A machine-
learning model trained (with 10-fold cross-validation) on outcome with
sertraline, using conflict-regulation activation (iI–cI), showed a strong
correlation (r = 0.49, P < 0.001) between predicted changes in HAMD 17 (for
(10 × 10)-fold cross-validation samples) and observed changes. b, When
applied to patients receiving placebo (n = 129), the sertraline model failed
to predict placebo outcome (r = −0.06, P = 0.48), illustrating its sertraline
specificity. c, Non-zero regional weights contributing to the sertraline
model. d,e, Training a machine-learning model on outcome with sertraline
(n = 122) with conflict-response activation (I–C) does not yield statistically
significant prediction of sertraline outcome (r = 0.003, P = 0.98) (d) and
does not yield statistically significant prediction (r = −0.12, P = 0.19) of
placebo outcome (n = 129) (e).
NATurE HuMAN BEHAvIour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTUre HUmaN BeHaviOUr
regulation of emotional conflict much more robustly moderated both clinical and financial sense42,43, while additional medication
treatment outcome than overall response to the conflict itself sug- trials may be better for patients with an antidepressant-responsive
gests strongly that it is the specific process of adaptive regulation phenotype. It is therefore noteworthy that the large-scale studies
that matters, rather than conflict processing per se. As we found no of rTMS treatment for depression have specifically enroled med-
evidence that emotional conflict regulation behaviour (that is, reac- ication-resistant patients and showed benefit of real over sham
tion times) moderates treatment outcome, this result may be due rTMS44,45. More broadly, however, it may also be that a brain-based
to brain activation being a better assay of the relevant mechanisms test that identifies an individual as having a medication-responsive
relative to behaviour (consistent with similar previous findings, for brain phenotype may serve to encourage patients to seek medica-
example ref. 27) and the fact that activity across multiple regions tion treatment in the first place and decrease the stigma associated
together contribute to single behavioural measures. These find- with mental illness46.
ings also delineate a particular mental capacity and associated brain In sum, these findings advance a mechanistic brain profile of
structures as targets for development of novel treatments. These depression that augurs well for the possibility of an effective strati-
findings raise the intriguing scenario that converting a patient non- fication of an otherwise heterogeneous and solely clinically defined
responsive to sertraline into a patient responsive to sertraline may population into segments likely or unlikely to respond to a com-
be possible if aspects of the brain’s emotional conflict regulation mon antidepressant treatment. While other measures will no doubt
capacity can be improved by new medications, brain stimulation, further improve this stratification and aid in its broader clinical
behavioural training or psychotherapy. application, our work argues for a critical transition: from question-
Interestingly, not all aspects of emotional conflict regula- ing whether antidepressants are effective to focusing on identifying
tion-related activity moderated between sertraline and placebo. the most robust combination of individual predictors that will shift
Activation in the rostral anterior cingulate non-specifically pre- clinical care in psychiatry to a neuroscience-informed personalized
dicted outcome independently of treatment, which may relate to the approach47.
shared placebo component of both interventions or natural patterns
of recovery over time. This finding is consistent with resting EEG Methods
studies, including those using EMBARC data, as well as neuroim- Participants and treatment. The study methods and participant characteristics
aging work across a wide range of interventions28. Moreover, EEG are presented here in brief, and for more detail we refer the reader to a publication
detailing the rationale and design of EMBARC29. Written informed consent
work in non-placebo-controlled studies implicated this region in
was obtained from each participant under institutional review board-approved
treatment prediction, but subsequent efforts found that it similarly protocols at each of the four clinical sites (University of Texas Southwestern
predicted outcome with both medication and placebo31,37. In fact, Medical Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Columbia University and
our non-specific predictive effect partially overlapped with the clus- University of Michigan). Data reported here are based on EMBARC participants
ter demonstrating non-specific prediction in the EEG analyses31. who were randomly assigned to sertraline or placebo during stage 1 of the
trial (N = 309 total). This sample size was based on effect size estimates for
In future work, it will be important to replicate the current find-
sertraline treatment from previous studies. Key eligibility for the study included
ings, which is essential to maximizing their potential clinical util- being 18–65 years old, having major depression as a primary diagnosis by the
ity for biomarker-informed treatment prediction efforts. It is also Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Axis I Disorders48, at least moderate
important to determine the degree to which our findings generalize depression severity with a score ≥ 14 on the Quick Inventory of Depressive
Symptomatology-Self Report at screening and randomization, a major depressive
to other antidepressants or other forms of evidence-based treatment
episode beginning before age 30, either a chronic recurrent episode (duration ≥ 2
such as psychotherapy or brain stimulation, as well as to patients
years) or recurrent major depressive disorder (at least two lifetime episodes), and
with multiple medications (as patients here were medication-free). no antidepressant failure during the current episode. Exclusion criteria included
Importantly, as EMBARC recruited individuals without a history current pregnancy, breastfeeding, no use of contraception; lifetime history of
of antidepressant treatment failures to maximize power to detect psychosis or bipolar disorder; substance dependence in the past 6 months or
substance abuse in the past 2 months; unstable psychiatric or general medical
treatment moderation effects, these findings may not necessarily
conditions requiring hospitalization; study medication contraindication; clinically
generalize to all individuals with major depression, especially those
significant laboratory abnormalities; history of epilepsy or condition requiring an
with a history of failing one or more adequate antidepressant trials. anticonvulsant; electroconvulsive therapy, vagal nerve stimulation, TMS or other
Regarding methodological rigour, additional work should be done somatic treatments in the current episode; medications (including but not limited
to assess and optimize test–retest reliability of emotional conflict to antipsychotics and mood stabilizers); current psychotherapy; significant suicide
risk; or failure to respond to any antidepressant at adequate dose and duration
regulation signals in patients with depression, which was outside
in the current episode. In addition, 40 medically and psychiatrically healthy
the scope of this study. Moreover, we propose that ultimate wide-
individuals were recruited across the four sites and assessed in a similar manner as
spread clinical application of our moderation signals will require the patients.
use of EEG instead of fMRI—a transition encouraged by similar
normative spatial patterns during conflict regulation in EEG as Clinical trial. EMBARC used a double-blind design, wherein participants
were randomized to an 8-week course of sertraline or placebo. Randomization
seen in fMRI38–41. Thus, future studies incorporating multi-modal
was stratified by site, depression symptom severity and chronicity with a block
brain assessments of emotional conflict regulation with additional randomization procedure. Sertraline dosing began at 50 mg with 50-mg capsules
design components facilitating replication of the current findings and was increased as tolerated if the patient did not respond until a maximum of
and identification of sertraline-specific predictive effects versus 200 mg (ref. 29). A similar dosing approach was used for placebo capsules. The trial
those specific to other forms of treatment (or those that predict out- was registered on ClinicalTrials.gov as ‘Establishing Moderators and Biosignatures
of Antidepressant Response for Clinical Care for Depression (EMBARC)’,
comes for multiple treatment modalities) will continue to advance
NCT#01407094.
this body of knowledge to maximally positively affect clinical care.
For example, one potential clinical application could be in decid- Emotional conflict task. This well-characterized paradigm assesses both
ing whether to continue further medication trials after initial failure emotional conflict and emotional conflict regulation15,16. Each trial involved
presentation of an emotional face with either a fearful or happy expression, drawn
or to switch to treatments with putatively distinct mechanisms of
from the set of Ekman and Friesen49, with an overlaid emotion word (‘FEAR’ or
action (for example, repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation ‘HAPPY’). Participants were instructed to identify the facial emotion with a key
(rTMS), electroconvulsive therapy or psychotherapy). Typically, press, while trying to ignore the emotion word. The task consisted of 148 trials,
patients undergo iterative rounds of pharmacological treatment with stimuli presented for 1,000 ms in a fast event-related design. Interstimulus
before advancing to a treatment modality such as rTMS42,43, leading intervals were 3,000–5,000 ms in a pseudo-randomized order counterbalanced for
facial expression, gender, word and response button. Stimuli were either congruent
to substantial morbidity and economic cost. More rapidly advanc-
(for example, fearful face with ‘FEAR’) or incongruent (for example, fearful face
ing patients with an antidepressant-non-responsive brain pheno- with ‘HAPPY’), and stimuli were furthermore balanced to achieve an equal fraction
type to even costly interventions, such as rTMS, may thus make of current and previous trial congruency, while ensuring no direct stimulus
NATurE HuMAN BEHAvIour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTUre HUmaN BeHaviOUr Articles
repetitions. Before performance of the task during neuroimaging, all participants that the sample sizes used here are at least sufficient to detect moderation effects of
underwent a practice version to ensure task proficiency was reached (minimum moderate-to-large magnitude.
80% accuracy) and the task instructions were understood. The neuroimaging task
lasted 13 min and 14 s. Statistical analyses. All statistical tests undertaken were two-tailed. Where
Regulation in the emotional conflict task occurs via an implicit process possible (for example, for clinical moderation and treatment arm × time analyses),
when conflict trials are preceded by other conflict trials11,13,15,16. That is, although the normality and homoscedasticity of model residuals were plotted and inspected
emotional conflict results in slowing of reaction times, this effect can be mitigated visually for adherence to model assumptions57,58 (linear relationship(s) between
in iI trials, compared to cI trials15,16. This trial-to-trial adaptive regulation of predictor(s) and outcomes, model residuals normally distributed with equivalent
emotional conflict reflects an active process by which the brain increases emotional variances across distribution of fitted values, and so on). When this was not
control in response to previous trial conflict, which then benefits regulation of possible (for example, for voxel-level moderation analyses), adherence to model
emotional conflict on the subsequent trial (captured by the iI–cI contrast). This assumptions was assessed with within-subject-extracted average cluster activation
regulation effect, captured through the same contrast, has also been extensively values that were exported for data visualization purposes. Visual inspection
described for non-emotional conflict stimuli36,50,51. Critically, this contrast between revealed no clear violations of model assumptions. Cohen’s d effect size for relevant
postincongruent incongruent and postcongruent incongruent trial compares brain statistics was calculated according to the following methods: (1) for two-sample
responses to physically identical stimuli (that is, incongruent trials) that differ mean comparisons, d was calculated as the difference in means divided by the
only on the relative emotional conflict regulatory context in which they come pooled standard deviation; (2) for one-sample t-tests, Cohen’s d was calculated
due to previous trial congruency and is furthermore independent of the I–C trial as the mean divided by the standard deviation. The confidence intervals were
conflict response contrast. Neuroimaging acquisition parameters are shown in calculated as follows: (1) for two-sample mean comparisons, the 95% confidence
Supplementary Table 2. intervals for Cohen’s d were calculated with the cohen.d.ci function from the psych
library59 in R; (2) for one-sample t-tests, the 95% confidence intervals for Cohen’s
fMRI preprocessing and first-level modelling. FSL tools were used to preprocess d were calculated according to the following formula: d ± s.e.m. × 1.96 (critical z
imaging data52,53. Functional images were first realigned to structural images value), where s.e.m. = √((1/n) + (d2/2n)).
with an affine registration matrix and boundary-based registration based upon
tissue segmentation as implemented in FSL’s FLIRT, which was concatenated Assessing the effect of sertraline on depressive symptoms. Using the total
with a nonlinear normalization of each participant’s T1 image to the Montreal sample after quality-control procedures for poor-quality imaging data, repeated
Neurological Institute 152-person 1 mm3 T1 template with FNIRT from FSL 5.0 measures of HAMD total score at baseline, week 1, week 2, week 3, week 4, week
17
to result in a single transformation step from individual native functional space to 6 and week 8 (endpoint) were entered into a longitudinal linear mixed model in
structurally aligned and spatially normalized template space. Functional images IBM SPSS v.21.0 (ref. 60) along with variables coding for participant, treatment
were realigned to the middle volume of the run. Nuisance signals corresponding arm, site (four-centred dummy-coded variables, each specifying one of the non-
to segmented white matter and cerebrospinal fluid were regressed out of motion- UT Southwestern study sites/scanners (Columbia used two separate scanners)
corrected functional images. A 6-mm full-width at half max isotropic smoothing versus UT Southwestern) and time (scaled from 0 to 1) to assess the effect of
kernel was then applied to preprocessed time series images to account for sertraline versus placebo on depression symptoms in an intent-to-treat framework.
individual anatomical variability. Treatment arm was effects coded as −0.5 for placebo and 0.5 for sertraline.
For individual-level analyses for each participant and timepoint, regressors Random effects were specified for the model intercept to account for individual
modelling trials of interest were convolved with the hemodynamic response variation in baseline depressive symptom severity. A fixed intercept as well as a
function. First-level general linear models were estimated in SPM 8 (ref. 54). fixed effect of time, effect of Columbia scanner 1 versus UT Southwestern site,
Regressors corresponded to zero-duration markers set at the onset of stimuli, effect of Columbia scanner 2 versus UT Southwestern site, effect of Massachusetts
which were explicitly categorized by congruency (incongruent or congruent) General Hospital versus UT Southwestern site, effect of University of Michigan
and previous trial type (postincongruent or postcongruent) to model conflict versus UT Southwestern site, interaction of time with each of the aforementioned
response and regulation effects. This process resulted in four different trial types in four site variables, treatment arm × time, and the interaction of treatment arm
total, in addition to nuisance regressors for error trials and posterror trials (when × time with each of the four aforementioned site variables were modelled, with
applicable) and six motion parameters. the treatment arm × time interaction effect of interest specifying differential
trajectories in symptom change over time for sertraline versus placebo while
Participant selection and quality-control procedures. To ensure the quality of controlling for baseline severity (random intercept), non-treatment-specific
imaging measures in testing moderation and prediction effects, consistent with our symptom changes (time), potential differences in site cohorts, the interactions
previous work in imaging treatment effects55,56, we instituted cutoffs for absolute of site cohorts with non-treatment-specific changes over time and potential
level of motion (root mean square of the absolute level of movement < 4 mm across differences in medication effects by site cohort. Site variables were centred to yield
the mean of the squared maximum displacements in each of the six translational an interpretable (that is, grand average) overall treatment arm × time effect.
and rotational parameters estimated during realignment) during the baseline scans.
In addition, to ensure that brain activation measures reflect task-relevant metrics, Assessing task effects on brain activity. The entire randomized sample
we also instituted a minimum level of behavioural accuracy during completion was subjected to a voxel-wise one-sample t-test against the null hypothesis
of the emotional conflict task as an additional quality-control metric (total (activation = 0) for two contrasts of interest: the effect of emotional conflict
accuracy ≥ 80% of trials correct). Functional runs at baseline displaying motion (incongruent minus congruent trials) and the effect of emotional conflict
higher than our cutoff or accuracy below the minimum cutoff were excluded from regulation (postincongruent incongruent trials (iI) versus postcongruent
group-level analyses. incongruent trials (cI); iI–cI). We constrained all imaging analyses to a search
space defined by a whole-brain mask constructed from (1) a 30% probabilistic
Sample size selection and power considerations. The EMBARC study was voxel-wise threshold derived from spatially normalized, segmented binary grey
designed to be sufficiently powered to detect an interaction effect between matter images from an independent sample of healthy comparison participants55,56
treatment arm (sertraline versus placebo) and a continuous treatment outcome- and (2) a conjunction map of adequate signal coverage across study scanners
predictive marker (brain activation) based upon the following parameters: with constructed by concatenating the binarized individual-level average map of all task
a sample size of 160 participants in each treatment arm, there is 80% power of a experimental conditions within participants acquired at each scanner, thresholding
two-sided significance test with α = 0.05 (i.e., tolerating the rejection of the null at a minimum of 50% coverage within each scanner sample and then conjoining
hypothesis when the null hypothesisis true 5% of the time) to detect differences these maps across all scanners. Thus, the final search space was a function of
between the correlation coefficients (between the marker and the outcome in each both adequate signal coverage across all study scanners as well as a probabilistic
treatment group) of a magnitude 0.31. For example, if the relationship between assignment to the brain’s grey matter. At each voxel in this search space, a one-
the marker (that is, brain activation) and the outcome (HAMD ) were 0.31 in sample t-test was conducted for each contrast of interest, and the resultant
17
the sertraline group and 0 in the placebo group (or 0.41 in the sertraline group statistical t-maps were corrected for multiple comparisons on the voxel-level with
and 0.1 in the placebo group), a sample size of 160 in each treatment arm would a whole-brain (constrained within the search space) FDR correction with AFNI’s
be sufficient to detect this effect. Given that EMBARC is a hypothesis-generating program 3dFDR. Voxels displaying FDR-corrected z values < 1.96 (pFDR < 0.05)
study and is the largest and only placebo-controlled sertraline trial with fMRI were then thresholded and clustered for subsequent individual-level extraction and
measures, there is only indirect evidence to support that a difference in correlation visualization of effects in IBM SPSS version 21.0 (ref. 60).
coefficients between the predictive marker and the outcome in each treatment
arm would be expected to be of this or higher magnitude. In fact, the magnitude Assessing brain-behaviour relationships for emotional conflict regulation.
of moderation effect sizes of the sertraline versus placebo effect on a continuous Individual contrast maps specifying the difference in activation for iI–cI trials
outcome by a continuous measure is largely unknown. However, previous were subjected to a robust regression61,62 implemented in R63 using the fmri
studies24–27 examining brain activation-based predictors of treatment response in package64. The predictor of interest was the mean reaction time difference for each
depression (but without a placebo control group, in smaller samples, and/or using subject for iI minus cI trials from the emotional conflict task. Covariates of no
a dichotomous split of treatment responders and non-responders) have reported interest included four-centred dummy variables corresponding to scanner (with
effect sizes that are moderate to large in magnitude, which supports the assumption the scanner at UT Southwestern serving as the non-coded reference). Activation
NATurE HuMAN BEHAvIour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTUre HUmaN BeHaviOUr
at each voxel within a whole-brain mask (described above) was modelled as a Symptom Questionnaire subscale scores for Anxious Arousal, Anhedonic
function of an intercept, the grand mean-centred reaction time differences for iI Depression, and General Distress; Snaith-Hamilton Pleasure Scale total score;
minus cI trials, and the four scanner dummy variables. The corresponding model age; years of education; gender; and Wechsler Abbreviated Scale of Intelligence
coefficients and t statistics were written out in NIFTI format, and a whole-brain t-scores for Vocabulary and Matrix Reasoning. Extractions were conducted on
voxel-level FDR was used to correct for Type I error inflation due to multiple cortical ROIs, defined by a recently published cortical parcellation derived from
comparisons. Voxels displaying FDR-corrected z values < 1.96 (pFDR < 0.05) were applying a combination of local gradient analysis and global signal similarity on an
then thresholded and clustered for subsequent individual-level extraction and independent resting-state fMRI cohort74. Since functional parcellations typically
visualization of effects in IBM SPSS v.21.0 (ref. 60). rely on resting-state connectivity patterns, which may or may not adequately
describe activity patterns in the emotional conflict task, we pooled ROIs from the
Assessing baseline brain activation moderation of the sertraline versus placebo 200, 400 and 600 region parcellations to limit parcellation-related specificity. ROIs
effect. For each contrast of interest (iI–cI and I–C), first-level, spatially normalized were mapped to seven previously identified functional networks according to the
activation contrast maps from each individual were loaded into R63 with the spatial overlap between each ROI and each network74. In addition to these cortical
fmri package64 (see example R syntax available in Supplementary Software). We ROIs, subcortical ROIs included striatal75 and cerebellar76 parcellations based
constrained analyses to a search space defined by a whole-brain mask constructed on the same seven functional networks, amygdala ROIs77, anterior and posterior
from (1) a 30% probabilistic voxel-wise threshold derived from spatially hippocampal ROIs78 and the thalamus79. We then regressed imaging sites out of
normalized, segmented binary grey matter images from an independent sample these data using multiple linear regression within the training set at each round
of healthy comparison participants55,56 and (2) a conjunction map of adequate of the RVM model, and the residualized brain signals were then used for training
signal coverage across study scanners constructed by concatenating the binarized the model.
individual-level average map of all task experimental conditions within participants A regression model was then built with RVM learning to predict each
acquired at each scanner, thresholding at a minimum of 50% coverage within each individual’s before minus after change in HAMD scores, wherein the most
17
scanner sample and then conjoining these maps across all scanners. Thus, the important ROI features were determined under a probabilistic framework by
final search space was a function of both adequate signal coverage across all study exploiting a separate Gaussian prior with a Gaussian likelihood function. All model
scanners as well as a probabilistic assignment to the brain’s grey matter. At each parameters for controlling the sparsity of regression weights were automatically
voxel within this search space, the moderating effect of baseline brain activation estimated through Bayesian machine learning based on each training set. The
(mean-centred) was examined with a longitudinal linear mixed model implemented prediction performance was evaluated by (10 × 10)-fold cross-validation (see
in the nlme R package65. Modelled effects included a random and fixed intercept, Supplementary Fig. 6). Specifically, for ten repetitions, all participants were
fixed effects of time, time × treatment arm, four mean-centred, dummy-coded randomly divided into ten folds, such that each participant was left out and used
scanner variables corresponding to: (1) Columbia University scanner 1 versus UT as a test set once, while the remaining nine folds were used as a training set for
Southwestern scanner; (2) Columbia University scanner 2 versus UT Southwestern RVM model learning. Each participant was left out exactly once after running
scanner; (3) Massachusetts General Hospital scanner versus UT Southwestern each tenfold cross-validation. By using the estimated regression weights of the
scanner; and (4) University of Michigan scanner versus UT Southwestern scanner, RVM model, we computed the predicted symptom change value for each of the
treatment arm × time × brain activation and all model variables in interaction left-out participants by the weighted sum of the all 1,235 ROI features. After
with each of the four site variables. See Supplementary Table 3 for all variables in repeating tenfold cross-validation ten times, we determined each participant’s
the mixed models. The effect of interest was the treatment arm × time × brain predicted symptom change by taking the median of the predicted values across
activation moderation effect from this model, controlling for all lower-order and each of the ten times that participant was left out. Pearson’s correlation coefficient
higher-order (that is, multiplicative) interaction terms with each of the scanner was then computed by correlating the predicted symptom changes and the actual
variables to fully control for potential effects due to this source of heterogeneity. At symptom changes across all participants. The outcome of the RVM was assessed
each voxel, the number of degrees of freedom was individually defined based on by correlating model-predicted HAMD change scores with observed/imputed
17
the number of individuals displaying adequate signal coverage at that voxel (which change scores. Significant correlations were verified using 1,000 permutations of
tended to be less in areas prone to echoplanar imaging signal dropout, particularly the RVM modelling conducted by randomly shuffling observed/imputed change
for certain scanners), with individuals displaying ‘0’ values for activation being scores across participants. Specificity of the model prediction was tested by
removed from the analysis. At each voxel, the relevant F tests corresponding to applying, at each round of cross-validation, the regression model (with appropriate
effects of interest were transformed to P values and then z values to nullify potential intercepts) to the data from the other treatment arm, which was summarized for
statistical variation across voxels secondary to varying degrees of freedom and each participant by taking the median of the ten rounds of cross-validation. We
signal coverage. These z value maps for effects of interest were then written out to conducted similar RVM analyses on item-level clinical, historical, demographic
AFNI .BRIK files with the fmri package, and voxel-level FDR correction within and behavioural data to determine whether these easier-to-get variables could
the whole-brain specified search space (see above) was conducted with AFNI’s perform as well as brain activation in predicting treatment outcome. Included were
program 3dFDR. Voxels displaying FDR-corrected z values < 1.96 (pFDR < 0.05) the Spielberger State-Trait Anxiety Inventory33, the Quick Inventory of Depressive
were then thresholded and clustered for subsequent individual-level extraction and Symptoms32, the Mood and Anxiety Questionnaire34, the Childhood Trauma
visualization of effects in IBM SPSS v.21.0 (ref. 60). Questionnaire35, age, education and I–C and iI–cI reaction time and accuracy
difference scores.
Machine learning analyses. RVMs were used to build a regression model for
the prediction of pre- minus post-treatment change in HAMD (see example
17 Reporting Summary. Further information on research design is available in the
Matlab syntax in Supplementary Software). By exploiting an automatic relevance
Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.
determination before penalizing unnecessary complexity in the model, RVM is
able to automatically determine the feature sparsity under a Bayesian evidence
Data availability
framework66. The effectiveness of the popular L1 regularization-based sparse
learning algorithms67 depends on the selection of regularization hyperparameter to All data are publicly available through the NIMH Data Archive (https://nda.nih.
a large extent. Cross-validation on training sets has been usually used to determine gov/edit_collection.html?id=2199).
the most appropriate hyperparameter. However, additional validation data from
the training set are required by cross-validation for hyperparameter selection, Code availability
which is prone to overfitting because fewer training samples can be used for Custom code that supports the findings of this study is available in the
model calibration68. Different from the L1 regularization approaches, all model Supplementary Software section.
parameters in RVMs can be efficiently estimated with all available training data
without the need of cross-validation. RVMs therefore provide a more accurate Received: 25 May 2019; Accepted: 16 August 2019;
estimation of the sparse solution than other L1 regularization-based sparse-
Published: xx xx xxxx
learning algorithms69, especially when a small training set is available. In the past
decades, RVMs have demonstrated their strength in various fields including EEG
classification for brain-computer interface70 and bioinformatics analysis of gene references
expression data71,72. 1. Hasin, D. S. et al. Epidemiology of adult DSM-5 major depressive disorder
RVM learning was conducted on data from patients who had baseline and its specifiers in the United States. JAMA Psychiat. 75, 336–346 (2018).
HAMD , passed the image and task accuracy quality-control criteria for the 2. Lopez-Munoz, F. & Alamo, C. Monoaminergic neurotransmission: the history
17
baseline scan, had imaging data at baseline and had sufficient whole-brain of the discovery of antidepressants from 1950s until today. Curr. Pharm. Des.
coverage such that data were available from almost all regions of interest (ROIs) 15, 1563–1586 (2009).
for all participants (sertraline N = 115, placebo N = 122). For participants lacking 3. Moore, T. J. & Mattison, D. R. Adult utilization of psychiatric drugs and
an endpoint HAMD , multiple imputation by chained equations was conducted differences by sex, age, and race. JAMA Intern. Med. 177, 274–275 (2017).
17
in R63 using the package mice73. The following observed variables were used 4. Kirsch, I. The Emperor’s New Drugs: Exploding the Antidepressant Myth
to impute endpoint HAMD values for missing data via Bayesian regression: (Random House, 2009).
17
baseline HAMD ; week 1 HAMD ; week 2 HAMD ; week 3 HAMD ; week 5. Khan, A. & Brown, W. A. Antidepressants versus placebo in major
17 17 17 17
4 HAMD ; week 6 HAMD ; baseline QIDS total score; baseline Mood and depression: an overview. World Psychiatry 14, 294–300 (2015).
17 17
NATurE HuMAN BEHAvIour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTUre HUmaN BeHaviOUr Articles
6. Kirsch, I. et al. Initial severity and antidepressant benefits: a meta-analysis of 34. Wardenaar, K. J. et al. Development and validation of a 30-item short
data submitted to the food and drug administration. PLoS Med. 5, e45 (2008). adaptation of the Mood and Anxiety Symptoms Questionnaire (MASQ).
7. Fournier, J. C. et al. Antidepressant drug effects and depression severity: Psychiatry Res. 179, 101–106 (2010).
a patient-level meta-analysis. JAMA 303, 47–53 (2010). 35. Bernstein, D. P. et al. Initial reliability and validity of a new retrospective
8. Cipriani, A. et al. Comparative efficacy and acceptability of 21 antidepressant measure of child abuse and neglect. Am. J. Psychiatry 151,
drugs for the acute treatment of adults with major depressive disorder: a 1132–1136 (1994).
systematic review and network meta-analysis. Lancet 391, 1357–1366 (2018). 36. Kerns, J. G. et al. Anterior cingulate conflict monitoring and adjustments in
9. Drysdale, A. T. et al. Resting-state connectivity biomarkers define control. Science 303, 1023–1026 (2004).
neurophysiological subtypes of depression. Nat. Med. 23, 28–38 (2017). 37. Korb, A. S., Hunter, A. M., Cook, I. A. & Leuchter, A. F. Rostral anterior
10. Kraemer, H. C. Messages for clinicians: moderators and mediators of cingulate cortex theta current density and response to antidepressants and
treatment outcome in randomized clinical trials. Am. J. Psychiatry 173, placebo in major depression. Clin. Neurophysiol. 120, 1313–1319 (2009).
672–679 (2016). 38. Clayson, P. E. & Larson, M. J. Adaptation to emotional conflict: evidence
11. Etkin, A., Buchel, C. & Gross, J. J. The neural bases of emotion regulation. from a novel face emotion paradigm. PLoS One 8, e75776 (2013).
Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 16, 693–700 (2015). 39. Tang, D., Hu, L., Chen, A., Clayson, P. E. & Larson, M. J. The neural
12. Gross, J. J. Handbook of Emotion Regulation (Guilford Press, 2014). oscillations of conflict adaptation in the human frontal region. Biol. Psychol.
13. Gyurak, A., Gross, J. J. & Etkin, A. Explicit and implicit emotion regulation: a 93, 364–372 (2013).
dual-process framework. Cogn. Emot. 25, 400–412 (2011). 40. Larson, M. J., Clawson, A., Clayson, P. E. & Baldwin, S. A. Cognitive conflict
14. Xu, M., Xu, G. & Yang, Y. Neural systems underlying emotional and adaptation in generalized anxiety disorder. Biol. Psychol. 94, 408–418 (2013).
non-emotional interference processing: an ALE meta-analysis of functional 41. Suzuki, K. & Shinoda, H. Transition from reactive control to proactive
neuroimaging studies. Front. Behav. Neurosci. 10, 220 (2016). control across conflict adaptation: an sLORETA study. Brain Cogn. 100,
15. Egner, T., Etkin, A., Gale, S. & Hirsch, J. Dissociable neural systems resolve 7–14 (2015).
conflict from emotional versus nonemotional distracters. Cereb. Cortex 18, 42. Voigt, J., Carpenter, L. & Leuchter, A. Cost effectiveness analysis comparing
1475–1484 (2008). repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation to antidepressant medications
16. Etkin, A., Egner, T., Peraza, D. M., Kandel, E. R. & Hirsch, J. Resolving after a first treatment failure for major depressive disorder in newly
emotional conflict: a role for the rostral anterior cingulate cortex in diagnosed patients: a lifetime analysis. PLoS One 12, e0186950 (2017).
modulating activity in the amygdala. Neuron 51, 871–882 (2006). 43. Nguyen, K. H. & Gordon, L. G. Cost-effectiveness of repetitive transcranial
17. Maier, M. E. & di Pellegrino, G. Impaired conflict adaptation in an emotional magnetic stimulation versus antidepressant therapy for treatment-resistant
task context following rostral anterior cingulate cortex lesions in humans. J. depression. Value Health 18, 597–604 (2015).
Cogn. Neurosci. 24, 2070–2079 (2012). 44. O’Reardon, J. P. et al. Efficacy and safety of transcranial magnetic stimulation
18. Chechko, N. et al. Brain circuitries involved in emotional interference task in in the acute treatment of major depression: a multisite randomized controlled
major depression disorder. J. Affect. Disord. 149, 136–145 (2013). trial. Biol. Psychiatry 62, 1208–1216 (2007).
19. Chechko, N. et al. Unstable prefrontal response to emotional conflict and 45. George, M. S. et al. Daily left prefrontal transcranial magnetic stimulation
activation of lower limbic structures and brainstem in remitted panic therapy for major depressive disorder: a sham-controlled randomized trial.
disorder. PLoS One 4, e5537 (2009). Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 67, 507–516 (2010).
20. Etkin, A., Prater, K. E., Hoeft, F., Menon, V. & Schatzberg, A. F. Failure of 46. Pescosolido, B. A. et al. “A disease like any other”? A decade of change in
anterior cingulate activation and connectivity with the amygdala during public reactions to schizophrenia, depression, and alcohol dependence.
implicit regulation of emotional processing in generalized anxiety disorder. Am. J. Psychiatry 167, 1321–1330 (2010).
Am. J. Psychiatry 167, 545–554 (2010). 47. Insel, T. R. & Cuthbert, B. N. Medicine. Brain disorders? Precisely. Science
21. Etkin, A. & Schatzberg, A. F. Common abnormalities and disorder-specific 348, 499–500 (2015).
compensation during implicit regulation of emotional processing in 48. First, M., Spitzer, R., Gibbon, M. & William, J. Structured Clinical Interview
generalized anxiety and major depressive disorders. Am. J. Psychiatry 168, forDSM-IV-TR Axis 1 Disorders, Research Version, Patient Edition (SCID-I/P)
968–978 (2011). (New York State Psychiatric Institute Press, 2002).
22. Xue, S., Wang, S., Kong, X. & Qiu, J. Abnormal neural basis of emotional 49. Ekman, P. & Friesen, W. V. Pictures of Facial Affect (Consulting Psychologists,
conflict control in treatment-resistant depression. Clin. EEG Neurosci. 48, 1976).
103–110 (2017). 50. Gratton, G., Coles, M. G. & Donchin, E. Optimizing the use of information:
23. Widge, A. S. et al. Treating refractory mental illness with closed-loop brain strategic control of activation of responses. J. Exp. Psychol. Gen. 121,
stimulation: progress towards a patient-specific transdiagnostic approach. 480–506 (1992).
Exp. Neurol. 287, 461–472 (2017). 51. Egner, T. & Hirsch, J. Cognitive control mechanisms resolve conflict through
24. Gyurak, A. et al. Frontoparietal activation during response inhibition predicts cortical amplification of task-relevant information. Nat. Neurosci. 8,
remission to antidepressants in patients with major depression. Biol. 1784–1790 (2005).
Psychiatry 79, 274–281 (2016). 52. Jenkinson, M., Beckmann, C. F., Behrens, T. E., Woolrich, M. W. & Smith, S.
25. Williams, L. M. et al. Amygdala reactivity to emotional faces in the M. FSL. Neuroimage 62, 782–790 (2012).
prediction of general and medication-specific responses to antidepressant
53. Smith, S. M. et al. Advances in functional and structural MR image analysis
treatment in the randomized iSPOT-D trial. Neuropsychopharmacology 40,
and implementation as FSL. Neuroimage 23, S208–S219 (2004).
2398–2408 (2015).
54. Friston, K. J. et al. Statistical parametric maps in functional imaging: a
26. Etkin, A. et al. A cognitive-emotional biomarker for predicting remission
general linear approach. Hum. Brain Mapp. 2, 189–210 (1995).
with antidepressant medications: a report from the iSPOT-D trial.
55. Fonzo, G. A. et al. PTSD psychotherapy outcome predicted by brain
Neuropsychopharmacology 40, 1332–1342 (2015).
activation during emotional reactivity and regulation. Am. J. Psychiatry 174,
27. Langenecker, S. A. et al. Frontal and limbic activation during inhibitory
1163–1174 (2017).
control predicts treatment response in major depressive disorder. Biol.
56. Fonzo, G. A. et al. Selective effects of psychotherapy on frontopolar cortical
Psychiatry 62, 1272–1280 (2007).
function in PTSD. Am. J. Psychiatry 174, 1175–1184 (2017).
28. Pizzagalli, D. A. Frontocingulate dysfunction in depression: toward
57. Fox, J. Applied Regression Analysis and Generalized Linear Models 2nd edn
biomarkers of treatment response. Neuropsychopharmacology 36,
(Sage Publications, 2008).
183–206 (2011).
58. Loy, A., Hofmann, H. & Cook, D. Model choice and diagnostics for linear
29. Trivedi, M. H. et al. Establishing moderators and biosignatures of
mixed-effects models using statistics on street corners. J. Comput. Graph. Stat.
antidepressant response in clinical care (EMBARC): rationale and design.
26, 478–492 (2017).
J. Psychiatr. Res. 78, 11–23 (2016).
59. Revelle, W. psych: Procedures for Psychological, Psychometric, and
30. Goldstein-Piekarski, A. N. et al. Intrinsic functional connectivity predicts
remission on antidepressants: a randomized controlled trial to identify Personality Research. R package version 1.8.12. https://CRAN.R-project.org/
clinically applicable imaging biomarkers. Transl. Psychiatry 8, 57 (2018). package=psych (2018).
31. Pizzagalli, D. et al. The incremental predictive validity of rostral anterior 60. IBM SPSS Statistics for Macintosh v.21.0 (IBM Corp, 2012).
cingulate cortex activity in relation to symptom improvement in depression: a 61. Huber, P. J. Robust regression: asymptotics, conjectures and monte carlo. Ann.
randomized clinical trial. JAMA Psychiat. 75, 547–554 (2018). Stat. 1, 799–821 (1973).
32. Rush, A. J. et al. The 16-Item Quick Inventory of Depressive Symptomatology 62. Wager, T. D., Keller, M. C., Lacey, S. C. & Jonides, J. Increased sensitivity in
(QIDS), clinician rating (QIDS-C), and self-report (QIDS-SR): a neuroimaging analyses using robust regression. Neuroimage 26, 99–113
psychometric evaluation in patients with chronic major depression. Biol. (2005).
Psychiatry 54, 573–583 (2003). 63. R: a language and environment for statistical computing v. 3.2.3 (R
33. Spielberger, C. D., Gorsuch, R. L., Lushene, R., Vagg, P. R. & Jacobs, Foundation for Statistical Computing, 2015).
G. A. Manual for the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (Consulting Psychologists 64. Tabelow, K. & Polzehl, J. Statistical parametric maps for functional MRI
Press, 1983). experiments in R: the package fMRI. 44, 21 (2011).
NATurE HuMAN BEHAvIour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTUre HUmaN BeHaviOUr
65. Pinheiro, J., Bates, D., DebRoy, S., Sarkar, D., & R Core Team. nlme: linear Pharmaceuticals, The Forest Research Institute, Shire Development Inc., Medtronic,
and nonlinear mixed effects models. R package version 3.1-141. https:// Cyberonics, Northstar, and Takeda. P.J.M. has received funding from the National
CRAN.R-project.org/package=nlme (2019). Institute of Mental Health, New York State Department of Mental Hygiene, Research
66. Tipping, M. E. Sparse bayesian learning and the relevance vector machine. Foundation for Mental Hygiene (New York State), Forest Research Laboratories,
J. Mach. Learn. Res. 1, 211–244 (2001). Sunovion Pharmaceuticals, and Naurex Pharmaceuticals (now Allergan). In the past
67. Tibshirani, R. Regression shrinkage and selection via the Lasso. J. R. Stat. Soc. two years, M.M.W. received funding from the National Institute of Mental Health
B 58, 267–288 (1996). (NIMH), the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA), the National Alliance for
68. Cawley, G. C. & Talbot, N. L. Preventing over-fitting during model selection Research on Schizophrenia and Depression (NARSAD), the Sackler Foundation, the
via Bayesian regularisation of the hyper-parameters. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 8, Templeton Foundation; and receives royalties from the Oxford University Press,
841–861 (2007). Perseus Press, the American Psychiatric Association Press, and MultiHealth Systems.
69. Wipf, D. P. & Rao, B. D. Sparse bayesian learning for basis selection. M.F. has received research support from Abbot Laboratories; Alkermes, Inc.; American
IEEE Trans. Signal Process. 52, 2153–2164 (2004). Cyanamid; Aspect Medical Systems; AstraZeneca; Avanir Pharmaceuticals;
70. Zhang, Y. et al. Sparse bayesian classification of EEG for brain- BioResearch; BrainCells Inc.; Bristol-Myers Squibb; CeNeRx BioPharma; Cephalon;
computer interface. IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst. 27, Clintara, LLC; Cerecor; Covance; Covidien; Eli Lilly and Company; EnVivo
2256–2267 (2016). Pharmaceuticals, Inc.; Euthymics Bioscience, Inc.; Forest Pharmaceuticals, Inc.;
71. Cawley, G. C. & Talbot, N. L. Gene selection in cancer classification using Ganeden Biotech, Inc.; GlaxoSmithKline; Harvard Clinical Research Institute;
sparse logistic regression with Bayesian regularization. Bioinformatics 22, Hoffman-LaRoche; Icon Clinical Research; i3 Innovus/Ingenix; Janssen R&D, LLC; Jed
2348–2355 (2006). Foundation; Johnson & Johnson Pharmaceutical Research & Development; Lichtwer
72. Li, Y., Campbell, C. & Tipping, M. Bayesian automatic relevance Pharma GmbH; Lorex Pharmaceuticals; Lundbeck Inc.; MedAvante; Methylation
determination algorithms for classifying gene expression data. Bioinformatics Sciences Inc.; National Alliance for Research on Schizophrenia & Depression
18, 1332–1339 (2002). (NARSAD); National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine (NCCAM);
73. van Buuren, S. & Groothuis-Oudshoorn, K. mice: Multivariate imputation by National Institute of Drug Abuse (NIDA); National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH);
chained equations in R. J. Stat. Soft. 45, 1–67 (2011). Neuralstem, Inc.; Novartis AG; Organon Pharmaceuticals; PamLab, LLC.; Pfizer Inc.;
74. Schaefer, A. et al. Local-global parcellation of the human cerebral Pharmacia-Upjohn; Pharmaceutical Research Associates., Inc.; Pharmavite® LLC;
cortex from intrinsic functional connectivity MRI. Cereb. Cortex 28, PharmoRx Therapeutics; Photothera; Reckitt Benckiser; Roche Pharmaceuticals; RCT
3095–3114 (2018). Logic, LLC (formerly Clinical Trials Solutions, LLC); Sanofi-Aventis US LLC; Shire;
75. Choi, E. Y., Yeo, B. T. & Buckner, R. L. The organization of the human Solvay Pharmaceuticals, Inc.; Stanley Medical Research Institute (SMRI); Synthelabo;
striatum estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity. J. Neurophysiol. 108, Tal Medical; Wyeth-Ayerst Laboratories; he has served as advisor or consultant to
2242–2263 (2012). Abbott Laboratories; Acadia; Affectis Pharmaceuticals AG; Alkermes, Inc.; Amarin
76. Buckner, R. L., Krienen, F. M., Castellanos, A., Diaz, J. C. & Yeo, B. T. The Pharma Inc.; Aspect Medical Systems; AstraZeneca; Auspex Pharmaceuticals; Avanir
organization of the human cerebellum estimated by intrinsic functional Pharmaceuticals; AXSOME Therapeutics; Bayer AG; Best Practice Project
connectivity. J. Neurophysiol. 106, 2322–2345 (2011). Management, Inc.; Biogen; BioMarin Pharmaceuticals, Inc.; Biovail Corporation;
77. Patenaude, B., Smith, S. M., Kennedy, D. N. & Jenkinson, M. A Bayesian BrainCells Inc; Bristol- Myers Squibb; CeNeRx BioPharma; Cephalon, Inc.; Cerecor;
model of shape and appearance for subcortical brain segmentation. CNS Response, Inc.; Compellis Pharmaceuticals; Cypress Pharmaceutical, Inc.;
Neuroimage 56, 907–922 (2011). DiagnoSearch Life Sciences (P) Ltd.; Dinippon Sumitomo Pharma Co. Inc.; Dov
78. Chen, A. C. & Etkin, A. Hippocampal network connectivity and activation Pharmaceuticals, Inc.; Edgemont Pharmaceuticals, Inc.; Eisai Inc.; Eli Lilly and
differentiates post-traumatic stress disorder from generalized anxiety disorder. Company; EnVivo Pharmaceuticals, Inc.; ePharmaSolutions; EPIX Pharmaceuticals,
Neuropsychopharmacology 38, 1889–1898 (2013). Inc.; Euthymics Bioscience, Inc.; Fabre-Kramer Pharmaceuticals, Inc.; Forest
79. Behrens, T. E. et al. Non-invasive mapping of connections between Pharmaceuticals, Inc.; Forum Pharmaceuticals; GenOmind, LLC; GlaxoSmithKline;
human thalamus and cortex using diffusion imaging. Nat. Neurosci. 6, Grunenthal GmbH; i3 Innovus/Ingenis; Intracellular; Janssen Pharmaceutica; Jazz
750–757 (2003). Pharmaceuticals, Inc.; Johnson & Johnson Pharmaceutical Research & Development,
LLC; Knoll Pharmaceuticals Corp.; Labopharm Inc.; Lorex Pharmaceuticals; Lundbeck
Acknowledgements Inc.; MedAvante, Inc.; Merck & Co., Inc.; MSI Methylation Sciences, Inc.; Naurex, Inc.;
Nestle Health Sciences; Neuralstem, Inc.; Neuronetics, Inc.; NextWave
The EMBARC study was supported by the National Institute of Mental Health of the
Pharmaceuticals; Novartis AG; Nutrition 21; Orexigen Therapeutics, Inc.; Organon
National Institutes of Health under award numbers U01MH092221 (M.H.T.) and
Pharmaceuticals; Osmotica; Otsuka Pharmaceuticals; Pamlab, LLC.; Pfizer Inc.;
U01MH092250 (P.J.M., M.M.W.). This work was also funded in part by the Hersh
PharmaStar; Pharmavite LLC.; PharmoRx Therapeutics; Precision Human
Foundation (M.H.T., principal investigator). The funders had no role in study design,
Biolaboratory; Prexa Pharmaceuticals, Inc.; Puretech Ventures; PsychoGenics; Psylin
data collection and analysis, decision to publish or preparation of the manuscript.
Neurosciences, Inc.; RCT Logic, LLC Formerly Clinical Trials Solutions, LLC; Rexahn
Pharmaceuticals, Inc.; Ridge Diagnostics, Inc.; Roche; Sanofi-Aventis US LLC.;
Author contributions
Sepracor Inc.; Servier Laboratories; Schering-Plough Corporation; Solvay
G.A.F. contributed the analysis and interpretation of the data and the drafting and Pharmaceuticals, Inc.; Somaxon Pharmaceuticals, Inc.; Somerset Pharmaceuticals, Inc.;
revision of the manuscript. A.E. contributed to the design of the study, the analysis Sunovion Pharmaceuticals; Supernus Pharmaceuticals, Inc.; Synthelabo; Taisho
and interpretation of the data, and the drafting and revision of the manuscript. Y.Z. Pharmaceutical; Takeda Pharmaceutical Company Limited; Tal Medical, Inc.;
contributed to the analysis and interpretation of the data and the drafting and revision Tetragenex Pharmaceuticals, Inc.; TransForm Pharmaceuticals, Inc.; Transcept
of the manuscript. W.W. contributed to the analysis and interpretation of the data. C.C., Pharmaceuticals, Inc.; Vanda Pharmaceuticals, Inc.; VistaGen; he has received speaking
C.C.F., M.K.J. and J.T. contributed to the conduct of the study, analysis and interpretation or publishing fees from Adamed, Co; Advanced Meeting Partners; American
of the data, and revision of the manuscript. T.D., P.A., M.M., P.J.M. and M.F. contributed Psychiatric Association; American Society of Clinical Psychopharmacology;
to the design and conduct of the study. M.M.W. contributed to the design and conduct AstraZeneca; Belvoir Media Group; Boehringer Ingelheim GmbH; Bristol-Myers
of the study, and revision of the manuscript. M.H.T. was the study PI and contributed to Squibb; Cephalon, Inc.; CME Institute/Physicians Postgraduate Press, Inc.; Eli Lilly and
study design and funding, conduct of the study, analysis and interpretation of the data, Company; Forest Pharmaceuticals, Inc.; GlaxoSmithKline; Imedex, LLC; MGH
and the drafting and revision of the manuscript. Psychiatry Academy/Primedia; MGH Psychiatry Academy/Reed Elsevier; Novartis AG;
Organon Pharmaceuticals; Pfizer Inc.; PharmaStar; United BioSource, Corp.; Wyeth-
Competing interests Ayerst Laboratories; he has equity holdings in Compellis and PsyBrain, Inc.; he has a
A.E. (lifetime disclosure) holds equity in Mindstrong Health and Akili Interactive for patent for Sequential Parallel Comparison Design (SPCD), which are licensed by MGH
unrelated work, has received research funding from the National Institute of Mental to Pharmaceutical Product Development, LLC (PPD); and patent application for a
Health, Department of Veterans Affairs, Cohen Veterans Bioscience, Brain and combination of Ketamine plus Scopolamine in Major Depressive Disorder (MDD),
Behaviour Research Foundation, Dana Foundation, Brain Resource Inc, and the licensed by MGH to Biohaven; and he receives copyright royalties for the MGH
Stanford Neurosciences Institute, and consulted for Cervel, Takaeda, Posit Science, Cognitive & Physical Functioning Questionnaire (CPFQ), Sexual Functioning
Acadia, Otsuka, Lundbeck and Janssen. G.A.F. received research support from the Inventory (SFI), Antidepressant Treatment Response Questionnaire (ATRQ),
National Institute of Mental Health and the Department of Veterans Affairs. T.D.’s Discontinuation-Emergent Signs & Symptoms (DESS), Symptoms of Depression
research has been funded by NIH, NIMH, NARSAD, TSA, IOCDF, Tufts University, Questionnaire (SDQ), and SAFER; Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins; Wolkers Kluwer;
DBDAT and Otsuka Pharmaceuticals, he has received honoraria, consultation fees and/ World Scientific Publishing Co. Pte. Ltd. M.H.T. is or has been an advisor/consultant
or royalties from the MGH Psychiatry Academy, BrainCells Inc., Clintara, LLC, Inc., and received fee from (lifetime disclosure): Abbott Laboratories, Inc., Abdi Ibrahim,
Systems Research and Applications Corporation, Boston University, the Catalan Akzo (Organon Pharmaceuticals Inc.), Alkermes, AstraZeneca, Axon Advisors, Bristol-
Agency for Health Technology Assessment and Research, the National Association of Myers Squibb Company, Cephalon, Inc., Cerecor, CME Institute of Physicians, Concert
Social Workers Massachusetts, the Massachusetts Medical Society, Tufts University, Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Eli Lilly & Company, Evotec, Fabre-Kramer Pharmaceuticals,
NIDA, NIMH, Oxford University Press, Guilford Press and Rutledge. He has also Inc., Forest Pharmaceuticals, GlaxoSmithKline, Janssen Global Services, LLC, Janssen
participated in research funded by DARPA, NIH, NIA, AHRQ, PCORI, Janssen Pharmaceutica Products, LP, Johnson & Johnson PRD, Libby, Lundbeck, Meade
NATurE HuMAN BEHAvIour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTUre HUmaN BeHaviOUr Articles
Johnson, MedAvante, Medtronic, Merck, Mitsubishi Tanabe Pharma Development Additional information
America, Inc., Naurex, Neuronetics, Otsuka Pharmaceuticals, Pamlab, Parke-Davis Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/
Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Pfizer Inc., PgxHealth, Phoenix Marketing Solutions, Rexahn s41562-019-0732-1.
Pharmaceuticals, Ridge Diagnostics, Roche Products Ltd., Sepracor, SHIRE
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to A.E.
Development, Sierra, SK Life and Science, Sunovion, Takeda, Tal Medical/Puretech
Venture, Targacept, Transcept, VantagePoint, Vivus, and Wyeth-Ayerst Laboratories. In Peer review information Primary handling editor: Mary Elizabeth Sutherland
addition, he has received grants/research support from: Agency for Healthcare Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Research and Quality (AHRQ), Cyberonics, Inc., National Alliance for Research in
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
Schizophrenia and Depression, National Institute of Mental Health and National
published maps and institutional affiliations.
Institute on Drug Abuse. G.A.F., Y.Z., W.W., C.C., C.C.F., M.K., P.A. and J.T. report no
competing interests. M.M. has no conflicts of interest with respect to this paper. © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2019
NATurE HuMAN BEHAvIour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
1
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Corresponding author(s): Amit Etkin, M.D., Ph.D.
Last updated by author(s): Aug 1, 2019
Reporting Summary
Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency
in reporting. For further information on Nature Research policies, see Authors & Referees and the Editorial Policy Checklist.
Statistics
For all statistical analyses, confirm that the following items are present in the figure legend, table legend, main text, or Methods section.
n/a Confirmed
The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
A statement on whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided
Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.
A description of all covariates tested
A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
A full description of the statistical parameters including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient)
AND variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)
For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted
Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.
For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated
Our web collection on statistics for biologists contains articles on many of the points above.
Software and code
Policy information about availability of computer code
Data collection MRI data were collected using conventional imaging acquisition software on each of the MRI platforms noted. Behavioral data were
collected using e-prime software (which presented the stimuli). Clinical and self-report data were collected by web and paper forms into
the StudyTrax database
Data analysis Imaging data were analyzed using tools from FSL 5, SPM8, and R, as well as custom Matlab code for the Sparse Bayesian Learning. Other
statistical analyses used SPSS v21.
For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors/reviewers.
We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Research guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.
Data
Policy information about availability of data
All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable:
- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets
- A list of figures that have associated raw data
- A description of any restrictions on data availability
All data are publicly available through the NIMH Data Archive (https://nda.nih.gov/edit_collection.html?id=2199).
2
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Field-specific reporting
Please select the one below that is the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.
Life sciences Behavioural & social sciences Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences
For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/documents/nr-reporting-summary-flat.pdf
Life sciences study design
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
Sample size Final analyzable sample size: 251 patients and 40 healthy controls
Data exclusions Data were excluded for excessive head motion, poor task accuracy and acquisition errors or artifacts (see supplemental figure 1)
Replication Strict voxelwise wholebrain FDR was conducted on data analyzed in a full intent-to-treat manner (thus incorporating all eligible randomized
participants with sufficient data quality, thereby minimizing risk of bias due to small sample sizes or only analyzing completers). The predictive
multivariable regression models used a 10-fold cross-validation procedure.
Randomization Patients were randomized 1:1 into the sertraline versus placebo treatment arms
Blinding All MRI/behavioral data acquisition occurred prior to randomization, and was thus blind to treatment arm. Clinical assessors were also blind to
treatment arm
Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods
We require information from authors about some types of materials, experimental systems and methods used in many studies. Here, indicate whether each material,
system or method listed is relevant to your study. If you are not sure if a list item applies to your research, read the appropriate section before selecting a response.
Materials & experimental systems Methods
n/a Involved in the study n/a Involved in the study
Antibodies ChIP-seq
Eukaryotic cell lines Flow cytometry
Palaeontology MRI-based neuroimaging
Animals and other organisms
Human research participants
Clinical data
Human research participants
Policy information about studies involving human research participants
Population characteristics The study methods and participant characteristics are presented here in brief, as well as in a publication detailing the rationale
and design of EMBARC. Written informed consent was obtained from each participant under institutional review board-
approved protocols at each of the four clinical sites (University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Columbia University, and University of Michigan). Data reported here are based on EMBARC participants who were
randomly assigned to sertraline or placebo during stage 1 of the trial (N=309 total). Key eligibility for the study included being
18-65 years old, having major depression as a primary diagnosis by the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Axis I Disorders ,
at least moderate depression severity with a score ≥14 on the Quick Inventory of Depressive Symptomatology-Self Report (QIDS-
SR) at screening and randomization, a major depressive episode beginning before age 30, either a chronic recurrent episode
(duration ≥ 2 years) or recurrent MDD (at least 2 lifetime episodes), and no antidepressant failure during the current episode.
Exclusion criteria included: current pregnancy, breastfeeding, no use of contraception; lifetime history of psychosis or bipolar
disorder; substance dependence in the past six months or substance abuse in the past two months; unstable psychiatric or
general medical conditions requiring hospitalization; study medication contraindication; clinically significant laboratory
abnormalities; history of epilepsy or condition requiring an anticonvulsant; electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), vagal nerve
stimulation (VNS), transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) or other somatic treatments in the current episode; medications
(including but not limited to antipsychotics and mood stabilizers); current psychotherapy; significant suicide risk; or failure to
respond to any antidepressant at adequate dose and duration in the current episode. In addition, 40 healthy individuals who
were medically and psychiatrically healthy, were recruited across the four sites, and assessed in a similar manner as the patients.
Recruitment See above.
3
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Ethics oversight Institutional review boards for the four participating institutions: University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Columbia University, and University of Michigan.
Note that full information on the approval of the study protocol must also be provided in the manuscript.
Clinical data
Policy information about clinical studies
All manuscripts should comply with the ICMJE guidelines for publication of clinical research and a completed CONSORT checklist must be included with all submissions.
Clinical trial registration Establishing Moderators and Biosignatures of Antidepressant Response for Clinical Care for Depression (EMBARC),
NCT#01407094. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01407094
Study protocol Study protocol is published here: Trivedi, M. H. et al. Establishing moderators and biosignatures of antidepressant response in
clinical care (EMBARC): Rationale and design. Journal of psychiatric research 78, 11-23, doi:10.1016/j.jpsychires.2016.03.001
(2016).
Data collection Data was located across four sites in academic medical centers in Texas, Massachusetts, New York, and Michigan. Data was
collected from July 2011 to April 2016.
Outcomes Outcomes were pre-defined during the design stage and included emotional conflict regulation-related brain activation
moderators of the effect of sertraline vs. placebo on the 17-item Hamilton Rating Depression Scale from baseline to 8 weeks
after the start of treatment.
Magnetic resonance imaging
Experimental design
Design type Event-related task-based functional magnetic resonance imaging
Design specifications One run of 148 trials, with duration 1s and jittered 3-5s inter-trial intervals
Behavioral performance measures Button presses were recorded and used to calculate accuracy and reaction time
Acquisition
Imaging type(s) Functional
Field strength 3 Tesla
Sequence & imaging parameters Gradient Echo EPI. Acquisition parameters are in supplemental table 2
Area of acquisition Whole brain
Diffusion MRI Used Not used
Preprocessing
Preprocessing software FSL tools were used to preprocess imaging data . Functional images were first realigned to structural images using an
affine registration matrix and boundary-based registration based upon tissue segmentation as implemented in FSL’s
FLIRT, which was concatenated with a non-linear normalization of each participant’s T1 image to the Montreal
Neurological Institute (MNI) 152-person 1 mm3 T1 template using FNIRT from FSL 5.0 to result in a single
transformation step from individual native functional space to structurally-aligned and spatially-normalized template
space. Functional images were realigned to the middle volume of the run. Nuisance signals corresponding to segmented
white matter and CSF were regressed out of motion-corrected functional images. A 6 mm full-width half max (FWHM)
isotropic smoothing kernel was then applied to preprocessed time series images to account for individual anatomical
variability.
Normalization Non-linear normalization with FSL's fnirt
Normalization template MNI152
Noise and artifact removal Six motion parameters were utilized as covariate nuisance regressors in first-level models.
Volume censoring N/A
Statistical modeling & inference
Model type and settings Mass-univariate GLM analyses were performed. For individual-level analyses for each participant and timepoint,
regressors modeling trials of interest were convolved with the hemodynamic response function. First-level general
linear models were estimated in SPM 8 . Regressors corresponded to zero-duration markers set at the onset of stimuli,
4
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
which were explicitly categorized by congruency (Incongruent or Congruent) and prior trial type (Post-incongruent or
Post-congruent) in order to model conflict response and regulation effects. This resulted in 4 different trial types in
total, in addition to nuisance regressors for error trials and post-error trials (when applicable) and six motion
parameters.
Effect(s) tested For each contrast of interest (iI-cI and inc-con), first-level, spatially-normalized activation contrast maps from each
individual were loaded into R using the fmri package. We constrained analyses to a search space defined by a whole-
brain mask constructed from: a) a 30% probabilistic voxelwise threshold derived from spatially normalized, segmented
binary gray matter images from an independent sample of healthy comparison participants; and b) a conjunction map
of adequate signal coverage across study scanners constructed by concatenating the binarized individual-level average
map of all task experimental conditions within participants acquired at each scanner, thresholding at a minimum of 50%
coverage within each scanner sample, and then conjoining these maps across all scanners. Thus, the final search space
was a function of both adequate signal coverage across all study scanners as well as a probabilistic assignment to the
brain’s gray matter. At each voxel within this search space, the moderating effect of baseline brain activation (mean-
centered) was examined using a longitudinal linear mixed model implemented in the nlme R package. Modeled effects
included a random and fixed intercept, fixed effects of time, time x treatment arm, 4 mean-centered, dummy-coded
scanner variables corresponding to: a) Columbia University scanner 1 vs. UT Southwestern scanner; b) Columbia
University scanner 2 vs. UT Southwestern scanner; c) Massachusetts General Hospital scanner vs. UT Southwestern
scanner; and d) University of Michigan scanner vs. UT Southwestern scanner, treatment arm x time x brain activation,
and all model variables in interaction with each of the 4 site variables. See supplemental table 3 for all variables in the
mixed models. The effect of interest was the treatment arm x time x brain activation moderation effect from this model,
controlling for all lower-order and higher-order (i.e. multiplicative) interaction terms with each of the scanner variables
to fully control for potential effects due to this source of heterogeneity. At each voxel, the number of degrees of
freedom was individually-defined based upon the number of individuals displaying adequate signal coverage at that
voxel (which tended to be less in areas prone to EPI BOLD signal dropout, particularly for certain scanners), with
individuals displaying “0” values for activation being removed from the analysis. At each voxel, the relevant F tests
corresponding to effects of interest were transformed to p-values and then z-values to nullify potential statistical
variation across voxels secondary to varying degrees of freedom and signal coverage. These Z value maps for effects of
interest were then written out to NIFTI files using the fmri package, and voxel-level FDR-correction within the whole-
brain specified search space (see above) was conducted using AFNI’s program 3dFDR. Voxels displaying FDR-corrected
Z-values < 1.96 (q < 0.05) were then thresholded and clustered for subsequent individual-level extraction and
visualization of effects in IBM SPSS version 21.0.
Specify type of analysis: Whole brain ROI-based Both
Statistic type for inference Voxel-wise
(See Eklund et al. 2016)
Correction false discovery rate (FDR)-corrected p<0.05
Models & analysis
n/a Involved in the study
Functional and/or effective connectivity
Graph analysis
Multivariate modeling or predictive analysis
Multivariate modeling and predictive analysis Relevance Vector Machines (RVM) were used to build a regression model for the prediction of pre- minus
post-treatment change in HAMD17. By exploiting an automatic relevance determination prior to penalizing
unnecessary complexity in the model, RVM is able to automatically determine the feature sparsity under a
Bayesian evidence framework 45. The effectiveness of the popular L1-regularization based sparse learning
algorithms 46 depends on the selection of regularization hyperparameter to a large extent. Cross-
validation on training set has been usually used to determine the most appropriate hyperparameter.
However, additional validation data from the training set are required by cross-validation for
hyperparameter selection, which is prone to overfitting since fewer training samples can be used for
model calibration 47. Different from the L1-regularization approaches, all model parameters in RVM can
be efficiently estimated based on all available training data without the need of cross-validation. RVM
therefore provides a more accurate estimation of the sparse solution compared with other L1-
regularization based sparse learning algorithms 48, especially when a small training set is available. In the
past decades, RVM has demonstrated its strength in various fields including EEG classification for brain-
computer interface 49 and bioinformatics analysis of gene expression data 50,51.
RVM learning was conducted on data from patients who had baseline HAMD17, passed the image and task
accuracy quality control criteria for the baseline scan, had imaging data at baseline, and sufficient whole-
brain coverage such that data were available from almost all ROIs for all participants (sertraline N=115,
placebo N=122). For participants lacking an endpoint HAMD17, multiple imputation by chained equations
was conducted in R42 using the package mice52. The following observed variables were utilized in order to
impute endpoint HAMD17 values for missing data via Bayesian regression: baseline HAMD17, week 1
HAMD17, week 2 HAMD17, week 3 HAMD17, week 4 HAMD17, week 6 HAMD17, baseline Quick Inventory
of Depressive Symptoms (QIDS) total score, baseline Mood and Symptom Questionnaire subscale scores
for Anxious Arousal, Anhedonic Depression, and General Distress, Snaith-Hamilton Pleasure Scale (SHAPS)
total score, age, years of education, gender, and Wechsler Abbreviated Scale of Intelligence (WASI) t-
scores for Vocabulary and Matrix Reasoning. Extractions were conducted on cortical regions of interest
(ROIs), defined based on a recently-published cortical parcellation derived from applying a combination of
5
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
local gradient analysis and global signal similarity on an independent resting-state fMRI cohort 53. Since
functional parcellations typically rely on resting-state connectivity patterns, which may or may not
adequately describe activity patterns in the emotional conflict task, we pooled ROIs from the 200, 400, and
600 region parcellations in order to limit parcellation-related specificity. ROIs were mapped to seven
previously identified functional networks based on the spatial overlap between each ROI and each network
53. In addition to these cortical ROIs, subcortical ROIs included striatal54 and cerebellar55 parcellations
based on the same seven functional networks, amygdala ROIs 56, anterior and posterior hippocampal
ROIs57 and the thalamus58. We then regressed imaging site out of these data using multiple linear
regression within the training set at each round of the RVM model, and the residualized brain signals were
then used for training the model.
A regression model was then built based using RVM learning to predict each individual’s pre-minus-post
change in HAMD17 scores, wherein the most important ROI features were determined under a
probabilistic framework by exploiting a separate Gaussian prior with a Gaussian likelihood function. All
model parameters for controlling the sparsity of regression weights were automatically estimated through
Bayesian machine learning based on each training set. The prediction performance was evaluated by
10x10 cross-validation (see supplemental figure 6). Specifically, for 10 repetitions, all participants were
randomly divided into 10 folds, such that each participant was left out and used as a test set once while
the remaining nine folds were used as a training set for RVM model learning. Each participant was left out
exactly once after running each 10-fold cross-validation. By using the estimated regression weights of the
RVM model, we computed the predicted symptom change value for each of the left-out participants by
the weighted sum of the all 1235 ROI features. After repeating 10-fold cross-validation 10 times, we
determined each participant’s predicted symptom change by taking the median of the predicted values
across each of the 10 times that participant was left out. Pearson’s correlation coefficient was then
computed by correlating the predicted symptom changes and the actual symptom changes across all
participants. The outcome of the RVM was assessed by correlating model-predicted HAMD17 change
scores with observed/imputed change scores. Significant correlations were verified using 1,000
permutations of the RVM modeling conducted by randomly shuffling observed/imputed change scores
across participants. Specificity of the model prediction was tested by applying, at each round of cross-
validation, the regression model (with appropriate intercepts) to the data from the other treatment arm,
which was summarized for each participant by taking the median of the 10 rounds of cross-validation. We
conducted similar RVM analyses on item-level clinical, historical, demographic and behavioral data to
determine whether these easier-to-get variables could perform as well as brain activation in predicting
treatment outcome. Included were the Spielberger State-Trait Anxiety Inventory 59, the Quick Inventory of
Depressive Symptoms 60, the Mood and Anxiety Questionnaire 61, the Childhood Trauma Questionnaire
62, age, education and I-C and iI-cI reaction time and accuracy difference scores.