Articles
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-020-0929-3
Polarity of uncertainty representation during
exploration and exploitation in ventromedial
prefrontal cortex
Nadescha Trudel 1 ✉, Jacqueline Scholl 1, Miriam C. Klein-Flügge 1, Elsa Fouragnan 1,2,
Lev Tankelevitch 1, Marco K. Wittmann 1,3 and Matthew F. S. Rushworth 1,3
Environments furnish multiple information sources for making predictions about future events. Here we use behavioural mod-
elling and functional magnetic resonance imaging to describe how humans select predictors that might be most relevant. First,
during early encounters with potential predictors, participants’ selections were explorative and directed towards subjectively
uncertain predictors (positive uncertainty effect). This was particularly the case when many future opportunities remained
to exploit knowledge gained. Then, preferences for accurate predictors increased over time, while uncertain predictors were
avoided (negative uncertainty effect). The behavioural transition from positive to negative uncertainty-driven selections was
accompanied by changes in the representations of belief uncertainty in ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC). The polar-
ity of uncertainty representations (positive or negative encoding of uncertainty) changed between exploration and exploi-
tation periods. Moreover, the two periods were separated by a third transitional period in which beliefs about predictors’
accuracy predominated. The vmPFC signals a multiplicity of decision variables, the strength and polarity of which vary with
behavioural context.
H
umans and other animals are often presented with multiple Evidence for uncertainty-guided exploration has, however,
information sources in the environment that can predict dif- recently been questioned9. It has been argued that behaviour may
ferent outcomes such as reward. Selecting the right predictor sometimes appear exploratory but on closer inspection the deci-
to guide behaviour towards a particular outcome requires determin- sions that people make can be understood as having been guided
ing the predictor’s relevance in forecasting that outcome1,2. Biases in by noisy estimates of the values of the choices that are formed dur-
information seeking can lead to mistaken beliefs about the relation- ing learning. In other words, when people appear exploratory, they
ships that prevail in the world3,4. It has been argued that animals may in fact be attempting to make exploitative decisions, but their
should attend either to certain predictors5 or, on the contrary, to exploitative decisions are informed by noisy estimates of choice
uncertain predictors6. Certain predictors might be relevant as they values. Our second aim was to ascertain whether people genuinely
deliver an outcome with known prediction accuracy, while attend- engage in exploratory behaviour. This can be tested by comparing
ing to uncertain predictors might turn out to be more beneficial in rates of exploratory behaviour when past experience is held con-
the long term. stant, but the length of the future time horizon is manipulated; a
We propose that which type of predictor should be considered longer future time horizon should elicit more exploration even
most relevant changes during different phases of the learning pro- when previous learning opportunities are the same. Moreover, the
cess. When selecting between multiple predictors for the first time, appropriateness of computational models of exploratory behaviour
selections should maximize information about available predictors. can also be tested by obtaining more direct empirical indices of par-
Selections should be ‘explorative’ and directed towards ‘uncertain’ ticipants’ subjective uncertainty; we obtained such measures in our
predictors. The degree of exploration should also be determined by experiment. In addition, the computational model can be used to
the time horizon. The time horizon is the remaining time in the identify trials in which exploratory behaviour appears to be guided
current context (or block in the current experiment)7,8: exploration by information seeking to reduce uncertainty and trials in which
is beneficial in longer compared with shorter time horizons as the exploratory behaviour simply reflects randomness in the response
knowledge gained can be used in later predictor selections. Once an selection or learning process9.
estimate about a predictor’s accuracy has formed, selections should Our third aim was to examine neural activity related to explor-
be ‘exploitative’ and guided by the ‘accuracy’ and ‘certainty’ of pre- atory and exploitative modes of decision-making. Many previous
dictors in line with reward maximization. This perspective draws studies have shown that ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC)
on both previously formulated hypotheses in the field of learn- activity reflects information relevant for making value-guided
ing theory5,6. Predictors should be selected based on the learner’s decisions between choices. When making a decision between
uncertainty about predictors’ accuracy during exploration and on choice options, vmPFC activation covaries with the decision vari-
the learner’s certainty about predictors’ accuracy during exploi- able that guides the decision—the difference in value between the
tation. Our first aim in this study was to examine whether this choice taken as opposed to the choice rejected10–18. If, as has been
was the case. argued, such vmPFC activity changes reflect allocation of attention
1Wellcome Integrative Neuroimaging (WIN), Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. 2School of Psychology, University
of Plymouth, Plymouth, UK. 3These authors contributed equally: Marco K. Wittmann, Matthew F. S. Rushworth. ✉e-mail: nadescha.trudel@psy.ox.ac.uk
NaTuRE HuMaN BEHaviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTurE HuMaN BEHaviour
to a choice option19–21, then it is possible that vmPFC activity also size of an interval around the predictor’s estimate such that the true
reflects selection of a predictor to guide behaviour and the reason target location would fall within this interval. At the end of a trial,
why it is being selected to guide behaviour: either because of its pre- the true target location and possible points were revealed (outcome
dictive accuracy, because of the certainty of its prediction or because phase). Participants gained points when the target fell within the
of the uncertainty of its prediction. chosen interval and the amount of points increased when the inter-
We use a combination of behavioural analysis, computational val size was small. This payoff scheme incentivized selecting pre-
modelling and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to dictors with smaller angular errors in the first place. In addition to
investigate at both behavioural and neural levels which predictors being informed about whether they had won or lost, the outcome
are classified as informative, uncertain or certain, as a function phase enabled participants to update their beliefs about how well
of time horizon, and the current behavioural mode (exploration, the chosen predictor estimated the target by observing the angu-
exploitation or the period of transition from exploration to exploi- lar error. Participants took part in two versions of the task that
tation). We designed a novel task in which participants selected differed in their framing aspect (social/non-social framing). Here
between multiple predictors that gave partial information about the we collapsed data across versions after finding that they did not
location of a target that the participants were asked to find. During differ in the results depicted here (see details on task versions in
the course of multiple experimental blocks, participants encoun- Supplementary Information).
tered a series of potential predictors while transitioning through The value of exploration lies in revealing more accurate predic-
time horizons of different lengths, inducing explorative and exploit- tors, but this is useful only if the time horizon (the amount of trials
ative selections. We used a Bayesian model to extract trial-by-trial remaining) offers sufficient opportunity to exploit the newly discov-
estimates of participants’ beliefs about both the accuracy of predic- ered predictors7. To test this idea, participants transitioned through
tors and their subjective uncertainty in those beliefs. This allowed blocks of different lengths (45, 30 and 15 trials) each with a unique
us to test their independent and complementary impact on selec- set of four predictors ((1) in Fig. 1b). This made it possible to exam-
tion behaviour and their neural representations. ine the balance between exploration and exploitation as a function
We found predictor selections are made as a function of time in of time horizon. Time horizon and current progress were explicitly
two important ways. They change as a function of the time that has cued on each trial. Each block comprised two good predictors, with
elapsed since learning began and they change as a function of the a relatively low average angular error between the predicted refer-
remaining time horizon—the time period over which the learner ence point and true target location, and two bad predictors with a
expects the current conditions to prevail. These changes occur in higher angular error ((2) in Fig. 1b).
tandem with the evolution of predictor-related activity patterns
in the vmPFC. Activity in the vmPFC was sensitive to partici- Dissociable effects of uncertainty and accuracy on predictor
pants’ uncertainty in their beliefs about predictors but the polarity selections and subjective confidence judgements. Exploration
of uncertainty representations (positive or negative encoding of should be guided not only by one’s belief in the predictor’s accu-
uncertainty) changed with the behavioural mode: a positive uncer- racy but also by one’s own uncertainty in that belief. For this reason,
tainty decision signal was present in the vmPFC during exploration, we used a Bayesian model to capture participants’ belief distribu-
while activity in the same region signalled negative uncertainty dur- tions over the angular error between the reference point and the
ing exploitation. By contrast, other brain areas, such as the ante- true target location ((1) in Fig. 2a). The trial-by-trial angular errors
rior cingulate cortex (ACC) and other dorsomedial frontal cortical were derived from a normal distribution centred on the true target
areas, signalled uncertainty only during explorative phases. We also location. Predictors’ normal distributions varied in their standard
found that exploration and exploitation modes were separated by a deviations (referred to here as sigma), making some predictors bet-
transitional period in which beliefs about predictors’ accuracy pre- ter in estimating the target location (lower sigma value) and other
dominated in their impact on vmPFC activity. These results show predictors worse (higher sigma value). Hence, by tracking the
that a predictor’s relevance for guiding behaviour is not defined angular errors of a predictor, participants could estimate the sigma
by a single attribute (accuracy, positive or negative uncertainty), value associated with each predictor’s distribution ((2) in Fig. 2a).
but rather it is dynamically modulated by the behavioural modes We used the Bayesian model to capture participants’ beliefs in the
of exploration and exploitation, and their transition. We show that sigma value after observing the angular error of the chosen predic-
the vmPFC carries similar information, representing a multiplicity tor at each trial ((3) in Fig. 2a and Fig. 2b). This belief distribution
of predictor selection variables, the strength and polarity of which allowed us to derive two independent model-based estimates that
vary according to their relevance for the current behavioural mode. we hypothesized to influence choice in parallel. First, an estimate in
the ‘accuracy’ of a predictor (a point estimate derived by the mode
Results of the belief distribution, representing the sigma believed to be the
On each trial of the experiment (Fig. 1a), participants made two most likely of that of the chosen predictor) ((4) in Fig. 2a):
decisions. First, they made a binary choice between two predictors
to find a target’s location on a circle (decision phase). Participants Accuracy maxBeliefdistribution ´ 1 1
¼ ½  ð� Þ ð Þ
knew that the target location changed constantly on every trial and
could not be predicted directly from previous observations of its Note that a higher accuracy value denoted in equation (1) indi-
location. The only way to infer the target’s location was through cates bigger deviations of the target from the reference point. To
learning how well each predictor predicted the target location. derive an accuracy estimate that can be interpreted intuitively, the
Participants learned how well a predictor predicted the target sign of equation (1) is reversed so that positive values can be inter-
by observing the distance between the location estimated by the preted as higher accuracy. Second, an estimate of the ‘uncertainty’ in
selected predictor and the true target location (which we refer to that predictor (variability around the accuracy estimate, represent-
as ‘angular error’). Importantly, predictors differed in how well ing the uncertainty) ((4) in Fig. 2a) is given by:
they estimated the target location (see Supplementary Section 1 for
Uncertainty Cumulativebeliefdistribution 97:5%
details on the cover story). Selecting a better predictor led to more ¼ð ¼ Þ 2
rewards at the time of a second decision in the trial. During the sec- Cumulativebeliefdistribution 2:5% ð Þ
�ð ¼ Þ
ond decision, the predictor’s estimate of the target location (referred
to as reference point) was revealed and participants expressed their The terms ‘accuracy’ and ‘uncertainty’ will from now onwards
confidence in it (confidence phase). They did this by adjusting the refer to the model-derived parameters defined in equations (1)
NaTuRE HuMaN BEHaviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTurE HuMaN BEHaviour Articles
a during the decision phase and then averaged beta weights across
Trial timeline
participants (Fig. 3a and Supplementary Fig. 1). Regressors of inter-
Decision Confidence Outcome
est (accuracy and uncertainty) were coded as the difference between
ITI
1.5 s 0.5 s + RT RT 3 s left and right predictors to predict leftward selections. As would be
expected if participants were attempting to maximize payoff, partici-
? pants generally sought out accurate predictors (accuracy: t(23) = 7.5,
0 P < 0.001, Cohen’s d = 1.53, 95% confidence interval (CI) = [0.82,
1.45]). There was no credible evidence that uncertainty impacted
choice behaviour (uncertainty: t(23) = −1.9, P = 0.07, d = −0.39, 95%
b
Design CI = [−0.51, 0.018], Bayes factor = 1.05, %error = 1.1017 × 10−4).
(1) Time horizons: (2)Per block: Angular error: 10
Next, to examine the time-dependent effect of uncertainty and
45 trials Two good
30 trials predictors +0.7 accuracy on selection, we included the percentage of trials remain-
15 trials Two bad ing in a block (referred to as ‘block time’) into the GLM model and
predictors examined its interaction with accuracy and uncertainty. Participants
alternated between behavioural modes of exploration and exploita-
Fig. 1 | Experimental task and design. a, Trial timeline. In each trial, tion by integrating information about the remaining trials into their
participants made two choices. First, a binary choice between two predictor selections: a positive interaction term between uncertainty
predictors (coloured boxes; decision phase) to receive information about and block time (uncertainty × block time: t(23) = 5.8, P < 0.001,
a target’s location on a circle. The goal was to choose predictors that d = 1.18, 95% CI = [0.53, 1.1]) showed that uncertain sources were
accurately predicted the target location. The length of a black bar at the explored more when many trials remained. By contrast, a negative
bottom of the screen informed participants about the number of remaining interaction term between accuracy and block time indicated that,
trials in the current block. Second, participants indicated their belief in as time passed, choices were increasingly directed towards accurate
the accuracy of the chosen predictor by modifying the size (dotted lines) predictors (accuracy × block time: t(23) = 7.5, P < 0.001, d = −1.53,
of an interval symmetrical around the predictor’s estimate of the target 95% CI = [−0.91, −0.52]; Fig. 3a).
location (black dot; confidence phase). In the outcome phase, the target In a follow-up analysis, we further examined the interaction
location (star) and any points earned (value below the coloured box) were effects. We binned trials into those that occurred in the first and sec-
indicated. Two possible example outcomes are illustrated. In the above ond halves of each time horizon (Fig. 3b, left). A logistic GLM with
case, the participant’s prediction was incorrect as the target fell outside the accuracy and uncertainty as regressors was fitted to both halves of
interval, resulting in a null payoff (indicted as red star and red value). In the each block’s trials. Once again we found that decisions were influ-
bottom case, the target fell within the interval, resulting in a positive payoff enced by both factors but in dynamically distinct ways (paired
(indicated as yellow star and yellow value). Positive payoffs increase with t-test between accuracy(first vs second half) vs uncertainty (first
narrower intervals as long as the target falls within the interval. RT, reaction vs second half): t(23) = −8.1, P < 0.001, d = −1.7, 95% CI = [−2.27,
time; ITI, inter-trial interval. b, Design. (1) Participants transitioned through −1.02]; Fig. 3b, left). Uncertain predictors were more likely to be
blocks of different numbers of trials (time horizons). (2) Each time horizon sought out early compared with late in a block (paired t-test early
introduced four new predictors (illustrated as boxes) that were categorized versus late: uncertainty (t(23) = −8.1, P < 0.001, d = 1.66, 95%
into two good and two bad predictors according to how well they predicted CI = [1.06, 1.8]): while during the first half there was only anecdotal
the target. The quality of predictions was determined by the angular error support for the interpretation that participants sought out uncer-
between target (black star) and the predictor’s target estimate (black dot) tain predictors (positive uncertainty effect in first half: t(23) = 2,
with a smaller angular error representing better target predictions. P = 0.057, d = 0.41, 95% CI = [−0.007, 0.48], Bayes factor = 1.18,
10
%error = 9.954 × 10−5), during the second half of blocks, uncer-
tain predictors were avoided (negative uncertainty effect in second
and (2), respectively ((4) in Fig. 2a). We used a Bayesian model that half: t(23) = −6.2, P < 0.001, d = −1.27, 95% CI = [−1.59, −0.79]).
assumed uniform prior beliefs for all four predictors at each block Accurate predictors were preferred to inaccurate ones and this
start. However, we compared this Bayesian model to two competing was increasingly the case in the second half of the blocks (paired
models: a Bayesian model using informative priors (Extended Data t-test early versus late time points accuracy: t(23) = −4.2, P < 0.001,
Fig. 1) and a reinforcement learning model tracking payoff history d = −0.85, 95% CI = [−1.63, −0.55]). These results replicated when
(Extended Data Fig. 2). The Bayesian model with uniform priors regressors were normalized across or within blocks.
provided a better model fit to choice behaviour compared to either of In response to the reviewers’ comments, we considered the pos-
the other models (see Methods, ‘Alternative computational models’ sibility that such a result might have arisen because the overall
in Supplementary Information, and Extended Data Figs. 1 and 2). model fit was better for either the first half or second half of the
We measured the degree to which participants were exploit- block. It is important to consider differences in model fit across sets
ing accurate predictors and the degree to which they were explor- of trials (or participants) because a poor model fit might indicate
ing uncertain predictors. We hypothesized, first, that uncertainty that the model is not appropriate for the behaviour under investiga-
drives exploration between choices at the beginning of a block tion in one part of the data. However, a priori such an argument
and so choices might be directed to uncertain predictors. Then, would predict that an effect, such as uncertainty, would be stron-
over the course of a block, participants should become increas- ger in the part of the data that was better fit by the model than in
ingly accuracy-seeking and uncertainty avoiding; in other words, the part worse fit by the model; it cannot predict a polarity change
choices should be directed towards certain predictors (negative in the uncertainty prediction effects when moving from explora-
uncertainty effect) (Fig. 2c, left). Second, we hypothesized that tion (earlier trials) to exploitation (later trials). We excluded trials
the initial choice pattern in a block should depend on how many on the basis of the trial-wise choice residuals so that both first and
more trials were still to be encountered in the block (effect of time second block halves were no longer different in their residual vari-
horizon). Longer blocks favour more uncertainty-driven explora- ance (Extended Data Fig. 3). Even under such conditions, we were
tion and less accuracy-driven exploitation compared with shorter able to replicate evidence for the same pattern of results (Extended
blocks (Fig. 2c, right). Data Fig. 3d). Moreover, below we show that several brain regions
To test the first hypothesis, we applied a logistic general linear represent uncertainty prediction difference only during explo-
model (GLM, see ‘GLM1’ in Methods) to participants’ selections ration and not exploitation (Supplementary Fig. 7, in particular
NaTuRE HuMaN BEHaviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTurE HuMaN BEHaviour
Relationship between task parameters and Bayesian belief formation
Observations
within experiment
Angular Good
error predictor
0
Bad
±180 predictor
–180 0 +180
Distance to target
Bayesian update across time Hypotheses: accuracy and uncertainty effects on choice behaviour
Prior
belief
t + 1
Posterior
belief
Supplementary Fig. 7b) even though model fits were better for later and variable (accuracy, uncertainty); Horizon × Variable interac-
compared with earlier phases. tion: F(2,46) = 36.7, P < 0.001, eta squared η2 = 0.61, assumption of
Next, we tested our second hypothesis that the degree of explo- sphericity is met with Mauchly’s test: x2(2) = 0.28, P = 0.87; Fig. 3b,
ration during initial choices should be stronger in longer time right). Uncertain predictors were particularly sought out during
horizons, that is, if subsequent encounters with the same predic- initial trials within long and medium time horizons (long horizon:
tor are expected to be more frequent. We compared choices dur- t(23) = 4, P < 0.001, d = 0.8, 95% CI = [0.053, 0.164]; medium hori-
ing the first 15 trials across all time horizons by fitting a linear zon: t(23) = 2.8, P = 0.009, d = 0.56, 95% CI = [0.02, 0.13]).
robust GLM to data from each time horizon. The first 15 trials in So far we have shown that model-derived estimates of the accu-
all three horizons were identical in their order presentation and racy and uncertainty determined participants selections between
importantly, their trial-by-trial target estimates were drawn from a predictors. Next, we examined whether participants also relied on
Gaussian distribution with the same parameters (sigma of either 50 both of these estimates when making their subjective confidence
or 70). As predicted, participants adjusted their behavioural strat- report during the second phase of each trial (the confidence phase
egy in the initial trials according to the horizon type: participants in Fig. 1a). Accuracy reflects a point estimate of the most likely
were more uncertainty-driven in longer than in shorter horizons angular error between the target and the predictor’s estimate and
and in a complementary manner, shorter horizons led to a rapid should therefore have an impact on the interval size the partici-
convergence onto accurate predictors (3 × 2 repeated measures pants use to indicate their subjective confidence during the confi-
analysis of variance (ANOVA) with horizon (long, medium, short) dence phase. Indeed, participants indicated higher confidence for
htgnerts
feileB
fo
ycneuqerF
snoitavresbo htgnerts
feileB
htgnerts
feileB
Objective
distribution
Sigma
Time
+ +
– –
45 30 15
Time
Sigma Time horizon
ateb
eciohC
)ezis
tceffe(
).u.a(
a
(1) (2) (3) Subjective belief (4) Model
distribution of sigma parameters
Sigma = 50
50
95%
Sigma = 70 Uncertainty
Accuracy
70 Sigma
b c
Across time Initial choices per horizon
Uncertainty Accuracy
0 50 140
Fig. 2 | Task statistics, Bayesian model and choice hypotheses. a, (1) The mapping between observations during the task, (2) their statistical properties
and (3), (4) subjective beliefs about these properties derived with Bayes’ rule. (1) A predictor’s performance can be evaluated by the angular error at
each trial (left) and by comparing angular errors between predictors across observations (right). Better predictors have on average smaller angular errors
(green is better than orange). (2) Predictors’ angular errors were derived from normal distributions centred on the true target location. Critically, the
normal distributions for good and bad predictors differed in their standard deviation (sigma): smaller sigma’s reflected smaller angular errors, that is, more
accurate predictions of the true target location. Learning about a predictor’s angular error across time corresponded to forming beliefs about a predictor’s
sigma value. (3) To capture this learning process, we used Bayesian modelling and derived trial-wise belief distributions over sigma for each predictor. In
other words, we estimated a probability density function that expressed the belief strength in each possible sigma over a large range of sigmas and that
was updated with each new observation via Bayes’ rule. The coloured vertical lines indicate the true underlying sigmas of the predictors, and the black
distributions reflect the Bayesian approximation after extensive training. (4) We captured two separable estimates about participants’ beliefs concerning
predictors: an estimate of the accuracy of a predictor (the mode of the distribution indicated by the position of the vertical line on the abscissa) and the
uncertainty in that belief (width of the belief distribution). b, In all panels, light to dark orange represents earlier and later trials, respectively, in a block.
Left: prior beliefs are updated after observing the angular error in the trial’s outcome phase at trial (t), resulting in a posterior belief. The posterior belief
forms the prior for the next encounter (t + 1) with the same predictor. Right: belief distribution when selecting the same predictor multiple times. Across
time, the belief distribution will converge towards the true value of sigma (here, true sigma is 50). c, Experimental hypotheses. Note that panels depict
an illustration of hypothesized effect sizes of accuracy and uncertainty on choice akin to logistic GLM analyses of choice. Left: participants’ patterns of
explore–exploit choices should systematically change over the course of the blocks. At the beginning of a block (light orange area), participants should
pursue the more uncertain predictor, that is, choices should be driven by a positive uncertainty effect, but this tendency should reverse over time. Accurate
predictors should be sought out throughout (positive accuracy effect), but particularly towards the end of the block (dark orange area) when the value of
exploration diminishes. Right: at the time of initial choices (indicated by black boxes in inset), the value of exploration should be modulated by the time
horizon and choices towards uncertain predictors should systematically increase if there are more trials remaining in which to exploit the knowledge
gained, that is, in longer horizons (vice versa for accuracy-driven choices).
NaTuRE HuMaN BEHaviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTurE HuMaN BEHaviour Articles
a c
Decision phase: accuracy, uncertainty and time
Left
Right
Accuracy Uncertainty Block time Uncert Blai on ct ky ti× me Accu Blr oa cc ky ti× me
b
Parameters across time Initial choices per horizon
Uncertainty
Accuracy
Left
Right
predictors that were believed to be accurate (accuracy: t(23) = 11.7, larger interval size to guarantee that the target falls within the inter-
P < 0.001, d = 2.4, 95% CI = [0.66, 0.98]). The Bayesian model also val. In tandem with the above effect of accuracy, participants were
suggests that participants form a representation about other pos- less confident and selected a larger interval size when they evaluated
sible angular errors that might underlie a predictor’s distribution predictors they believed were uncertain (uncertainty: t(23) = −10.4,
(that is, the width of the belief distribution). If participants are very P < 0.001, d = −2.12, 95% CI = [−1.1, −0.73]; Fig. 3c).
uncertain in their point estimate of the angular error (that is, if the In summary, accuracy, uncertainty and a time modulation of both
Bayesian belief distribution is very wide), then they should report a effects influenced participants’ predictor selections. Early selections
eciohC
eciohC
).u.a(
)ezis
tceffe(
ateb
).u.a(
)ezis
tceffe(
ateb
ecnedifnoc
evitcejbuS
)esrevni(
tnemegduj
).u.a(
)ezis
tceffe(
ateb
Confidence phase: subjective confidence judgment
4 2
1
0
0
–1
–2
Regressors coded as (left – right)
–3
Chosen Chosen accuracy uncertainty
Decision phase: time modulations of uncertainty and accuracy
8 0.4
4
0
0
Regressors coded as (left – right) Regressors coded as (left – right)
–4 –0.4
First Second 45 30 15
Block half Time horizon
Fig. 3 | Dissociable effects of accuracy and uncertainty on predictor selections and subjective confidence judgements. a, Decision phase. By using
logistic GLM analyses we predict leftward predictor selection as a function of several variables (coded as left minus right). In general, participants
preferred accurate predictors (accuracy: t(23) = 7.5, P < 0.001, d = 1.52, 95% CI = [0.8, 1.45]). There was no credible evidence for an uncertainty effect
on behaviour (t(23) = −1.9, P = 0.07, d = −0.39, 95% CI = [−0.51, 0.018], Bayes factor 10 = 1.05, %error = 1.1017 × 10−4). However, uncertainty and accuracy
exerted different effects depending on when choices were made: uncertain predictors were explored when many trials remained (positive interaction
term with percentage of remaining trials, that is, block time; t(23) = 5.8, P < 0.001, d = 1.18, 95% CI = [0.53, 1.1]), whereas decisions were accuracy-driven
as the end of a block approached (negative interaction effect with block time; t(23) = 7.5, P < 0.001, d = −1.53, 95% CI = [−0.91, −0.52]). b, Decision
phase. Left: trials were binned into first and second halves of each block (independent of time horizon length) to examine the interaction effects shown
in a. Earlier choices (that is, first half) were more uncertainty-driven compared with later (that is, second half) choices when uncertainty was avoided
(paired-test early versus late: t(23) = −8.1, P < 0.001, d = 1.66, 95% CI = [1.06, 1.8]). In contrast, accuracy determined choices throughout both early and
late block halves, but increasingly so in the second half (paired t-test early versus late: t(23) = −4.2, P < 0.001, d = −0.85, 95% CI = [−1.63, −0.55]).
Both accuracy and uncertainty changed differently across block halves (paired t-test between differences of block halves for accuracy and uncertainty:
t(23) = −8.1, P < 0.001, d = −1.7, 95% CI = [−2.27, −1.02]). Right: accuracy and uncertainty effects on choice also varied as a function of how many trials
still remained within a block: differences in the initial choice patterns (first 15 trials; see inset) across horizons showed that the exploration of uncertain
predictors was more pronounced when horizons were longer while shorter horizons demanded more rapid exploitation of predictors estimated as most
accurate (3 × 2 ANOVA: F(2,46) = 36.7, P < 0.001, η2 = 0.62). c, Confidence phase. Trial-by-trial confidence judgements increased (that is, the interval size
decreased) when selecting predictors that were believed to be accurate (accuracy: t(23) = 11.7, P < 0.001, d = 2.4, 95% CI = [0.66, 0.98]) but decreased
when predictors were believed to be uncertain in the accuracy belief according to the Bayesian model (uncertainty: t(23) = −10.4, P < 0.001, d = −2.12,
95% CI = [−1.1, −0.73]. Note that we used the inverse of the interval size such that a greater confidence index also represents higher confidence. n = 24;
error bars denote s.e.m. across participants.
NaTuRE HuMaN BEHaviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTurE HuMaN BEHaviour
were uncertainty-driven explorative selections and occurred par- uncertainty-based prediction difference as participants switched
ticularly when time horizons were longer. Later selections were of from exploration to exploitation (Fig. 4b). To test this hypothesis,
exploitative selections, directed towards accurate and away from we made use of the fact that our computational model allowed us
uncertain predictors. The exploratory behaviour we identify can- to classify individual trials into exploration or exploitation accord-
not simply be the result of noise in the learning process9; people ing to the selection made on each trial: an exploitative selection was
are more exploratory when the future time horizon is longer even defined as one in which the more accurate and less uncertain pre-
if learning opportunities are identical. Moreover, we show that our dictor was selected while a directed uncertainty-guided explorative
model-derived estimates of participants’ beliefs about the accuracy selection was defined as the opposite: a trial in which the more inac-
of a predictor and the uncertainty about those beliefs correspond to curate and uncertain predictor was chosen (Extended Data Fig. 4).
features of their subjective confidence judgements. Importantly, this is distinct to other types of decision that might
initially appear exploratory, because the less accurate predictor was
Polarity of uncertainty decision signal in vmPFC changes from chosen, but which may simply be due to noise in the learning or deci-
exploration to exploitation. Our behavioural analyses show that sion process9,22. On such trials, selection is not just of the less accurate
participants incorporated the uncertainty in their beliefs when predictor but is also made with certainty (Supplementary Fig. 4a).
selecting between two predictors. We went on to examine the coding To test for a neural polarity change of uncertainty prediction
of uncertainty in the brain during predictor selection (fMRI-GLM1, difference, we extracted time courses from an independent region
see Methods). Our variable of interest was the difference in uncer- of interest (ROI) associated with the accuracy prediction difference
tainty (as captured by our model) between the chosen and unchosen effect across all trials. This ensured that we did not bias the analy-
predictors, that is ‘uncertainty prediction difference’. This is simi- sis towards finding an effect in an area that was previously asso-
lar to studies of value-guided decision-making, where the differ- ciated with the uncertainty prediction difference. First, we used
ence in value between the option chosen and the option rejected a time-course analysis to extract both components of the uncer-
is regressed against the blood-oxygen-level-dependent (BOLD) tainty prediction difference signal (variance in activity related to
signal. A value difference signal often prominently implicates the the chosen predictor and variance in activity related to the uncho-
vmPFC in decision-making processes10–14,17. sen predictor) during exploration and exploitation. Activation in
When testing for an uncertainty prediction difference signal the vmPFC covaried with a decision signal that changed its polar-
across all trials, we found a negative uncertainty prediction dif- ity depending on the current behavioural mode: during exploita-
ference in the vmPFC (whole-brain cluster corrected; Fig. 4a, left, tion, the vmPFC carried a decision signal that reflected a negative
and Supplementary Table 1). This neural effect was in line with the uncertainty prediction difference (negatively encoding the uncer-
negative effect uncertainty exerted on choice behaviour towards the tainty of the chosen predictor as opposed to the unchosen predic-
end of a block when participants avoided uncertain predictors or tor; Fig. 4c, right); in exploration, when behaviour was guided by
in other words, sought out certain predictors. In addition, we also uncertainty, vmPFC activity carried a positive uncertainty predic-
found an ‘accuracy prediction difference’ in a similar anatomical tion difference (positively encoding the uncertainty of the chosen
location in the vmPFC (Fig. 4a, right, and Supplementary Table 1). predictor as opposed to the unchosen predictor; Fig. 4c, left). The
Again, this accords with participants’ general preference for select- finding that the same variable is reflected in both increase and
ing accurate predictors to help them find the target location. To decrease in activity at different task stages suggests an important
additionally show that both accuracy and uncertainty predic- change in the nature of the representation. In response to review-
tion differences were encoded in a similar anatomical region, we ers’ comments, we verified the robustness of these results when
derived a domain general prediction difference by first, calculat- the precise criteria for drawing boundaries between exploration/
ing the mean across both absolute contrasts ((Chosen uncer- exploitation categories were modified (Supplementary Fig. 8). It
tainty − Unchosen uncertainty) + (Chosen accuracy − Unchosen might be argued that the vmPFC activity pattern simply reflects
accuracy)) and second, by deriving a conjunction between both absolute uncertainty differences between the presented predictors
absolute contrasts (Supplementary Fig. 3a,b, respectively, and irrespective of behavioural mode (exploration versus exploitation).
Supplementary Table 3). A domain general prediction difference We repeated the analysis and included the absolute uncertainty
peaked within vmPFC. Accuracy and uncertainty prediction dif- prediction difference as an additional regressor. Nevertheless, we
ferences are independent variables sharing across all trials, on aver- replicated the uncertainty polarity change across modes in the
age, 0.01% of their variance (0.137% and 0.09 % of their variance vmPFC (Supplementary Fig. 5).
is shared when exploration and exploitation trials are considered The trials we define as uncertainty-guided exploration trials are
separately; Fig. 4d) suggesting both variables have independent comparable to trials that have previously been described as directed
effects on activity but within the same part of the vmPFC (for more explorative choices7. They are, however, hypothesized to be distinct
details on regressor correlations, see Supplementary Figs. 1 and 2). to apparently random choice selections that may result simply from
These findings underline the role of the vmPFC in guiding predic- noise in the decision process22 or the learning process9. In the cur-
tor selection as a function of both the differences in accuracy and rent experiment, random exploration trials were defined as ones on
uncertainty of the predictors. which participants selected predictors that they believed to be inac-
Having identified the vmPFC as representing a negative uncer- curate with certainty (i.e., negative uncertainty) (Supplementary
tainty prediction difference across all trials, we then went on to test Fig. 4a). While it is not possible to be sure that all uncertainty-guided
whether this signal was modulated by distinct behavioural modes exploration and all noise-based exploration trials are classified cor-
of exploration and exploitation. We have shown that uncertainty rectly, on average, the classification should capture a potential differ-
tended to drive exploration of predictors at the beginnings of blocks; ence in exploration type that may be associated with different neural
at that time, selections were directed to uncertain predictors (that mechanisms. To test this possibility, we therefore in addition exam-
is, there was a positive effect of uncertainty during the first 15 tri- ined vmPFC activity on random exploration trials. We extracted
als in medium and long horizons; Fig. 3b, right). Then, over the a time course from the vmPFC associated with the previous clus-
course of the block, participants became increasingly uncertainty ter of accuracy prediction difference and tested for an uncertainty
avoiding shown by a negative effect of uncertainty on choice behav- prediction difference during random exploratory trials. We tested
iour. We refer to this pattern of change as an ‘uncertainty polarity beta weights extracted from the time course with a leave-one-out
change’. We investigated whether there was a brain region with simi- procedure and found that unlike on uncertainty-guided exploratory
lar characteristics: transitioning from encoding a positive to negative trials, there was no credible evidence that the vmPFC represented
NaTuRE HuMaN BEHaviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTurE HuMaN BEHaviour Articles
Prediction differences across all trials
Negative uncertainty
(2)
(1) Negative uncertainty
uncertainty prediction difference during these random exploratory were associated with any distinct neural networks. We performed a
selections (Supplementary Fig. 4b). whole-brain GLM of exploration and exploitation trials and focused
We have shown that behavioural modes were associated with dif- again on the uncertainty prediction difference during the decision
ferent polarities of uncertainty representation in the vmPFC. Next, phase (fMRI-GLM2). During exploitation, we observed activity
we were interested in whether the different behavioural modes centred on the vmPFC related to a negative uncertainty prediction
evitageN )niatrec(
Positive uncertainty
Exploration Exploitation Time
phase phase
Exploration: positive uncertainty Exploitation: negative uncertainty
prediction difference prediction difference
tceffe
CFPmv
evitisoP
)ytniatrecnu(
Hypothesis:
Chosen
0.1
0
–0.15
Time (s)
All trials:
3 Representative 3 Representative 3 Representative
participant: participant: participant:
0 0 0
Across participants, r = 0.1 Across participants, r = 0.37 Across participants, r = 0.3
–3 –3 –3
noitciderp
ytniatrecnU
ateb
IRMf
ecnereffid
).u.a(
)ezis
tceffe(
0.1
0
–0.15
noitciderp
ytniatrecnU
ateb
IRMf
ecnereffid
).u.a(
)ezis
tceffe(
Unchosen Chosen Unchosen
0 10 0 10
Time (s)
Uncertainty
0 180 0 35 0 120
Trials across experiment Explorative trials Exploitative trials
ecnereffid
noitciderP
)dezilamron(
a b
Polarity change:
from positive to negative uncertainty
Accuracy
representation across time
All trials
x left = –2, x right = –4
c
Polarity change in vmPFC covaries with behavioural mode
d
Relationship between accuracy and uncertainty prediction differences
Accuracy Exploration: Exploitation:
Fig. 4 | Modulation of uncertainty prediction difference in vmPFC according to behavioural mode. a, Across all trials, negative uncertainty (left) and
positive accuracy (right) prediction differences covaried with activation in the vmPFC. b, We found a polarity change in the impact uncertainty exerted on
predictor selection at a behavioural level; initial trials in longer horizons were more likely to be explorative and directed towards more uncertain predictors
while behaviour in later trials was more exploitative and directed away from uncertain predictors; in other words, they selected certain predictors (see
labels on y axis). We tested for a neural uncertainty polarity change in vmPFC comparing behavioural modes of exploration and exploitation, respectively,
representing a positive and then negative uncertainty prediction difference. c, Time courses extracted from vmPFC for both chosen and unchosen
components of an uncertainty prediction difference signal during exploration (left) and exploitation (right). VmPFC BOLD activity changed in accordance
with the behavioural results; it transitioned from activity positively related to uncertainty prediction difference (positively encoding the uncertainty of the
chosen predictor as opposed to the unchosen predictor) during initial choices to activity negatively related to uncertainty prediction difference (negatively
encoding the uncertainty of the chosen predictor as opposed to the unchosen predictor) in later trials. All effects were time-locked to the decision phase.
n = 24; shaded area represents s.e.m. across participants; whole-brain effects are family-wise error cluster corrected with z-score > 2.3 and P < 0.05.
d, The relationship between accuracy and uncertainty prediction differences used for all neural analyses across all trials (left), exploration trials (centre)
and exploitation trials (right). Average correlations between accuracy and uncertainty prediction differences across all participants are reported at the
bottom of each panel, while panels show variables across time taken from a representative participant for each analysis. Accuracy and uncertainty
prediction differences are similarly decorrelated in all other analyses (for details on correlation, see Supplementary Figs. 1 and 2).
NaTuRE HuMaN BEHaviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTurE HuMaN BEHaviour
Exploitation: Exploration:
negative uncertainty positive uncertainty
prediction difference prediction difference Exploration – exploitation:
difference (Fig. 5a and Supplementary Table 2), confirming our pre- an uncertainty prediction difference in subcortical structures during
vious findings. During exploration, a positive uncertainty prediction both behavioural modes. We focused on the amygdala and ventral
difference signal was represented in the vmPFC, but also across an striatum (VS) as they have been previously associated with modes
extensive network of brain regions, including dorsomedial frontal of exploration and exploitation26. We also focused on the ventral
areas (Fig. 5b). A direct contrast of activation patterns in exploration tegmental area (VTA), which exhibited cluster-corrected positive
and exploitation trials confirmed these differences between behav- and negative uncertainty prediction difference during exploration
ioural modes (compare the three panels in Fig. 5). The dorsal ACC and exploitation respectively (Fig. 5). All three subcortical regions
(dACC) in particular has been associated with exploratory22 and for- represented uncertainty prediction difference during at least one
aging behaviour23. We show that the dACC represents uncertainty behavioural mode—either exploration or exploitation—but with
prediction differences during directed exploration (Fig. 5b, and a different pattern of activation in each case: the amygdala pre-
Supplementary Figs. 6 and 7a-iii), but there was no credible evidence dominantly represented uncertainty prediction difference during
for such a representation during random exploration (Supplementary exploration (Extended Data Fig. 5a), while the VS (Extended Data
Fig. 4b) or, unlike vmPFC, exploitation (Supplementary Fig. 7b-iii). Fig. 5b) activation was most apparent during exploitative phases
We also observed an uncertainty prediction difference in fronto- when it reflected a negative uncertainty prediction difference. VTA
polar cortex and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC), replicating activity suggested a representation of uncertainty prediction dif-
results of previous exploration studies24,25 (Supplementary Fig. 7a). ference during both exploration and exploitation in the decision
However, like dACC and other dorsomedial frontal areas, both the phase (Extended Data Fig. 5c). These patterns show that a network
dlPFC and frontopolar cortex have distinct profiles compared with of areas including multiple cortical and subcortical areas repre-
the vmPFC, as there was no credible evidence for a representation sent uncertainty-related information during both exploration and
of uncertainty prediction difference during exploitation and hence, exploitation. While it was not identical, the pattern in the VTA most
unlike the vmPFC, these areas did not show an uncertainty polarity closely resembled that seen in the vmPFC; it carried uncertainty sig-
change across behavioural modes (Supplementary Fig. 7b). nals that reversed in polarity between exploration and exploitation,
In summary, we have shown a polarity change in the influence but there was no credible evidence for an accuracy-related signal
that uncertainty in one’s belief exerts not only on behaviour but also during the transition phase between exploration and exploitation
on vmPFC activity. During exploitative modes, when differences in (see paragraph on the transition between exploration and exploi-
predictor certainty are the key decision variable, the vmPFC reflects tation; t(23) = −0.97, P = 0.35, d = −0.197, 95% CI = [−0.07, 0.026],
negative uncertainty prediction differences, but when participants Bayes factor = 0.325, %error = 0.037). These analyses were con-
10
are in an explorative mode, the vmPFC activity reflects positive ducted in response to the reviewers’ comments.
uncertainty prediction differences. During exploration, the vmPFC
is co-active with an extensive network of regions carrying a similar Uncertainty representation in vmPFC scales with predictor repe-
uncertainty-related signal. tition. We have shown a polarity change in the effect of uncertainty
on guiding behaviour and influencing vmPFC activity when com-
Uncertainty-related signals in subcortical structures during paring exploratory and exploitative behavioural modes. One pos-
exploration and exploitation. We used an ROI approach to test for sible way to interpret the negative uncertainty representation during
ytniatrecnU ateb
IRMf
ytniatrecnU ateb
IRMf
ytniatrecnU ateb
IRMf
a b c
Positive Positive Positive
Difference
Negative Negative Negative
z threshold: 3–5
x = –2 x = –2 x = –2
Fig. 5 | Whole-brain maps for uncertainty prediction difference during exploration and exploitation. Illustrations above whole-brain images clarify the
polarity (positive or negative) of the uncertainty prediction difference signal represented in the vmPFC (indicated by the black circle) during exploitation,
exploration and their contrast. a, During exploitation, activity related to an uncertainty prediction difference was restricted to a region centred on the
vmPFC and was represented with a negative polarity (inset). b, However, during exploration, uncertainty prediction difference was represented with a
positive polarity and associated with an extended network including the vmPFC but also dorsomedial frontal areas peaking in the dACC (Supplementary
Fig. 6). c, Difference in uncertainty prediction difference between exploration and exploitation. Contrasting activations between the behavioural modes of
exploration and exploitation confirmed the presence of mode-specific (for example, dACC) and mode-general (for example, vmPFC) activations. Note that
the sign of activation patterns resulting from a contrast between exploration and exploitation need to be interpreted with reference to the levels of activity
found in the exploration and exploitation phases with respect to baseline (see illustration above each whole-brain map). n = 24; whole-brain effects are
family-wise error cluster corrected with z > 2.3 and P < 0.05.
NaTuRE HuMaN BEHaviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTurE HuMaN BEHaviour Articles
a
Repetition trials are mainly b
present during exploitation
1.0 Repetition 0.30
0.06
0.15
0.5 0 0
0 –0.15 Exploration Exploitation –0.08
0 Time (s) 10
No
repetition Repetition
exploitation is that the vmPFC encodes a default choice21,23,27. In the well—how accurately—each predictor estimates the target’s location
context of the current task, an effective default choice is repetition (Fig. 7a, see illustration). Such a period might naturally precede a
of previously made choices particularly when there has been cer- period when the most accurate predictors are identified and contin-
tainty about the predictor’s accuracy. We therefore asked whether uously chosen. During such a transition period, one would expect
there was evidence of a higher frequency of choice repetition on neural activity correlating with an accuracy prediction difference,
exploitation as opposed to exploration trials; this was indeed the the difference between the accuracy estimates associated with the
case (paired t-test explore versus exploit: t(23) = −16.2, P < 0.001, chosen and unchosen predictors. Moreover, because participants
d = −3.3, 95% CI = [−0.36, −0.28]; Fig. 6a). Moreover, activity in are transitioning from positive to negative uncertainty-guided
the same location in the vmPFC reflected whether, on each trial, behaviour, the accuracy estimates held by participants for the cho-
participants would repeat a choice they had made the last time it sen and unchosen predictors should be close in value. This would
was offered. There was more activity in the vmPFC when partici- suggest that participants have no strict preference between pre-
pants were repeating a choice made previously (repetition: t(23) = 4, dictors yet, as they are still learning about them. We identified a
P < 0.001, d = 0.8, 95% CI = [0.017, 0.06]; Fig. 6b, grey time course). new subset of trials by selecting trials with accuracy prediction
In addition, the effect was greater when there was a stronger differences close in value (Supplementary Fig. 9a). We hypoth-
negative uncertainty signal (Repetition × Chosen uncertainty: esized that the vmPFC computes decision variables that are most
t(23) = −3.4216, P = 0.002, d = −0.7, 95% CI = [−0.07, −0.02], relevant for guiding choice behaviour in the current context; there-
Fig. 6b, red time course): in other words, the repetition signal was fore, when the accuracy difference is small in value, participants
greater when there was more certainty about the selected predictor need to carefully compare accuracy estimates between predictors
during repetitive trials compared with non-repetitive trials. When to make their choice. First, we tested whether these trials occurred
participants switched to a new choice that had not been made on a in time between the exploration and exploitation periods that we
previous trial (i.e., non-repetitive trials), a behaviour more likely to had previously identified. Indeed, these transition trials occurred
occur during exploration (Fig. 6a), vmPFC represented uncertainty later in time compared with previously defined explorative choices
with a positive polarity (Fig. 6b, right). (paired t-test, explore versus transition: t(23) = 6, P < 0.001, d = 1.2,
95% CI = [0.056, 0.12]) and earlier in time compared with exploit-
The transition from positive to negative uncertainty represen- ative choices (paired t-test, exploit versus transition: t(23) = −2.8,
tations is accompanied by the processing of accuracy between P = 0.01, d = −0.57, 95% CI = [−0.04, −0.006]) (Fig. 7a).
predictors. So far we have shown that the transition from explora- We then examined whether vmPFC activity reflected the
tion to exploitation and choice repetition behaviour is accompanied accuracy prediction difference during this transitional period.
by a change in the polarity of uncertainty signals and emergence Because we hypothesized that the accuracy prediction difference
of choice repetition signals in the vmPFC. However, it remains effect would occur in the same ROI as the uncertainty predic-
unclear how the transition between directing behaviour towards tion difference effects, we used an independent ROI based on the
uncertain and then certain predictors occurs as the behavioural cluster-corrected accuracy prediction difference effect across all
mode shifts from exploration to exploitation. It is possible that, trials (Fig. 4a). As predicted, activation in the vmPFC correlated
after initial exploration but before repetitively choosing certain pre- with an accuracy prediction difference during this transitional
dictors, there might be a phase in which participants focus on how phase (t(23) = 3.5, P = 0.002, d = 0.71, 95% CI = [0.03, 0.1]; Fig. 7b).
)%(
slairt
noititepeR
Chosen uncertainty in vmPFC interacts with predictor repetition
e
Repetition × Chosen uncertainty c
n
e
re
).u .a
( a te b C
F
P
ffid
n o
itc id e rp
y
tn).u
.a (
a te b C F
P
M
m iav
v tre
c
n U
Fig. 6 | interaction of repetition and uncertainty representation in vmPFC. a, The percentage of choice repetitions during exploitation was significantly
higher than during exploration (paired t-test explore versus exploit: t(23) = −16.2, P < 0.001, d = −3.3, 95% CI = [−0.36, −0.28]). Also note that within
the two phases, this indicates a relative predominance of repetitions versus no repetitions in exploitation, but a relative predominance of no-repetition
choices versus repetitions in exploration. b, vmPFC activity increased when participants repeated the same predictor selection as they had made on
the last encounter with the predictor (grey time course; repetition is coded as ‘repeat–no repeat’; t(23) = 4, P <0.001, d = 0.8, 95% CI = [0.017, 0.06]).
Moreover, we found a significant interaction effect of Repetition × Chosen uncertainty (red time course; t(23) = −3.4, P = 0.002, d = −0.7, 95% CI = [−0.07,
−0.02]). The interaction effect in the right panel is illustrated by decomposing it into the binned effects of chosen uncertainty during ‘repetition’ and ‘no
repetition’ trials at the time of the interaction effect time-course peak. This indicates that the increase in BOLD response accompanying choice repetition
was even stronger if participants were very certain about their choice (that is, negative uncertainty during repetition; green bar in right panel); whereas in
case of switching choices, the BOLD signal increased as a function of chosen uncertainty (that is, positive uncertainty; blue bar in right panel). Note that
the statistical test comparing the blue and green bars in the left panel was performed by testing the interaction effect against zero. n = 24; shaded area and
error bars denote s.e.m. across participants.
NaTuRE HuMaN BEHaviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTurE HuMaN BEHaviour
a
Timing of transition trials
Early
Late
0
b c
Time
–0.04
Time (s)
Accuracy prediction difference
fMRI beta residuals
In further support of the suggestion that accuracy processing is whether accuracy-related vmPFC activation during the transition
especially prominent during this transition phase (in which chosen period was related to a behavioural effect of uncertainty that changes
and unchosen predictors have similar accuracy values), we found no across time, that is, the interaction term Uncertainty × Block time
credible evidence of an accuracy prediction difference signal in the (see behavioural choice GLM, Fig. 3a). We used a partial correla-
vmPFC when very inaccurate predictors (accuracy prediction dif- tion analysis to examine the relationship between each individual’s
ference: t(23) = −0.84, P = 0.41, d = −0.17, 95% CI = [−0.13, 0.055], accuracy-related vmPFC activity extracted from the vmPFC clus-
Bayes factor = 0.296, %error = 0.037; Supplementary Fig. 9b-i) or ter (accuracy prediction difference effect across all trials) and the
10
very accurate predictors were selected (accuracy prediction differ- behavioural transition from positive to negative uncertainty-driven
ence: t(23) = −1.3, P = 0.21, d = −0.27, 95% CI = [−0.06, 0.02], Bayes predictor selection. In the same analysis, we controlled for all other
factor = 0.447, %error = 1.178 × 10−4; Supplementary Fig. 9b-ii). behavioural variables included in the previous GLM1 (Fig. 3a). We
10
This pattern of results suggests that the periods in which vmPFC found that accuracy prediction difference-related activity in the
activity reflects first positive and then negative uncertainty predic- vmPFC during the transition period was positively correlated with
tion difference are separated by a transition period in which the Uncertainty × Block time (r = 0.58, P = 0.007, 95% CI = [0.23, 0.8];
vmPFC reflects the accuracy estimate of the predictor chosen to Fig. 7c, left). That is, the larger the vmPFC signature encod-
guide behaviour. ing accuracy prediction difference during the transition period,
We tested whether activation during the transition phase was the stronger the behavioural transition from positive to negative
related to behavioural changes across time—from positive to uncertainty-driven behaviour over the course of a block (Fig. 7c,
negative uncertainty-driven behaviour—when selecting between right). Notably, these results were not confounded by variation
predictors. As the transition phase bridges exploration (posi- across participants’ in the number of transition trials that were
tive uncertainty) to exploitation (negative uncertainty), we tested identified; a partial correlation that controlled additionally for the
emit
kcolB
×
ytniatrecnU
saludiser
ateb
eciohc
ateb
eciohC
1.0
0.5
0.10 1.5 r = 0.58
P < 0.01
0
0
–1.0
0 10 –0.2 0 0.4
ecnereffid
noitciderp
ycaruccA
ateb
IRMf
)%(
emit
kcolB
tceffe
CFPmv
vmPFC activity covaries with accuracy vmPFC activity during transition correlates
prediction difference during transition with behavioural change across time
evitisoP
evitageN
Hypothesis:
Explore Transition Exploit Transition Time
(positive (accuracy) (negative phase
uncertainty) uncertainty)
High fMRI beta
Low fMRI beta
Fig. 7 | accuracy processing mediates uncertainty polarity change from exploration to exploitation. a, Transition trials (Supplementary Fig. 9a) occurred
later than exploratory selections and earlier than exploitative selections (left) (explore versus transition: t(23) = 6, P < 0.001, d = 1.2, 95% CI = [0.056,
0.12]; transition versus exploit: t(23) = −2.8, P = 0.01, d = −0.57, 95% CI = [−0.04, −0.006]). We hypothesized activation in the vmPFC to be correlated
with positive uncertainty, accuracy and negative uncertainty prediction differences between predictors, but at different times during the experiment
(illustration, right). b, During transition trials, activation in the vmPFC covaried with the difference in the accuracy between the chosen and unchosen
predictor, that is, accuracy prediction difference (t(23) = 3.5, P = 0.002, d = 0.71, 95% CI = [0.03, 0.1]. c, Left: participants who showed a stronger vmPFC
accuracy prediction difference during the transition period (variability around time-course peak from b) also integrated more drastically the uncertainty
between predictors across time into their choice behaviour (Uncertainty × Block time from Fig. 3a; r = 0.58, P = 0.007, 95% CI = [0.23, 0.8]). Right: for
illustration, this means that participants with stronger accuracy-related vmPFC activation had a greater change in integrating uncertainty across time,
that is, a steeper slope in the Uncertainty × Block time effect. The illustration depicts two example participants. Dark orange indicates a participant with
both a strong vmPFC accuracy activation and pronounced behavioural change in how uncertainty was used to drive choice behaviour. By contrast, the
participant indicated in light orange shows a weak vmPFC BOLD accuracy effect and only a small change in how uncertainty was used over time. These
findings support the idea that the transition between positive uncertainty-driven exploration to negative uncertainty-driven exploitation is mediated by
representing the accuracy between predictors. n = 24; shaded areas and error bars denote s.e.m. across participants.
NaTuRE HuMaN BEHaviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTurE HuMaN BEHaviour Articles
horizon is longer even when the decision context and past learning
opportunities remain the same.
Similar flexibility was also observed on a neural level. vmPFC
activity reflected different decision variables at different times in
a manner that reflected their relevance for the current context of
exploration or exploitation. Behaviour and neural activity in the
vmPFC were not determined by only exploration or exploitation,
but rather it reflected several different variables but only when they
were relevant to the current behavioural mode.
Positive uncertainty Learning about predictors’ Negative uncertainty Our findings are related to studies of attention during the learn-
representation during accuracies mediates representation during
exploration exploration–exploitation transition exploitation ing of cue–outcome relationships. Here two influential models have
made opposite predictions: one model suggests that selective atten-
Fig. 8 | Polarity of subjective uncertainty in vmPFC changes from tion is driven by cues that are most predictive of reward2,5, reminis-
exploration to exploitation. At the beginning of a block, choices are cent of the accuracy-driven, repetition-driven and certainty-driven
exploratory and directed towards uncertain predictors (like a shuffle predictor selections in the present study. The second model assumes
mode when playing music; left). The vmPFC and an extended network that the uncertainty of a predictor is crucial for selective attention6.
centred in the dACC represent the difference in uncertainty between By using a Bayesian model to dissociate participants’ beliefs about
the predictors that might be selected. As time passes, participants learn accuracy and uncertainty, we were able to show that, in fact, both
about the predictors’ accuracy through observing how well they predict are important to determine whether a predictor will be selected to
an outcome. A participant’s belief in the accuracy of the predictors exerts guide behaviour. Importantly, the magnitude of their influence on
the predominant influence on the vmPFC activity during this transition predictor selection depends on their relevance to the current con-
phase (middle). Towards the end of a block, vmPFC activity represents the text, which varies across time.
difference in negative uncertainty; in other words, the certainty between In accordance with the behavioural results, we found that neu-
predictors. In this exploitative period, choices are repeatedly directed ral activity reflected predictor differences. Activity in the vmPFC
towards certain predictors (like a repeat mode; right). We show that the reflected the difference between the selected and rejected predic-
vmPFC carries information about a multiplicity of decision variables, the tor, in terms of the key feature that was currently of relevance for
strength and polarity of which vary according to their relevance for the guiding behaviour: first positive uncertainty, then accuracy and
current context of exploration, exploitation or their transition. then negative uncertainty. Previous studies have often focused on
the manner in which activation in the vmPFC is correlated with dif-
ferences in the reward values of chosen and rejected choices11,28,29.
number of transition trials remained significant (r = 0.57, P = 0.01, In such studies, differences in the reward values associated with the
95% CI = [0.22, 0.79]). choices constitute the evidence in favour of taking one choice rather
This result suggests that a transition phase during which the than the other. Although we focus on the vmPFC’s role in repre-
accuracy between predictors is represented in the vmPFC may senting information-based belief estimates of accuracy and uncer-
facilitate a neural polarity change from first representing positive tainty, on subthreshold the vmPFC also represented the difference
uncertainty when selections are exploratory to later representing in expected value between predictors (Extended Data Fig. 2). This
negative uncertainty when repeatedly selecting the same certain shows that when selecting between predictors to guide behaviour,
predictor during exploitation (Fig. 8). Participants exhibiting stron- multiple types of information, rather than just a single one, can be
ger predictor accuracy signals in the vmPFC during the transition of importance. This can be linked to the idea that the vmPFC inte-
period exhibited a more drastic change from positive to negative grates a diverse set of variables that are currently choice relevant30
uncertainty-driven behaviour. and to recent evidence that exploitation and exploration are not
simply behaviours that are controlled by completely separate neural
Discussion circuits but rather they are, at least in part, controlled by changes in
Humans select between multiple information sources that can pre- mode within neural structures26. An alternative interpretation could
dict outcomes in an adaptive manner that enables them efficiently be that the vmPFC’s signal represents variables that are relevant
both to gather information about the predictors and to use that for long-term reward expectation: early uncertainty-driven explo-
information to make choices. Using Bayesian modelling, we derived ration is beneficial for reward maximization during later exploit-
estimates of two kinds of beliefs that simultaneously influenced ative phases. Although we do not differentiate between immediate
choice and neural activity. To select between predictors, partici- or long-term representations, other studies have shown that the
pants integrated beliefs about how accurately a predictor predicted dACC in particular represents value expectations modulated by
the target (‘accuracy’) and beliefs about the uncertainty in that esti- different timescales8,31–33.
mate (‘uncertainty’). How much these beliefs influenced predictor Our results also suggest that the vmPFC does not guide behav-
selection depended on how many opportunities participants had iour in isolation, but that there are additional broader differences
had to learn about the predictors already7. Behaviourally, partici- in the recruitment of choice-relevant brain networks between
pants initially gathered information about available predictors by exploration and exploitation. Although activation associated with
selecting more uncertain predictors, while over time they converged negative uncertainty prediction difference during exploitation
towards accurate and certain (i.e., negative uncertainty effect) pre- was mainly present in the vmPFC, positive uncertainty prediction
dictors. However, importantly, the influence of accuracy beliefs difference during exploration was associated with a wider net-
and their uncertainty depended on the future time horizon; par- work, including areas such as the dACC, dlPFC and frontopolar
ticipants explored uncertain predictors more during initial phases cortex that have previously been associated with exploration24,25.
of a block when they knew that they had a longer time horizon Activation in the dACC has often been related to behavioural adap-
remaining to exploit the knowledge gained. Behaviour that initially tation and the search for better alternatives, for example, during
appears uncertainty directed and exploratory in nature may simply foraging8,22,23,33–40 and to the update of internal models during envi-
reflect noise in the decision process22 or the learning process9 but ronmental changes41–43. Our results may therefore suggest that in
in the present study, behaviour is uncertainty seeking and explor- some cases during exploration, wider updates in decision networks
atory because it manifests to a greater degree when the future time occur that encompass both the vmPFC, dACC and prefrontal areas
NaTuRE HuMaN BEHaviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTurE HuMaN BEHaviour
in a similar fashion. Nevertheless, it is important to remember that Methods
the pattern of activity in the vmPFC, when considered across both Participants. Thirty participants took part in the experiment. Participants were
behavioural modes, is different from that seen in the dACC, dlPFC excluded because they fell asleep repeatedly during the scan (N = 2), exhibited
excessive motion during the scan (N = 1) or because of premature termination of
and frontopolar cortex where activity only reflects uncertainty
an experimental session (N = 3) (final sample: 24 participants; 14 female; age range,
during exploration while the change in the polarity of positive to 19–35; mean age, 25.6; standard deviation, 4). No statistical methods were used
negative uncertainty-related activation, between exploration and to pre-determine sample sizes but our sample sizes are larger than those reported
exploitation, only occurs in the vmPFC. In addition, the vmPFC in previous publications31,33. Moreover, participants took part in two versions of
did not carry a clear uncertainty signal during random exploration the task that were averaged within participant and thereby statistical power was
increased. The study was approved by the Central Research Ethics Committee
as opposed to uncertainty-guided exploration. An important new
(MSD-IDREC-C1-2013-13) at the University of Oxford. All participants gave
finding is that effective exploratory behaviour may simply emerge informed consent.
from noise in the learning process9 and this may impact on activity
in brain areas such as the dACC that reflect choice value learning Experimental procedure. Participants took part in two fMRI sessions on separate
at multiple timescales31,33,44. However, the current findings suggest days (see Supplementary Information for details on task versions). We collapsed
participants’ data across two versions of the task (social/non-social conditions) as
that an uncertainty signal is also carried in these areas when it is
the presented results did not show differences between versions. The order of task
relevant for behaviour. version was counterbalanced across participants. Stimuli used in each version were
A related line of research supports the notion that the vmPFC randomized across participants. Data collection and analysis were not performed
not only represents the value difference between choice options blind to the conditions of the experiments. Each session lasted approximately two
hours, including one hour of scanning. Participants received £15 per hour and a
but also a second-order representation, that is, one’s own confi-
bonus based on task performance (per session: £5–£7).
dence in a choice13,45. These results are compatible with our finding
Before each scanning session, participants were instructed about the task and
that both accuracy and uncertainty are represented in the vmPFC. performed seven practice trials outside the scanner. After completion of both
However, we show in addition that the polarity of the uncertainty sessions, participants filled in a questionnaire that assessed their understanding
representation (which is a second-order representation similar to of the study.
confidence) in the vmPFC changes depending on the behavioural
mode. This suggests that in some cases second-order represen- Experimental design. On every trial, participants made decisions to maximize
rewards over the course of the experiment. The experiment was subdivided into
tations in the vmPFC are themselves choice-guiding and highly
six blocks. Each block included four new predictors associated with four new
context sensitive. The change in signal in the vmPFC from signal- stimuli. Although each predictor was unique, every block comprised two good
ling positive to negative uncertainty prediction differences, that and two bad predictors. After selecting between a pair of predictors, the chosen
is, uncertainty polarity change in the vmPFC, might be related to predictor suggested the location of a target. The true target location varied from
the presence of a learning phase during which predictors’ accu- trial to trial and could not be predicted directly. The only way to estimate the target
location was to learn about the distance, defined as the angular error, between
racies are compared. We identified a transition phase between
true target location and the predictor-suggested target location. The goal was to
exploration and exploitation periods, when no clear preference identify and exploit the good predictors in each block. On every trial, at the first
had yet been formed for predictors. At that point, we observed stage, participants made a binary choice between the two presented predictors
that the vmPFC most prominently reflected participants’ accu- pseudo-randomly drawn from the four-predictor set (decision phase). Choosing
racy estimates for the predictors. Notably, the accuracy effect in better predictors at this first stage of each trial led potentially to more rewards
through a decision that was made in the second stage of each trial (confidence
the vmPFC during the transition phase was related to the degree
phase). The predictors’ estimates varied around a true target location according
of change from positive to negative uncertainty-driven behaviour to a normal distribution with a given standard deviation. Better options were
exhibited by each participant: participants exhibiting stronger characterized by a smaller standard deviation of the normal distribution. At the
accuracy-related vmPFC activation during the transition period second stage, participants expressed their confidence by changing the size of
an interval (symmetric interval around the predicted target location) and were
also showed more drastic behavioural changes.
rewarded if the target fell within the selected area (Fig. 1a). The payoff scheme
Although predictor selections were accuracy-guided through-
was such that participants earned most if they indicated a small angular error and
out the task, we did not observe an accuracy prediction difference the target appeared within the selected area in the subsequent outcome phase.
in the vmPFC during the final exploitation stage of predictor selec- Therefore, choosing a better predictor in the decision phase allowed participants
tion. This is similar to the way in which the vmPFC activity related to earn more rewards in the long run.
Overall, each MRI session comprised 180 trials, subdivided into 6 blocks, and
to value comparison during choice selection has been shown to
lasted approximately one hour. The length of a block (time horizon) was either
be stronger during earlier compared with later phases of a task28.
short (15 trials), medium (30 trials) or long (45 trials) ((1) in Fig. 1b). Each time
A predictor accuracy representation was present in the vmPFC horizon was presented twice and their order was pseudo-randomized with the
during the transition phase between exploration and exploita- constraint that blocks of the same horizon did not succeed each other directly.
tion when accuracy estimates between predictors were close in It is noted that there was only one temporal order of predictor presentation: the
order for short and medium horizons were extracted from the long horizon such
value, meaning that a careful comparison between predictors was
that the first 15 trials were identical across horizons. The order of predictors was
required to guide predictor selections successfully. In comparison,
carefully constructed such that variables of interest, model-derived estimates
during exploitative trials, participants established which predic- of accuracy and uncertainty were decorrelated statistically and across time. As
tors were accurate, resulting in repeated selections of the same shown in Fig. 4d, the critical correlations between accuracy and uncertainty
predictors. At that point, vmPFC activity reflected this repetitive prediction differences are r = 0.1 (95% CI = [−0.32, 0.48]) across all trials, r = 0.37
(95% CI = [−0.04, 0.67]) within exploration and r = 0.30 (95% CI = [−0.12, 0.63])
mode of decision-making and it did so in a manner that interacted
within exploitation, on average across participants. This means that the maximum
with the representation of certainty (i.e., negative uncertainty) shared variance in these conditions is 0.14 (in exploration). For more information
about the predictor. on how experimental design features helped to further decorrelate accuracy
and uncertainty estimates across time, see Supplementary Fig. 2. In response to
Summary. The combination of computational modelling and fMRI the reviewers’ comments, we simulated a scenario during which accuracy and
uncertainty are correlated across time and show that this scenario does not exist in
made it possible to show that beliefs concerning the accuracy of
the current study because of multiple precautions that were taken when designing
predictors and the uncertainty of those beliefs inform predictor the experiment. One of the main precautions was the order of predictors across
selection to guide behaviour. Their influence on both behaviour time. We created the sequence of predictors in each block such that all possible
and activity in the vmPFC changed and transitioned in tandem. binary combinations of high/low uncertainty and high/low accuracy predictors
The vmPFC carried information about a multiplicity of deci- were likely to occur irrespective of the particular choice pattern of the participant.
To achieve this, we introduced two of the four predictors at slightly later times in
sion variables (uncertainty, accuracy and repetition), the strength
each block, making them more uncertain compared with the earlier presented
and polarity of which varied according to their relevance for the predictors. We determined the precise order of predictors in behavioural
current context. pilot experiments.
NaTuRE HuMaN BEHaviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTurE HuMaN BEHaviour Articles
How good a predictor was, was determined by how well it estimated the target was bound between 1° and 140° to allow a broad range of sigma values considering
in the confidence phase. Estimations followed a Gaussian distribution centred on the circle shape.
the true target location ((2) in Fig. 1b). Values, x, for each predictor were drawn Following Bayes’ rule, a belief is updated by multiplication of a prior belief
from a Gaussian distribution and represented the difference between the true and a likelihood distribution resulting in a posterior belief (Fig. 2b). Before the
target location and the predictor’s estimate: very first observation, participant’s belief in sigma, ^σ was assumed to be uniformly
distributed across parameter space, such that all possible sigma values in parameter
x N μ;σ with 180<x<180 1
 ð Þ � ð Þ space were predicted to occur with equal probability:
where at a given trial, value x was derived from a normal distribution with mean p^σ U 1;140: 5
ð Þ¼ ð Þ ð Þ
of μ = 0 and sigma of either σ = 50 for good predictors or σ = 70 for bad predictors.
Note that sigma determined the distance (that is, the angular error) between the A likelihood function was then calculated that described the probability of the
true target location and the target position indicated by the predictor. Averaging observation x given each possible sigma value:
across all observations of the angular error allowed participants to estimate the
px^σ N xμ 0;^σ : 6
sigma associated with each predictor (see Fig. 2a for detailed mapping between ð j Þ¼ ð j ¼ Þ ð Þ
task space and belief estimates). As participants learned about the predictor’s With Bayes rule, we derived a trial-by-trial posterior distribution that was
performance through observing the angular error, they learned about the sigma of proportional to the multiplication of a prior distribution and likelihood:
each predictor’s distribution.
Participants maximized their points by decreasing the interval size during the p ð^σ jx Þ/p ðx jσ^ Þp ð^σ Þ ð7 Þ
confidence phase (Fig. 1a). Participants changed the interval size with a precision where
of up to 20 steps on each side of the reference location, that is a maximum of 40
steps as the interval was set symmetrically. A step size was derived by dividing the 1. p(^σ) is the prior distribution.
circle size (6.3 radians) by the maximum number of possible steps, resulting in a 2. p ðx j^σ Þ is the likelihood function.
step size of approximately 0.16 radians. The interval size was determined as follows: 3. pI ð^σ jx Þ, is the posterior distribution across parameter space. The posterior is
thIe updated belief across sigma space and is used as prior for the next trial of
Intervalsize Numberofsteps´2=40 2 the same predictor.
¼ð Þ ð Þ
Each posterior was normalized to ensure that probabilities across all sigma
When the target fell within the interval set by the participant, the magnitude of
values added up to one:
the payoff was determined by subtracting the interval size from 1. However, if the
target fell outside the CI, it resulted into a null payoff. This meant that the payoff p^σx
p^σx ð j Þ 8
per trial ranged between 0 and 1. ð j Þ¼ p^σx ð Þ
ð j Þ
1 Intervalsize iftargetisincluded
Payoff ð � Þ 3 Model parameters. We used features of an oPption’s prior distribution on every
¼ 0 iftargetisexcluded ð Þ
(cid:31) trial to approximate participants’ estimates of the accuracy of the predictor and
their uncertainty in those accuracy estimates. The mode (peak of distribution) of
Trial structure. Each trial included a decision, confidence and outcome phase the prior distribution was used to define ‘accuracy’, while a 95% interval around
(Fig. 1a). Trials started with the presentation of two options, a time bar and the mode was used to define ‘uncertainty’. Note that both variables depended on
question mark (1.5 s on screen, decision phase). The time bar indicated the amount choices made by participants, because feedback was only provided for the chosen
of trials left in the current block; it decreased after each trial until the end of a predictor and hence only beliefs for the chosen predictor could be updated. On
block. At the start of a new block, the type of horizon was identifiable by inspecting trial i, variables of interest were defined as follows ((4) in Fig. 2a):
the time bar. After the question mark disappeared, participants chose between two
Accuracy maxp^σ ´ 1 10
predictors to receive information about the location of the target on the circle. The ¼ ½ ð Þ ð� Þ ð Þ
chosen predictor was marked with a red box (0.5 s). In the confidence phase, the Note that a higher max[p(^σ)] of the distribution indicated bigger deviations of the
chosen predictor was shown in the centre of a circle and an interval was depicted target from the reference point. To derive an accuracy estimate that can be interpreted
around a reference point (i.e., the predictor’s suggested target location), which intuitively, the sign of max[p(^σ)] is reversed (multiplication with (−1)) so that positive
was indicated by a dot. The interval covered a portion of the circle symmetrically values can be interpreted as higher accuracy. The accuracy estimate represents a point
around the reference point. The interval size was randomly initiated on each trial estimate of a subject’s belief distribution in sigma-hat (^σ). This means it represents the
between a minimum of 1 and a maximum of 20 steps (1 step corresponds to 1 subject’s belief in the sigma value associated with the predictors’ distribution.
button press) away from the predictor’s estimated target location. After participants To derive a trial-wise uncertainty estimate from the distribution, we identified
made a choice on how to set the interval size, a black frame appeared around the a percentage (2.5%) of the lower and upper tail of the prior distribution,
chosen predictor to indicate their response (0.5 s). The duration of the confidence representing the distribution around the believed sigma value (^σ). We extracted the
phase was determined by the participant’s reaction time. Finally, a second marker estimated sigma value ^σ high and ^σ low at each of the two positions. The difference of
appeared on the circle representing the true target location and the number of both sigma values constituted the estimated ‘uncertainty’ variable:
points (between zero and one) below the predictor (3 s, outcome phase).
To decorrelate variables of interest between trial phases, short intervals were ^σ high cumulative ðp ð^σ ÞÞ¼97:5%
included between trials (inter-trial intervals) and randomly, but equally allocated ^σ low cumulative ðp ð^σ ÞÞ¼2:5% ð11 Þ
to either the transition between decision and confidence phase or confidence and Uncertainty ¼^σ high�^σ low
outcome phase. The duration of an interval was drawn from a Poisson distribution
with the range of 4 s to 10 s and a mean of 4.5 s. During these intervals, a fixation Throughout the manuscript, the terms of accuracy and uncertainty refer to the
cross was shown on the screen. model-derived estimates defined in equations (10) and (11), respectively.
Bayesian model. We used a Bayesian model to estimate the beliefs participants Alternative computational models. We used a Bayesian model with uniform
might optimally hold about the sigma (σ) characterizing the normal distribution priors at the start of each block for all four predictors, assuming participants do
of each predictor. Sigma (σ) refers to the standard deviation of the normal not have prior knowledge about the underlying distributions associated with
distribution from which observations of the angular error were drawn, i.e., the predictors. We refer to this model as ‘the original model’ because it is the model
distance between target and reference location at each trial. Participants learn used elsewhere in this study. We compared the original model to two alternative
about how well a predictor predicts the target location across time and by doing computational models: a Bayesian model with informative priors (Extended Data
so, they implicitly estimate the sigma value (σ) of the distribution (see Fig. 2 for Fig. 1) and a reinforcement learning model which tracks the payoff history of each
detailed mapping between task parameters and subjective estimates). Using a predictor (Extended Data Fig. 2). We explain in detail the rationale behind each
Bayesian model, we derived subjects’ beliefs about the sigma value (σ) of each computational model, their construction and the results in the Supplementary
predictor’s distribution, resulting in sigma-hat (^σ) that denotes participant’s Section 2 (‘Alternative computational models’). The results demonstrate that
estimated sigma. Before a belief can be formed, participants selected a predictor a Bayesian model using uniform priors had a better model fit compared with
and then made an observation x of how good the predictor was on a given a Bayesian model with informative priors or a reinforcement learning model.
trial, defined by the angular error between the true target location and the However, a combination of the original Bayesian model with uniform priors and
predictor-estimated location (reference location): value-based variables derived from a reinforcement learning model showed the
best model fit to choice behaviour. In conclusion, reinforcement learning value
x Angularerror Referencelocation Truetargetlocation; 4 terms complement the Bayesian model but do not substitute for the Bayesian
ð Þ¼ � ð Þ
model terms as an explanation of behaviour; participants’ beliefs in the accuracy
Key features of beliefs can be captured by a probability density function over sigma and uncertainty of a predictor explained additional variance in choice behaviour
((3) and (4) in Fig. 2a and 2b). The parameter space comprised possible sigma above and beyond that explained by their choice value estimates. These analyses
values that could be estimated by the participant. The parameter space of sigma were conducted in response to the reviewers’ comments.
NaTuRE HuMaN BEHaviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTurE HuMaN BEHaviour
Behavioural analyses. We applied a set of GLMs to the behavioural data. All GLM behavioural modes. For each subject, we categorized trials based on the predictor
analyses were applied to both versions (social and non-social) of the experiment selections during the decision phase (Extended Data Fig. 3). On each trial, we
separately. The resulting beta weights for each subject were first averaged across calculated the difference between chosen and unchosen accuracy and chosen
versions and then across participants. We used two-tailed statistical tests for all and unchosen uncertainty. Exploitative trials were defined by a positive ‘accuracy
analyses. In addition, we report effect size as Cohen’s d (d) for t-tests and (η2) for prediction difference’ (chosen predictor had higher accuracy than unchosen
ANOVAs, a 95% CI and Bayes factors for non-significant results. ones) and negative ‘uncertainty prediction differences’ (the chosen predictor
was the predictor participants were more certain about). Vice versa, exploration
Decision phase. We analysed the trial-wise impact of Bayesian-derived estimates trials were defined by a negative accuracy prediction difference and positive
of accuracy, uncertainty and their modulations across time in a block on choice uncertainty prediction differences (the more uncertain predictor is picked even
behaviour. Our first analysis aimed to show that the belief in the accuracy of a though it has yielded less accurate results in the past). Trials with both positive
predictor (‘accuracy’) and the uncertainty in that belief (‘uncertainty’) influenced accuracy prediction difference and uncertainty prediction difference (i.e.,
choice behaviour. Moreover, we focused on how these effects changed with the that were both accuracy and uncertainty guided) were allocated to either the
percentage of remaining trials in a block (referred to as block time), suggesting a exploitative or the exploratory bin depending on the relative predominance of
transition between exploration and exploitation as time within a block passes. We the accuracy prediction difference or the uncertainty prediction difference. For
used a logistic GLM to investigate these effects across all trials on choice behaviour example, if the chosen predictor and the unchosen predictor differed more in the
(choice GLM1). For all GLM analyses, regressors were normalized across all trials uncertainty of their predictions as opposed to the accuracy of their predictions
(mean of 0 and standard deviation of 1). The first GLM comprised the following (the chosen predictor was more uncertain than the unchosen predictor and
regressors and is shown in Fig. 3a. the chosen predictor was, to a smaller degree, more accurate in its predictions
than the unchosen predictor) then the predictor selection on that trial was
Choice GLM1. labelled as exploratory. Finally, trials with differences between both accuracy
and uncertainty close to zero (absolute difference of 5) were assigned to both
Accuracy difference (left – right) categories. We elaborate on the robustness of the current classification and
Uncertainty difference (left – right) compare it with those used in previous studies in the Supplementary Information
Block time (Supplementary Fig. 8).
Accuracy difference (left – right) × Block time Furthermore, we defined a new subset of trials to understand the transition
Uncertainty difference (left – right) × Block time from positive uncertainty prediction difference signals (exploration) to a negative
The dependent variable was whether or not participants made a leftward uncertainty prediction difference signal (exploitation) in the vmPFC. Because
choice on the current trial. Accordingly, for each regressor (except block time), we predictor selections are not driven by uncertainty alone, we tested whether
calculated the difference in the variable for the left and right option. To calculate accuracy prediction difference signals were particularly prominent in a transitional
the interaction term, we multiplied the normalized uncertainty and accuracy phase between exploration and exploitation in the vmPFC. We defined a threshold
variables with the normalized block time variable and then normalized this in a range of accuracy prediction difference values between [5, 20] that classified
interaction term again. Note that we use the accuracy and uncertainty regressors as trials into the transition period. We chose this subset such that it would comprise
defined in the ‘Bayesian model’ section. trials that are close in accuracy values for both options and at the same time
To further examine how the influence of uncertainty and accuracy on choice predictor selection would still be guided rationally by accuracy. Moreover, this
changed over time in a block, we binned trials within a given time horizon into window resulted in a sufficiently large sample for analysis (approximately 20% of
first and second halves (Fig. 3b, left). We fitted a logistic GLM on each half with the trials in the range of positive accuracy prediction difference). The threshold
uncertainty and accuracy as regressors, irrespective of the overall time horizon is arbitrary and slightly smaller or greater ranges (compromising positive values)
length of the block. Although we normalize regressors here within blocks, results did not alter the results. To show that the transition period was characterized by
replicate when regressors are normalized across blocks. learning about predictors, and that periods outside this transition were defined by
the processing of either positive uncertainty or negative uncertainty, we defined
Time GLM1. two separate subsets of trials (Supplementary Fig. 9a). One subset included
Accuracy difference (left – right) extreme positive accuracy-driven trials [accuracy values > 20] (Supplementary
Fig. 9a-ii), while a second subset contained extreme negative accuracy-driven
Uncertainty difference (left – right)
Next, we predicted an effect of time horizon (Fig. 3b, right) on the first trials [accuracy values < −5] trials (Supplementary Fig. 9a-i).
of a block. We fitted a robust linear GLM on the first 15 trials (a multiple of all
horizons, which were 15, 30 and 45) with accuracy and uncertainty as regressors to FMRI data acquisition and data processing. Imaging data were acquired with
investigate whether a variable’s effect covaried with the amount of remaining trials. a Siemens Prisma 3T MRI using a multiband T2*-weighted echo planar imaging
sequence with acceleration factor of two and a 32-channel head-coil. Slices were
Time GLM2 for the first 15 trials within horizons. acquired with an oblique angle of 30° to the posterior commissure (PC)– anterior
commissure (AC) line to reduce signal dropout in frontal pole. Other acquisition
Accuracy difference (left – right) parameters included 2.4 × 2.4 × 2.4 mm voxel size, echo time (TE) = 20 ms,
Uncertainty difference (left – right) tepetition time (TR) = 1,030 ms, 60° flip angle, a 240 mm field of view and 60
We used a linear robust regression to better estimate effects given the small slices per volume. For each session, a fieldmap (2.4 × 2.4 × 2.4 mm) was acquired
amount of trials included in the analysis. The first 15 trials were identical across to reduce spatial distortions. Bias correction was applied directly to the scan.
horizons in terms of their predictor order and statistical properties (apart from the A structural scan was obtained with a slice thickness of 1 mm; TR = 1,900 ms,
specific choice sequence taken by participants). All significant results reported in TE = 3.97 ms and 1 × 1 × 1 mm voxel size.
Fig. 3b, right, remained significant when basing the statistical tests on the t-stats Imaging data was analysed using FMRIB’s Software Library (FSL)46.
of the effect sizes obtained from a logistic regression (reported interaction effect: Preprocessing stages included motion correction, correction for spatial
3 × 2 repeated measures ANOVA with horizon (long, medium, short) and variable distortion by applying the fieldmap, brain extraction, high-pass filtering
(accuracy, uncertainty); Horizon × Variable interaction: F(2,46) = 27.6, P < 0.001, and spatial smoothing using a full-width at half-maximum of 5 mm. Images
η2 = 0.965, 95% CI = [0.052, 1.13], assumption of sphericity is met with Mauchly’s were co-registered to an individuals’ high-resolution structural image and
test: x2(2) = 0.26, P = 0.88; reported main effects: positive uncertainty during long then nonlinearly registered to the Montreal Neurological Institue (MNI) template
horizon: t(23) = 4.7, P < 0.001, d = 0.96, 95% CI = [0.51, 1.3]; medium horizon: using 12 degrees of freedom47.
t(23) = 2.6, P = 0.017, d = 0.5, 95% CI = [0.1, 1]).
FMRI data analysis. MRI whole-brain analyses. We used FSL FEAT for first-level
Confidence phase. We analysed the effect of accuracy and uncertainty on confidence
analysis46. First, data were pre-whitened with FSL film to account for temporal
judgements reported at the second phase of a trial (Fig. 1a). Confidence judgements
autocorrelations. Temporal derivatives were included into the model. We used two
were indicated by modifying the interval size around the chosen predictor
GLMs to analyse fMRI data across the whole brain. fMRI-GLM1 was applied to
with a smaller interval representing higher confidence. To make this measure
all trials and fMRI-GLM2 was fitted separately to trials that had been identified as
intuitive, we sign-reversed their relationship such that a higher confidence index
exploration and exploitation trials. Results were calculated using FSL’s FLAME1
represents greater confidence in the chosen predictor. We analysed the trial-by-trial
confidence judgements by applying the following linear GLM (Fig. 3c): with a cluster-correction threshold of z > 2.3 and P < 0.05, two-tailed. To analyse
BOLD changes associated with the processing of uncertainty and accuracy across
participants, a second-level analysis was applied in a two-step approach: data
Confidence GLM1.
were first averaged across both versions within subject (fixed-effect analysis) and
Chosen accuracy then sessions were analysed across participants (FLAME1). We included all three
Chosen uncertainty phases of a trial (decision, confidence and outcome) into the fMRI-GLM. Each
phase included a constant regressor, which was the onset of each phase as well as
Exploration, exploitation and transitional trials. We subdivided trials into parametric regressors that were modelled as stick functions (i.e., duration of zero)
exploration and exploitation trials to compare neural signals between both time-locked to the relevant phase onset.
NaTuRE HuMaN BEHaviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTurE HuMaN BEHaviour Articles
The decision phase began at the time the predictor appeared and lasted until a derive beta weights per timepoint for each regressor. For analyses across versions,
selection was made by the participant (Fig. 1a). The decision phase was modelled we used the same principle as applied to the whole-brain fMRI-GLMs and our
as a constant and was accompanied by the following parametric regressors. behavioural analyses: first, we averaged the time course within a subject across both
social and non-social versions, then we averaged across participants. For all ROI
fMRI-GLM1 decision phase. analyses, regressors were normalized (mean of zero and standard deviation of one).
To illustrate positive and negative uncertainty in exploration and exploitation
Chosen uncertainty
phases, respectively, we included the following regressors (Fig 4c).
Unchosen uncertainty
Chosen accuracy ROI-GLM1 decision phase (for explore and exploit separately).
Unchosen accuracy
All regressors were normalized before inclusion into the analysis. We calculated Chosen uncertainty
the difference between chosen and unchosen predictors for both accuracy and Unchosen uncertainty
uncertainty to derive prediction differences. To derive a ‘domain general prediction Chosen accuracy
difference’, we calculated the mean across absolute uncertainty and accuracy Unchosen accuracy
prediction differences ((Chosen – Unchosen uncertainty) + (Chosen – Unchosen Effects of ROI-GLM1 were extracted from the whole-brain cluster-corrected
accuracy)) (Supplementary Fig. 3a) and calculated a conjunction between both accuracy prediction difference effect in vmPFC to allow for an unbiased test.
cluster-corrected maps of accuracy and uncertainty prediction differences with a Next, we tested whether the uncertainty effect changed when repeating the same
cluster-correction of z > 2.3 and P < 0.05 (Supplementary Fig. 3b). For the conjunction predictor as on the last encounter. We used a ROI analysis to test for a main effect of
analysis, we used the provided FSL script ‘easythresh_conj’ with z > 2.3 and P < 0.05. repetition and interaction effect between repetition and chosen uncertainty. We used
The confidence phase was defined from the onset of the circle and interval ROI-GLM1 and additionally included the following regressors (Fig. 6):
presentation (Fig. 1a) until a decision about the interval size was made. It included
a constant and the following parametric regressors. ROI-GLM2 decision phase (across all trials). Additional regressors to ROI-GLM1:
Repetition (1 = repetition of the same predictor as during last encounter with
fMRI-GLM1 confidence phase. same predictor; 0 = no repetition of the same predictor)
Repetition × Chosen uncertainty,
Chosen uncertainty Repetition × Chosen accuracy.
Chosen accuracy Then we split trials into repetition and no-repetition categories to investigate
Block time the simple effect of chosen uncertainty per category (ROI-GLM3). We used
Chosen uncertainty × Block time ROI-GLM1, but now applied separately to repetition and no-repetition trials (Fig.
Chosen accuracy × Block time 6). For both ROI-GLM2 and ROI-GLM3, we used an unbiased ROI extracted from
All regressors were normalized before, and, where relevant, after building the the whole-brain cluster-corrected accuracy prediction difference effect across all
interaction term (Chosen accuracy/ Uncertainty × Block time). We only included trials in the vmPFC.
the chosen predictor, as participants evaluated their uncertainty and accuracy Next, we applied a ROI analysis to show activation for accuracy prediction
estimates according to the predictor they selected during the decision phase. difference during the transitional phase (Fig. 7b) in the vmPFC, using
The outcome phase was defined by the onset of the target and payoff fMRI-GLM2. We were interested in whether the accuracy prediction difference
presentation and lasted for a fixed duration of three seconds. In addition to the effect occurred in the transition between the previously observed positive and
constant regressor, we included the following parametric regressors. then negative uncertainty prediction differences. Because we hypothesized that
the accuracy prediction difference effect would occur in the same ROI as the
fMRI-GLM1 outcome phase. uncertainty prediction difference effects, we used an independent ROI based
on the cluster-corrected accuracy prediction difference effect across all trials
Chosen accuracy
(fMRI-GLM1). The same ROI and GLM was used to test extreme positive and
Chosen uncertainty
negative accuracy-driven trials (Supplementary Fig. 9b).
Payoff (as defined in equation (3))
ROI-GLM4 decision phase (transition trials and extreme positive and negative
In the second fMRI-GLM2, trials were binned into exploratory and exploitative
accuracy trials)
trials as described above. For this purpose, we included decision, confidence and
outcome phases for exploratory and exploitative trials separately. This meant that,
Leave-one-out procedure. A leave-one-out procedure was used to test the unbiased
in total, there were six phases within the fMRI-GLM2. We included the same set
significance of the time courses extracted from ROI-GLM2 and ROI-GLM3. For
of regressors in the exploratory and exploitative phases. The constants for each
phase was modelled as in the previous GLM, but we used separate constants for every participant (n = 24), we extracted the average time course based on the 23
remaining participants. We identified the peak of the group time course in a time
exploration and exploitation phases.
window between 4 and 8 s and then extracted the beta value for the excluded subject
at the time of the group peak. This procedure was repeated for all participants which
fMRI-GLM2 decision phase (for explore and exploit separately).
resulted in individual peak values that were independent from the subject to be
Uncertainty prediction difference (i.e., Chosen − Unchosen) analysed. The extracted peak values were tested with a one-sample t-test against zero.
Accuracy prediction difference (i.e., Chosen − Unchosen)
Correlations between neural and behavioural beta weights. To calculate the
fMRI-GLM2 confidence phase (for explore and exploit separately). correlation between the time course of neural activations and behavioural beta
values, we used neural beta weights extracted from the group peak. We calculated a
Chosen accuracy
partial correlation between the vmPFC accuracy prediction difference effect during
Chosen uncertainty
the transition phase and the behavioural interaction term of Uncertainty × Block
time (Fig. 7c), controlling for all other behavioural variables (main effects of
fMRI-GLM2 outcome phase (for explore and exploit separately).
accuracy, uncertainty, block time (in percentage) and the interaction between
Chosen accuracy block time and accuracy; see behavioural GLM1). A second partial correlation
Chosen uncertainty additionally included the number of individual transition trials.
Payoff
To test whether the uncertainty prediction difference significantly differed Reporting Summary. Further information on research design is available in the
between exploration and exploitation, we built a contrast comparing uncertainty Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.
prediction differences between exploration and exploitation (Fig. 5c).
In addition, fMRI-GLM1 contained one regressor time-locked to all button Data availability
presses, modelled as a stick function. For fMRI-GLM2, two regressors were We have deposited all choice raw data used for the analyses in the OSF repository
time-locked to the button presses: one relating to the exploration phase and the at https://osf.io/d5qzw/?view_only=037ea3b875914623a06999cef97ac57f. We have
other related to the exploitation phase. deposited unthresholded fMRI maps of all contrasts depicted in the manuscript on
NeuroVault at https://identifiers.org/neurovault.collection:8073. Source data are
ROI analyses. We calculated ROIs with a radius of three voxels that were centred on provided with this paper.
the peak voxel of significant clusters derived from whole-brain fMRI-GLM1 and
fMRI-GLM2. The selected ROI was transformed from MNI space to subject space Code availability
and the pre-processed BOLD time courses were extracted for each participant’s The above OSF repository includes the full Bayesian modelling pipeline. Relevant
session. Time courses were averaged across volumes, then normalized and behavioural and neural regressors were derived from this pipeline. We also provide
oversampled by a factor of 20 for visualization. Time courses were time-locked to the code for behavioural GLMs shown in Fig. 3. Please follow the README file
the onsets of each phase consistent with timings used in whole-brain fMRI-GLMs inside the repository for details of its use: https://osf.io/d5qzw/?view_only=037ea3
(decision, confidence or outcome). Then, a GLM was applied to each timepoint to b875914623a06999cef97ac57f.
NaTuRE HuMaN BEHaviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTurE HuMaN BEHaviour
Received: 25 November 2019; Accepted: 17 July 2020; 29. Rushworth, M. F. S., Noonan, M. P., Boorman, E. D., Walton, M. E. &
Published: xx xx xxxx Behrens, T. E. Frontal cortex and reward-guided learning and
decision-making. Neuron 70, 1054–1069 (2011).
30. Wilson, R. C., Takahashi, Y. K., Schoenbaum, G. & Niv, Y. Orbitofrontal
References
cortex as a cognitive map of task space. Neuron 81, 267–279 (2014).
1. Akaishi, R., Kolling, N., Brown, J. W. & Rushworth, M. Neural mechanisms of 31. Meder, D. et al. Simultaneous representation of a spectrum of dynamically
credit assignment in a multicue environment. J. Neurosci. 36, 1096–1112 (2016). changing value estimates during decision making. Nat. Commun. 8,
2. Leong, Y. C., Radulescu, A., Daniel, R., DeWoskin, V. & Niv, Y. Dynamic 1942 (2017).
interaction between reinforcement learning and attention in multidimensional 32. Kolling, N., Wittmann, M. & Rushworth, M. F. S. Multiple neural
environments. Neuron 93, 451–463 (2017). mechanisms of decision making and their competition under changing risk
3. Garrett, N., González-Garzón, A. M., Foulkes, L., Levita, L. & Sharot, T. pressure. Neuron 81, 1190–1202 (2014).
Updating beliefs under perceived threat. J. Neurosci. 38, 7901–7911 (2018). 33. Wittmann, M. K. et al. Predictive decision making driven by multiple
4. Charpentier, C. J., Bromberg-Martin, E. S. & Sharot, T. Valuation of time-linked reward representations in the anterior cingulate cortex. Nat.
knowledge and ignorance in mesolimbic reward circuitry. Proc. Natl Acad. Commun. 7, 12327 (2016).
Sci. USA 115, E7255–E7264 (2018). 34. Boorman, E. D., Behrens, T. E. & Rushworth, M. F. Counterfactual choice
5. Mackintosh, N. J. A theory of attention: variations in the associability of and learning in a neural network centered on human lateral frontopolar
stimuli with reinforcement. Psychol. Rev. 82, 276–298 (1975). cortex. PLoS Biol. 9, e1001093 (2011).
6. Pearce, J. M. & Hall, G. A model for Pavlovian learning: variations in the 35. Boorman, E. D., Rushworth, M. F. & Behrens, T. E. Ventromedial prefrontal
effectiveness of conditioned but not of unconditioned stimuli. Psychol. Rev. and anterior cingulate cortex adopt choice and default reference frames
87, 532–552 (1980). during sequential multi-alternative choice. J. Neurosci. 33, 2242–2253 (2013).
7. Wilson, R. C., Geana, A., White, J. M., Ludvig, E. A. & Cohen, J. D. Humans 36. Kolling, N., Behrens, T., Wittmann, M. & Rushworth, M. Multiple signals in
use directed and random exploration to solve the explore–exploit dilemma. anterior cingulate cortex. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 37, 36–43 (2016).
J. Exp. Psychol. Gen. 143, 2074–2081 (2014). 37. Kolling, N. et al. Value, search, persistence and model updating in anterior
8. Kolling, N., Scholl, J., Chekroud, A., Trier, H. A. & Rushworth, M. F. S. cingulate cortex. Nat. Neurosci. 19, 1280–1285 (2016).
Prospection, perseverance, and insight in sequential behavior. Neuron 99, 38. Hayden, B. Y., Pearson, J. M. & Platt, M. L. Neuronal basis of sequential
1069–1082.e7 (2018). foraging decisions in a patchy environment. Nat. Neurosci. 14, 933–939 (2011).
9. Findling, C., Skvortsova, V., Dromnelle, R., Palminteri, S. & Wyart, V. 39. Quilodran, R., Rothé, M. & Procyk, E. Behavioral shifts and action valuation
Computational noise in reward-guided learning drives behavioral variability in the anterior cingulate cortex. Neuron 57, 314–325 (2008).
in volatile environments. Nat. Neurosci. 22, 2066–2077 (2019). 40. Stoll, F. M., Fontanier, V. & Procyk, E. Specific frontal neural dynamics
10. Basten, U., Biele, G., Heekeren, H. R. & Fiebach, C. J. How the brain contribute to decisions to check. Nat. Commun. 7, 11990 (2016).
integrates costs and benefits during decision making. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 41. Karlsson, M. P., Tervo, D. G. R. & Karpova, A. Y. Network resets in medial
USA 107, 21767–21772 (2010). prefrontal cortex mark the onset of behavioral uncertainty. Science 338,
11. Boorman, E. D., Behrens, T. E. J., Woolrich, M. W. & Rushworth, M. F. S. 135–139 (2012).
How green is the grass on the other side? Frontopolar cortex and the 42. O’Reilly, J. X. et al. Dissociable effects of surprise and model update in
evidence in favor of alternative courses of action. Neuron 62, 733–743 (2009). parietal and anterior cingulate cortex. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 110,
12. Chau, B. K. H., Kolling, N., Hunt, L. T., Walton, M. E. & Rushworth, M. F. S. E3660–E3669 (2013).
A neural mechanism underlying failure of optimal choice with multiple 43. Tervo, D. G. R. et al. Behavioral variability through stochastic choice and its
alternatives. Nat. Neurosci. 17, 463–470 (2014). gating by anterior cingulate cortex. Cell 159, 21–32 (2014).
13. De Martino, B., Fleming, S. M., Garrett, N. & Dolan, R. J. Confidence in 44. Bernacchia, A., Seo, H., Lee, D. & Wang, X.-J. A reservoir of time constants
value-based choice. Nat. Neurosci. 16, 105–110 (2012). for memory traces in cortical neurons. Nat. Neurosci. 14, 366–372 (2011).
14. FitzGerald, T. H. B., Seymour, B. & Dolan, R. J. The role of human 45. Lebreton, M., Abitbol, R., Daunizeau, J. & Pessiglione, M. Automatic integration
orbitofrontal cortex in value comparison for incommensurable objects. of confidence in the brain valuation signal. Nat. Neurosci. 18, 1159–1167 (2015).
J. Neurosci. 29, 8388–8395 (2009). 46. Smith, S. M. et al. Advances in functional and structural MR image analysis
15. Fouragnan, E. F. et al. The macaque anterior cingulate cortex translates and implementation as FSL. Neuroimage 23(Suppl. 1), S208–S219 (2004).
counterfactual choice value into actual behavioral change. Nat. Neurosci. 22, 47. Jenkinson, M. & Smith, S. A global optimisation method for robust affine
797–808 (2019). registration of brain images. Med. Image Anal. 5, 143–156 (2001).
16. Papageorgiou, G. K. et al. Inverted activity patterns in ventromedial
prefrontal cortex during value-guided decision-making in a less-is-more task. acknowledgements
Nat. Commun. 8, 1886 (2017).
N.T. was funded by a DTC ESRC studentship (ES/J500112/1), J.S. was supported by
17. Philiastides, M. G., Biele, G. & Heekeren, H. R. A mechanistic account of
a MRC Skills Development Fellowship (MR/NO14448/1), M.C.K.-F. by a Sir Henry
value computation in the human brain. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 107,
Wellcome Fellowship (103184/Z/13/Z), M.F.S.R. was funded by a Wellcome Senior
9430–9435 (2010).
Investigator Award (WT100973AIA). E.F. was funded by UKRI FLF (MR/T023007/1).
18. Wunderlich, K., Dayan, P. & Dolan, R. J. Mapping value based planning
The funders had no role in the study design, data collection and analysis, decision to
and extensively trained choice in the human brain. Nat. Neurosci. 15,
publish or preparation of the manuscript. We would like to thank all members of the
786–791 (2012).
Rushworth lab for great discussions on this project.
19. Hunt, L. T. et al. Triple dissociation of attention and decision computations
across prefrontal cortex. Nat. Neurosci. 21, 1471–1481 (2018). author contributions
20. Lim, S.-L., O’Doherty, J. P. & Rangel, A. The decision value computations in
N.T., M.K.W. and M.F.S.R. conceived and designed the experiment; N.T., J.S. and M.K.W.
the vmPFC and striatum use a relative value code that is guided by visual
constructed the Bayesian model; N.T. conducted the experiment; N.T., E.F., L.T., M.K.W.
attention. J. Neurosci. 31, 13214–13223 (2011).
and M.F.S.R. conceived behavioural analyses; N.T., M.C.K.-F., M.K.W. and M.F.S.R.
21. Lopez-Persem, A., Domenech, P. & Pessiglione, M. How prior preferences
conceived neural analyses; N.T. conducted data analyses; N.T., M.K.W. and M.F.S.R.
determine decision-making frames and biases in the human brain. eLife 5,
wrote the manuscript; all authors provided expertise and feedback on the write-up;
e20317 (2016).
M.K.W. and M.F.S.R. supervised the research project.
22. Daw, N. D., O’Doherty, J. P., Dayan, P., Seymour, B. & Dolan, R. J. Cortical
substrates for exploratory decisions in humans. Nature 441, 876–879 (2006).
Competing interests
23. Kolling, N., Behrens, T. E. J., Mars, R. B. & Rushworth, M. F. S. Neural
mechanisms of foraging. Science 336, 95–98 (2012). The authors declare no competing interests.
24. Zajkowski, W. K., Kossut, M. & Wilson, R. C. A causal role for right
frontopolar cortex in directed, but not random, exploration. eLife https://doi. additional information
org/10.7554/eLife.27430 (2017). Extended data is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-020-0929-3.
25. Badre, D., Doll, B. B., Long, N. M. & Frank, M. J. Rostrolateral prefrontal Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/
cortex and individual differences in uncertainty-driven exploration. Neuron s41562-020-0929-3.
73, 595–607 (2012).
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to N.T.
26. Costa, V. D., Mitz, A. R. & Averbeck, B. B. Subcortical substrates of
explore–exploit decisions in primates. Neuron 103, 533–545.e5 (2019). Peer review information Primary Handling Editor: Marike Schiffer
27. Noonan, M. P., Kolling, N., Walton, M. E. & Rushworth, M. F. S. Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Re-evaluating the role of the orbitofrontal cortex in reward and
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
reinforcement: re-evaluating the OFC. Eur. J. Neurosci. 35, 997–1010 (2012).
published maps and institutional affiliations.
28. Hunt, L. T. et al. Mechanisms underlying cortical activity during value-guided
choice. Nat. Neurosci. 15, 470–476 (2012). © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2020
NaTuRE HuMaN BEHaviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NNaaTTuurrEE HHuuMMaaNN BBEEHHaavviioouurr AArrttiicclleess
Extended Data Fig. 1 | Model comparison: Bayesian model with informative prior. a, Participants might form expectations about possible sigma
values across time. Then prior beliefs at block start should reflect information gathered from past observations. We constructed a Bayesian model that
incorporated block-wise priors that reflect the previous history of all observations irrespective of predictor (referred to as adaptive model; green model)
and compared it to the Bayesian model using uniform priors (referred to as original model; grey model). b, We replicated all effects of interest when
deriving belief estimates with the adaptive Bayesian model (accuracy, t(23) = 4.7, p<0.001, d=0.96, 95% CI=[0.91 2.3]; uncertainty, t(23) = 1.2, p= 0.25,
d=−0.24, 95% CI=[−0.77 0.21]; uncertainty x block time, t(23) = 6, p<0.001, d=1.2, 95% CI=[0.83 1.73]; accuracy x block time, t(23) = 2.6, p= 0.015,
d=−0.54, 95% CI=[−1.1 −0.13]). c, The original Bayesian model was a better model fit for all behavioural analyses (here we only show across all trials)
compared to the adaptive Bayesian model. One reason might be that a uniform prior provides more flexibility for estimates to converge towards their
true value across time. d, Importantly, for behavioural and neural analyses, variables are constructed in relative terms (for example difference between
left and right predictor): changing prior distributions only impact absolute values while the relative values keep the same proportions. For this reason, the
key results remain unchanged when modifying initial block-wise priors. e, Next, we used the confidence judgement (that is interval size) at each block
start averaged across four predictors as an index of prior beliefs and compared it across all (six) blocks. We show confidence judgements at the start of a
block (red line) and at the end of a block (blue line). Participants reset their prior beliefs from one block to the next (blue line). Analysis of the interval size
shows no credible evidence for a change of confidence judgment during the first encounters across blocks when excluding blocks that were affected by
practice trials (red line: Mauchly’s test indicated a violation of equal variances: x2(9)=23,p=0.006, therefore we used Greenhouse Geiser: F(2.6,92) = 2.5,
p =0.08, η2=0.71, Bayes factor 10=0.91, error%=0.36). (see Supplementary Methods, Section 2 for detailed model construction and confidence judgement
analysis) (n = 24; error bars are SEM across participants).
NaTuRE HuMaN BEHaviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
AArrttiicclleess NNaaTTuurrEE HHuuMMaaNN BBEEHHaavviioouurr
Extended Data Fig. 2 | Model comparison: reinforcement learning model tracking payoff history. The payoff scheme reflects participants’ beliefs in
the accuracies and certainties associated with selected predictors, however it may itself exert an additional independent effect on behaviour and neural
activity. We constructed a reinforcement learning (RL) model that tracked each predictor’s payoff history in a recency-weighted way and compared it to
the Bayesian model using uniform priors (referred to as original model). a, Behavioural effects of interest (Fig. 3a) were replicated when controlling for the
RL-derived value difference (in yellow) (accuracy, t(23) = 5.5, p<0.001, d=1.1, 95% CI=[0.48 1.1]; uncertainty, t(23) = −3.1, p= 0.0049, d=−0.63, 95%
CI=[−0.75 −0.15]; uncertainty x block time, t(23) = 5.2, p<0.001, d=1.1, 95%CI =[0.49 1.13]; accuracy x block time, t(23) = −6.8, p<0.001, d=−1.4, 95%
CI=[−0.84 −0.44] and RL value difference, t(23) = 11.9, p<0.001, d= 2.43, 95% CI =[0.7 0.99]). b, This is consistent with the relative lack of correlation
between variables derived from the Bayesian model and the RL-derive value difference. c, A combination (red bar) of the RL value model (yellow bar)
and original Bayesian model (grey bar) was the best fit for choice behaviour, supporting the relevance of value-based and information-based variables
for explaining choice behaviour. d, We repeated the previous whole-brain analysis (fMRI-GLM1) and additionally included the RL value difference. We
replicated a domain general prediction difference in vmPFC (upper panel), while there was no cluster-significant activation for RL-derived value difference
(lower panel); however, the activation that was strongest was located within vmPFC. In conclusion, RL value terms complement the Bayesian model
but do not substitute for the Bayesian model terms as an explanation of behaviour. (n = 24; error bars are SEM across participants; whole-brain effects
family-wise error cluster corrected with z > 2.3 and p < 0.05).
NaTuRE HuMaN BEHaviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NNaaTTuurrEE HHuuMMaaNN BBEEHHaavviioouurr AArrttiicclleess
Extended Data Fig. 3 | Model fit across time. a, Model fits are better for the second compared to the first block half (paired t-test: t(23)
8.5,p<0.001,d=1.74,95% confidence interval(CI)=[28.5 46.8]). We tested whether we can replicate main effects of interest when equalizing model fits
across block halves. b, c, We used choice residuals which offer an index of model fit but unlike BIC measures, they are specific to each trial and they do not
depend on trial number or number of parameters. b, We show absolute choice residuals and block time for one example participant across all trials (‘short,
medium and long’ refer to the horizon length). There is a limited correlation for all choice residuals across all trials and the block time variable (inset shows
correlation across all participants; r=0.27;7% shared variance,95% CI=[−0.15 0.7]). This makes it very unlikely that results are driven by linear changes
in model fit alone. c, We tested this empirically. First, we extracted absolute residuals from the main GLM across all trials and separated them into first
and second halves. c-i, In accord with the model fit results, there was more residual variance during the first compared to second block half (paired t-test:
t(23)=7.7, p<0.001, d=1.6, 95% CI=[0.08 0.14]). c-ii, Next, we excluded trials on the basis of the trial-wise choice residuals until there was no credible
evidence that block halves were different in their residual variance (in effect this meant trials with residuals above 0.6 had to be excluded; paired t-test:
t(23)=1.35, p=0.19, d= 0.28, 95% CI=[−0.004 0.02], Bayes factor 10=0.48, error%=1.164e-4). d, Trials were collapsed back into one category and the
main GLM (Fig. 3a) was applied onto the new subset of trials. We replicated all effects of interest (accuracy: t(23)=13.1, p<0.001, d=2.67, 95% CI=[2.8
3.8]; uncertainty: t(23) = −1.14, p=0.26, d=−0.23, 95% CI=[−1.6 0.45]; uncertainty x block time: t(23)=9.7, p<0.001, d=1.98, 95% CI=[2 3.1]; accuracy x
block time: t(23)= −6.81, p<0.001, d=−1.39, 95% CI=[−2.8 -1.5]). (n = 24; error bars are SEM across participants).
NaTuRE HuMaN BEHaviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
AArrttiicclleess NNaaTTuurrEE HHuuMMaaNN BBEEHHaavviioouurr
Extended Data Fig. 4 | Trial classification into exploration/ exploitation according to individual choices. a-i, We classified trials into exploration and
exploitation according to subjects’ choices. To this end, we compared accuracy and uncertainty of the chosen and unchosen predictors, defining the
prediction difference. Explorative choices (Ai-1) were defined as those directed towards higher uncertainty (positive uncertainty prediction difference)
and less accurate predictors (negative accuracy prediction difference) (approximately 18% of trials). An exploitative trial (Ai-2) was defined by choices
of predictors with a higher accuracy (positive accuracy prediction difference) and lower uncertainty (negative uncertainty prediction difference) than
the unchosen predictor (approximately 52% of trials). a-ii, When participants chose predictors that were both more accurate and more uncertain, we
compared the relative magnitudes of the accuracy prediction difference and the uncertainty prediction difference (Ai-3). If the difference in accuracy
prediction was greater than the uncertainty prediction difference, then that trial was allocated to the exploitative bin. If the difference in uncertainty
prediction difference was greater than the difference in accuracy prediction difference, then the trial was assigned to the exploratory bin. However, if
the difference between the sizes of the decision variables was small (<5) then the trial was assigned to both exploration and exploitation bins (5% of
trials). The remaining 25% of trials (white area in panel i) were not assigned to either exploitative or exploratory bins, because these choices were neither
guided by uncertainty nor accuracy. a-iii, Example of an exploitative choice: the chosen predictor has a higher accuracy and a lower uncertainty prediction
difference. B, As a manipulation check, we plot the prediction differences for accuracy and uncertainty separated by exploration and exploitation. We
find that indeed exploratory trials are characterized by a positive uncertainty prediction difference (the chosen predictor was associated with greater
uncertainty than the unchosen predictor) while exploitative trials are defined by a positive accuracy prediction difference (the chosen predictor was
associated with greater predictive accuracy than the unchosen predictor) and negative uncertainty prediction difference (the chosen predictor
was associated with greater negative predictive uncertainty than the unchosen predictor). For robustness of trial classification, see Supplementary
Fig. 8. (n = 24).
NaTuRE HuMaN BEHaviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NNaaTTuurrEE HHuuMMaaNN BBEEHHaavviioouurr AArrttiicclleess
Extended Data Fig. 5 | uncertainty-related signals in subcortical regions during exploration and exploitation. We show subcortical activation associated
with the uncertainty prediction difference for exploration, exploitation, and their difference. Activation is shown during the decision phase, and when
relevant, during the outcome phase. We used bilateral masks and averaged the results over both hemispheres for each ROI. a, Amygdala represents
uncertainty prediction difference during exploration more strongly than during exploitation (paired t-test: uncertainty prediction difference, explore vs
exploit: t(23) = 3.5, p=0.002, d=0.71, 95% confidence interval (CI)=[6 23.5]). b, Activation patterns in VS during decision (left panel) and outcome
phases (right panel) suggest its primary involvement is during exploitation. VS represented both a negative uncertainty prediction difference during
the decision phase during exploitation (t(23)=−2.4, p=0.02, d=−0.49, 95% confidence interval=[−15.8 −1.3]) and the payoff during the outcome
phase during both exploration and exploitation but it did so more strongly during exploitation (paired t-test: payoff for explore vs exploit (t(23) = −2.3,
p=0.033, d=−0.47, 95% CI=[−21.2 −0.96]). c, Finally, VTA activity reflected uncertainty during both exploration and exploitation in the decision phase
(exploration: t(23) = 2.3, p= 0.03, d=0.47, 95% CI=[1.94 40]; exploitation: t(23) = −3, p=0.007, d=−0.6, 95% CI=[−25.3 −4.4]). (n = 24; error bars are
SEM across participants).
NaTuRE HuMaN BEHaviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
1
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Corresponding author(s): Nadescha Trudel
Last updated by author(s): Jun 5, 2020
Reporting Summary
Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency
in reporting. For further information on Nature Research policies, see Authors & Referees and the Editorial Policy Checklist.
Statistics
For all statistical analyses, confirm that the following items are present in the figure legend, table legend, main text, or Methods section.
n/a Confirmed
The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
A statement on whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided
Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.
A description of all covariates tested
A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
A full description of the statistical parameters including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient)
AND variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)
For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted
Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.
For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated
Our web collection on statistics for biologists contains articles on many of the points above.
Software and code
Policy information about availability of computer code
Data collection Behavioural data was collected via Presentation software (Neurobehavioral Systems Inc., Albany, CA). Functional Resonance Imaging
Data (fMRI) were acquired using a Siemens Prisma 3T MRI scanner.
Data analysis We analyzed data using Matlab 2018a&b versions, SPSS (Version24), JASP(0.9.1.0), SPM and FSL.
For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors/reviewers.
We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Research guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.
Data
Policy information about availability of data
All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable:
- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets
- A list of figures that have associated raw data
- A description of any restrictions on data availability
We have deposited all choice raw data used for the analyses in an OSF repository. The accession code is: https://osf.io/d5qzw/?
view_only=037ea3b875914623a06999cef97ac57f.
We have deposited unthresholded fMRI maps of all contrasts depicted in the manuscript on Neurovolt. The accession code is: https://identifiers.org/
neurovault.collection:8073.
The source data underlying Figure 3,6,7 and Extended Data Figure 1,2,3,5 are provided as a Source Data file.
2
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Field-specific reporting
Please select the one below that is the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.
Life sciences Behavioural & social sciences Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences
For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/documents/nr-reporting-summary-flat.pdf
Behavioural & social sciences study design
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
Study description Data are quantitative experimental data.
Research sample A sample of 24 students, staff and public members in and around Oxford took part in the study. Participants took part in two sessions
(social vs non-social conditions). As conditions did not show differences in the reported results, we averaged across conditions within
participant. Note that both conditions were statistically identical. The final sample covered 48 sessions but are presented as 24 data
points (averaged across conditions within participant).
Sampling strategy We used random sampling. No statistical methods were used to pre-determine sample sizes but our sample sizes are larger to those
reported in previous publications (for example, see Wittman et al., 2016 Nature Communications; Meder et al., 2017 Nature
Communications). Moreover, participants took part in two versions of the task which were averaged within participant and thereby
increased statistical power.
Data collection Participants first participated in a practice session outside the scanner with the researcher in the room. For both experimental sessions,
participants performed the task inside an MRI scanner in a separate room to the researcher and radiographers. We recorded the data
with a computer using Presentation and a MRI scanner.
Timing Data collection took place between March 2018 and September 2018.
Data exclusions Exclusion criteria included previous or current neurological or psychiatric disorder and contraindications that prohibited MRI scanning.
Participants were excluded because they fell asleep repeatedly during the scan (N=2), exhibited excessive motion during the scan (N=1),
or because of premature termination of an experimental session (N=3). This left a final sample of N=24, with 14 female participants.
Non-participation Premature termination of the experimental procedure are stated in 'data exclusions'. Two participants terminated the scan prematurely
by pressing the emergency button during the scan. One participant did not finish the experimental session as the scanner broke down
during the scanning session.
Randomization There were two experimental conditions: social and non-social conditions. Each participant performed both conditions. We allocated
participants in a counterbalanced fashion to either a social/non-social or non-social/social order.
Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods
We require information from authors about some types of materials, experimental systems and methods used in many studies. Here, indicate whether each material,
system or method listed is relevant to your study. If you are not sure if a list item applies to your research, read the appropriate section before selecting a response.
Materials & experimental systems Methods
n/a Involved in the study n/a Involved in the study
Antibodies ChIP-seq
Eukaryotic cell lines Flow cytometry
Palaeontology MRI-based neuroimaging
Animals and other organisms
Human research participants
Clinical data
Human research participants
Policy information about studies involving human research participants
Population characteristics 24 participants (14 female; age: 19-35; mean age= 25.6; standard deviation = 4): screening criteria included no history of
neurological or psychiatric disorder, normal or corrected-to-normal vision and suitability for undergoing MRI scanning.
Recruitment Participants were recruited through the departmental database, emails to students and word of mouth.
3
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Ethics oversight The study was approved by the Central Research Ethics Committee (MSD-IDREC-C1-2013-13) at the University of Oxford.
Note that full information on the approval of the study protocol must also be provided in the manuscript.
Magnetic resonance imaging
Experimental design
Design type Participants were doing a task while being scanned. The design was event-related.
Design specifications Each MRI session comprised 180 trials, subdivided into 6 blocks (the scanner continuously acquired data throughout all
blocks and did not stop between blocks). A trial lasted on average across participants and sessions 14.4 seconds
(including reaction times). The duration between trials was drawn from a Poisson distribution with the range of 4s to
10s and a mean of 4.5s. To decorrelate variables of interest between trial phases, short intervals were included
between trials (inter-trial-intervals,ITIs) and randomly, but equally allocated to either the transition between decision-
and confidence phase or confidence- and outcome phase. We used the same distribution parameters stated above.
Behavioral performance measures We recorded choice behaviour (predictor selections and confidence judgments), reaction times and all button presses
on each trial.
Acquisition
Imaging type(s) Functional and structural images were collected.
Field strength 3 Tesla
Sequence & imaging parameters Imaging data were acquired with a Siemens Prisma 3T MRI using a multiband T2*-weighted echo planar imaging
sequence with acceleration factor of two and a 32-channel head-coil. Slices were acquired with an oblique angle of 30 °
to the PC-AC line to reduce signal dropout in frontal pole. Other acquisition parameters included 2.4x2.4x2.4 mm voxel
size, TE = 20 ms, TR = 1030 ms, 60° flip angle, a 240 mm field of view and 60 slices per volume. For each session, a
fieldmap (2.4x2.4x2.4mm) was acquired to reduce spatial distortions. Bias correction was applied directly to the scan. A
structural scan was obtained with slice thickness = 1 mm; TR = 1900 ms, TE = 3.97 ms and 1x1x1 mm voxel size.
Area of acquisition A whole-brain scan was used.
Diffusion MRI Used Not used
Preprocessing
Preprocessing software Imaging data was analysed using FMRIB’s Software Library (FSL:https://fsl.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl/fslwiki). Preprocessing
stages included motion correction, correction for spatial distortion by applying the fieldmap, brain extraction, high-pass
filtering and spatial smoothing using full-width half maximum of 5mm.
Normalization Images were co-registered to an individuals’ high-resolution structural image and then nonlinearly registered to the
MNI template using 12 degrees of freedom. (Jenkinson and Smith, 2001).
Normalization template The MNI152 template was used as is standard in FSL.
Noise and artifact removal Preprocessing stages included motion correction, correction for spatial distortion by applying the fieldmap, brain
extraction, high-pass filtering and spatial smoothing using full-width half maximum of 5mm.
Volume censoring No volume censoring was used.
Statistical modeling & inference
Model type and settings We used univariate models. First, we estimated contrasts for each subject and condition (social and non-social)
separately with a first-level analysis using FSL FEAT. We used a second-level analysis to average across conditions within
subjects (FIXED effects). Finally, we used FLAME 1 (mixed model) as a third level analysis to combine data across
subjects.
Effect(s) tested We used two whole-brain analyses. First, we tested for effects of accuracy and uncertainty prediction differences across
all trials during the decision phase (Figure 4A). The second whole-brain analysis tested for effects of uncertainty
prediction during exploration and exploitation during the decision phase (Figure 5A;B). A contrast between both phases
for uncertainty prediction difference is depicted in Figure 5C. The full models are described in the methods including the
regressors entered in the analyses: see fMRI-GLM1 amd fMRI-GLM2.
Specify type of analysis: Whole brain ROI-based Both
4
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
In the main manuscript, we used ROI to analyse neural effects in vmPFC. For all analyses, we used
unbiased ROI selections: if we tested for an accuracy prediction difference effect (Figure 7), then we used
an unbiased ROI extracted from the whole-brain corrected vmPFC effect associated with the uncertainty
Anatomical location(s)
prediction difference (Figure 4A-i). If we tested for an uncertainty prediction difference or repetition
effect associated with uncertainty (Figure 4C; Figure6B, respectively), then we used an unbiased ROI
extracted from the whole-brain cluster-corrected accuracy prediction differences in vmPFC (Figure 4A-ii).
Statistic type for inference Whole-brain clusters were corrected with family family-wise error cluster correction of z>2.3 and p<0.05, two-tailed.
(See Eklund et al. 2016)
Correction Family-wise error cluster correction (z > 2.3 and p = 0.05).
Models & analysis
n/a Involved in the study
Functional and/or effective connectivity
Graph analysis
Multivariate modeling or predictive analysis