
===== PAGE 1/9 =====
Opendata:N/A Editedby:DanielLakens
Meta-Psychology,2021,vol5,MP.2019.1645 Openmaterials:N/A Reviewedby:J.Gottfried,M.Wolf
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2019.1645 Openandreproducibleanalysis:N/A Analysisreproducedby:N/A
Articletype:Commentary Openreviewsandeditorialprocess:Yes AllsupplementaryfilescanbeaccessedatOSF:
PublishedundertheCC-BY4.0license Preregistration:N/A https://osf.io/afusj/
The Validation Crisis in Psychology
Ulrich Schimmack
Department of Psychology, University of Toronto Mississauga
Abstract
CronbachandMeehl(1955)introducedtheconceptofconstructvalidityanddescribedhowresearcherscandemon-
strate that their measures have construct validity. Although the term construct validity is widely used, few re-
searchersfollowCronbachandMeehl’srecommendationtoquantifyconstructvaliditywiththehelpofnomological
networks. Asaresult,theconstructvalidityofmanypopularmeasuresinpsychologyisunknown. Icallforrigorous
tests of construct validity that follow Cronbach and Meehl’s recommendations to improve psychology as a science.
Without valid measures even replicable results are uninformative. I suggest that a proper program of validation
research requires a multi-method approach and causal modeling of correlations with structural equation models.
Constructvalidityshouldbequantifiedtoenablecost-benefitanalysesandtoreplaceexistingmeasureswithbetter
measuresthathavesuperiorconstructvalidity.
Keywords: Measurement, Construct Validity, Convergent Validity, Discriminant Validity, Structural Equation Model-
ing;NomologicalNetworks
Nine years ago, psychologists started to realize that example, research on intelligence that uses hair length
theyhaveareplicationcrisis. Manypublishedresultsdo as a measure of intelligence would be highly mislead-
not replicate in honest replication attempts that allow ing; highly replicable gender differences in hair length
the data to decide whether a hypothesis is true (Open wouldbeinterpretedasevidencethatwomenaremore
Science Collaboration, 2015). One key problem is that intelligent than men. This inference would be false be-
original studies often have low statistical power (Co- causehairlengthisnotavalidmeasureofintelligence,
hen,1962;Schimmack,2012). Anotherproblemisthat even though the relationship between gender and hair
researchers use questionable research practices to in- length is highly replicable. Thus, even successful and
creasepower,whichalsoincreasestheriskoffalsepos- replicabletestsofatheorymaybefalseifmeasureslack
itiveresults(Johnetal.,2012). Newinitiativesthatare construct validity; that is, they do not measure what
called open science (e.g., preregistration, data sharing, researchersassumetheyaremeasuring.
aprioripoweranalyses,registeredreports)arelikelyto The social sciences are notorious for imprecise use
improvethereplicabilityofpsychologicalscienceinthe of terminology. The terms validity and validation are
future, although progress towards this goal is painfully noexception. Ineducationaltesting,wheretheempha-
slow. Unfortunately, low replicability is not the only sis is on assessment of individuals, the term validation
problem in psychological science. I argue that psychol- has a different meaning than in psychological science,
ogynotonlyhasareplicationcrisis,butalsoavalidation where the emphasize is on testing psychological theo-
crisis. The need for valid measures seems obvious. To ries (Borsboom & Wijsen, 2016). In this article, I fo-
test theories that relate theoretical constructs to each cusonconstructvalidity. Ameasurepossessesconstruct
other (e.g., construct A influences construct B for indi- validity to the degree that quantitative variation in a
viduals drawn from population P under conditions C), measure reflects quantitative variation in the construct
itisnecessarytohavevalidmeasuresofconstructs. For that the measure was design to measure. For exam-
===== PAGE 2/9 =====
2
ple, a measure of anxiety is a valid measure of anxi- of intelligence. For IQ tests to be valid measures of in-
ety if scores on the measure reflect variation in anxi- telligence,itisnecessarytodefinetheconstructofintel-
ety. Hundreds of measures are used in psychological ligenceandtodemonstratethatobservedIQscoresare
sciencewiththepurposeofmeasuringvariationincon- related to unobserved variation in intelligence. Thus,
structs such as learning, attention, emotions, attitudes, construct validation requires clear definitions of con-
values, personality traits, abilities, or behavioral fre- structs that are independent of the measures that are
quencies. Although measures of these constructs are being validated. Without clear definition of constructs,
used in thousands of articles, I argue that very little the meaning of a measure reverts essentially to “what-
is known about the construct validity of these mea- everthemeasureismeasuring,”asintheoldsaying“In-
sures. That is, it is often claimed that psychological telligenceiswhateverIQtestsaremeasuring.”
measures are valid, but evidence for this claim is often
lacking or insufficient. I argue that psychologists could WhatareConstructs
improve the quality of psychological science by follow-
Cronbach and Meehl (1955) define a construct as
ingCronbachandMeehl’s(1955)recommendationsfor
“some postulated attribute of people, assumed to be
constructvalidation. Specifically, Iarguethatconstruct
reflected in test performance (p. 283). The term “re-
validation requires (a) a multi-method approach, (b) a
flected” in Cronbach and Meehl’s definition makes it
causalmodeloftherelationshipbetweenconstructsand
clearthattheydefineconstructsaslatentvariablesand
measures, and (c) quantitative information about the
the process of measurement requires a reflective mea-
correlation between unobserved variation in constructs
surementmodel. Thispointismadeevenclearerwhen
andobservedscoresonmeasuresofconstructs.
they write “It is clear that factors here function as con-
structs (p. 287). Individuals are assumed to have at-
ConstructValidity
tributes; today we may say personality traits or states.
Theclassicarticleon“ConstructValidity”waswritten These attributes are typically not directly observable
by Cronbach and Meehl (1955); two giants in the his- (e.g., kindness rather than height), but systematic ob-
tory of psychology. Every graduate student of psychol- servationsuggeststhattheattributeexists(somepeople
ogyandsurelyeverypsychologistwhowantstovalidate arekinderthanothersacrosstimeandsituations). The
apsychologicalmeasureshouldbefamiliarwiththisar- first step is to develop a measure of this attribute (e.g.,
ticle. The article was the result of an APA task force aself-reportmeasure“Howkindareyou?”). Iftheself-
thattriedtoestablishcriteria, nowcalledpsychometric report measure is valid, variation in the ratings should
properties, that could be used to evaluate psychologi- reflect actual variation in kindness. This needs to be
calmeasures. Inthisseminalarticleonconstructvalid- demonstrated in a program of validation research. For
ity Cronbach and Meehl note that construct validation example, self-ratings should show convergent validity
is necessary “whenever a test is to be interpreted as a with informant ratings, and they should predict actual
measure of some attribute or quality which is not “op- behavior in experience sampling studies or laboratory
erationally defined” (p. 282). This definition makes it settings. Face validity is not sufficient; that is “I am
clearthatthereareothertypesofvalidity(e.g.,criterion kind” is not automatically a valid measure of kindness
validity)andthatnotallmeasuresrequireconstructva- becausethequestiondirectlymapsontheconstruct.
lidity. However, studies of psychological theories that
relate constructs to each other require valid measures ConvergentValidity
of these constructs in order to test psychological theo-
To demonstrate construct validity, Cronbach and
ries. In modern language, construct validity is the re-
Meehl advocate a multi-method approach. The same
lationship between variation in observed scores on a
construct has to be measured with several measures. If
measure (e.g., degree Celsius on a thermometer) and
several measures are available, they can be analyzed
a latent variable that reflects corresponding variation
with factor analysis. In this factor analysis, the factor
in a theoretical construct (e.g., temperature; i.e., aver-
represents the construct and factor loadings show how
age kinetic energy of the particles in a sample of mat-
strongly scores in the observed measures are related to
ter). The problem of construct validation can be illus-
variation in the construct. For example, if multiple in-
trated with the development of IQ tests. IQ scores can
dependent raters agree in their ratings of individuals’
have predictive validity (e.g., performance in graduate
kindness, the common factor in these ratings may cor-
school) without making any claims about the construct
respondtothepersonalitytraitkindness,andthefactor
thatisbeingmeasured(IQtestsmeasurewhateverthey
loadingsprovideevidenceaboutthedegreeofconstruct
measureandwhattheymeasurepredictsimportantout-
validity of each measure (Schimmack, 2010). It is im-
comes). However,IQtestsareoftentreatedasmeasures
portanttodistinguishfactoranalysisofitemsandfactor
===== PAGE 3/9 =====
3
analysis of multiple measures. Factor analysis of items measuresthatsharemethodvariance(e.g.,self-reports)
is common and often used to claim validity of a mea- cannot be used to examine convergent validity. Unfor-
sure. However,correlationsamongself-reportitemsare tunately,fewstudiesuseactualbehaviortovalidateself-
influenced by systematic measurement error (Anusic et reportmeasuresofpersonalitytraits(Baumeister,Vohs,
al., 2009; Podsakoff, MacKenzie, & Podsakoff, 2012). &Funder,2007).
The use of multiple independent methods (e.g., multi-
pleraters)reducestheinfluencesofsharedmethodvari- DiscriminantValidity
ance and makes it more likely that correlations among
The term discriminant validity was introduced by
measures are caused by the influence of the common
Campbell and Fiske (1959). However, Cronbach and
construct that the measures are intended to measure.
Meehlalreadypointedoutthathighorlowcorrelations
Inthesection“Correlationmatricesandfactoranalysis”
can support construct validity. “Only if the underlying
CronbachandMeehl(1955)clarifywhyfactoranalysis
theory of the trait being measured calls for high item
canrevealconstructvalidity. “Iftwotestsarepresumed
inter correlations do the correlations support construct
to measure the same construct, a correlation between
validity” (p. 288). Crucial for construct validity is that
them is predicted (p. 287). The logic of this argument
the correlations are consistent with theoretical expec-
should be clear to any psychology student who was in-
tations. For example, low correlations between intelli-
troduced to the third-variable problem in correlational
gence and happiness do not undermine the validity of
research. Twomeasuresmayberelatedevenifthereis
an intelligence measure because there is no theoreti-
no causal relationship between them because they are
calexpectationthatintelligenceisrelatedtohappiness.
bothinfluencedbyacommoncause. Forexample,cities
In contrast, low correlations between intelligence and
withmorechurcheshavehighermurderrates. Herethe
jobperformancewouldbeaproblemifthejobsrequire
assumed common cause is population size. This makes
problem solving skills and intelligence is an ability to
itpossibletomeasurepopulationsizewithmeasuresof
solveproblemsfasterorbetter.
the number of churches and murders. The shared vari-
It is often overlooked that discriminant validity also
ance between these measures reflects population size.
requires a multi-method approach (e.g., Greenwald,
Thus, we can think about constructs as third variables
McGhee,&Schwartz,1998). Amulti-methodapproach
thatproducesharedvarianceamongobservedmeasures
isrequiredbecausetheupperlimitfordiscriminantva-
of the same construct. This basic idea was refined by
lidity is the amount of convergent validity for different
Campbell and Fiske (1959), who coined the term con-
measuresofthesameconstruct, notavalueof1orthe
vergent validity. Two measures of the same construct
reliability of a scale (Campbell & Fiske, 1959). For ex-
possess convergent validity if they are positively corre-
ample, Martel, Schimmack, Nikolas, and Nigg (2015)
lated with each other. However, there is a catch. Two
examinedmulti-raterdataofchildren’sAttentionDeficit
measuresofthesameconstructcouldalsobecorrelated
and Hyperactivity (ADHD) symptoms. Table 1 shows
for other reasons. For example, self-ratings of kind-
thecorrelationsfortheitems“listens”and“beingorga-
nessandconsideratenesscouldbecorrelatedduetoso-
nized.” The cross-rater-same-item correlations (italics)
cially desirable responding or evaluative biases in self-
show convergent validity of ratings of the same “symp-
perceptions (Campbell& Fiske, 1959). Thus, Campbell
tom” by different raters. The cross-rater-different-item
andFiske(1959)madeclearthatconvergentvalidityis
correlations (bold) show discriminant validity only if
different from reliability. Reliability shows consistency
they are consistently lower than the convergent valid-
inscoresacrossmeasureswithoutexaminingthesource
itycorrelations. Inthisexample,thereislittleevidence
of the consistency in responses. Construct validity re-
ofdiscriminantvaliditybecausecross-constructcorrela-
quires that consistency is produced by variation in the
tions are nearly as high as same-construct correlations.
constructthatameasurewasdesignedtomeasure. For
An analysis with structural equation modeling of these
this reason, reliability is necessary, but not sufficient to
data shows a latent correlation of r = .99 between a
demonstrate construct validity. An unreliable measure
“listening”factorandan“organized”factor. Thisexam-
cannot be valid because there is no consistency, but
pleillustrateswhyitisnotpossibletointerpretitemson
a reliable measure can be invalid. For example, hair
an ADHD checklist as distinct symptoms (Martel et al.,
length can be measured reliably, but the reliable vari-
2015). Moreimportant,theexampleshowsthatclaims
anceinthemeasurehasnoconstructvalidityasamea-
about discriminant validity require a multi-method ap-
sure of intelligence. One cause of the validation crisis
proach.
in psychology is that validation studies ignore the dis-
tinctionbetweensame-methodandcross-methodcorre-
lations (Campbell & Fiske, 1959). Correlations among
===== PAGE 4/9 =====
4
Table 1. Correlation among ratings of ADHD symptoms
Mother Father Teacher Mother Father Teacher
Listen Listen Listen Organized Organized Organized
M-Listen -
F-Listen 0.558 -
T-Listen 0.450 0.436 -
M-Organized 0.664 0.494 0.392 -
F-Organized 0.432 0.561 0.324 0.437 -
T-Organized 0.376 0.407 0.698 0.350 0.304 -
Note. M = Mother, F = Father, T = Teacher, Ratings of child listens and child is organized.
Data from Martel et al. (2015)
QuantifyingConstructValidity low. The limited evidence from some multi-method
studies suggests that about 30% to 50% of the vari-
It is rare to see quantitative claims about con-
anceinratingscalesisvalidvariance(Connelly&Ones,
struct validity in psychology, and sometimes informa-
2010; Zou, Schimmack, & Gere, 2013). Another rea-
tionaboutreliabilityisfalselypresentedasevidencefor
son is that it can be difficult or costly to measure the
construct validity (Flake, Pek, & Hehman; 2017). Most
sameconstructwiththreeindependentmethods,which
method sections include a vague statement that mea-
is the minimum number of measures to quantify valid-
sures have demonstrated construct validity as if a mea-
ity. Two methods are insufficient because it is not clear
sure is either valid or invalid. Contrary to this current
how much validity of each method contributes to the
practice, Cronbach and Meehl made it clear that con-
convergent validity correlation between them. For ex-
struct validity is a quantitative construct and that fac-
ample, a correlation of r = .4 between self-ratings and
tor loadings can be used to quantify validity. “There is
informant ratings is open to very different interpreta-
anunderstandabletendencytoseeka’constructvalidity
tions. “If the obtained correlation departs from the ex-
coefficient’. Anumericalstatementofthedegreeofcon-
pectation, however, there is no way to know whether
struct validity would be a statement of the proportion
the fault lies in test A, test B, or the formulation of the
ofthetestscorevariancethatisattributabletothecon-
construct”(Cronbach&Meehl,1955,p. 300). Ibelieve
structvariable. Thisnumericalestimatecansometimes
thatthefailuretotreatconstructvalidityasaquantita-
be arrived at by a factor analysis” (p. 289). And no-
tive construct is the root cause of the validation crisis
body today seems to remember Cronbach and Meehl’s
in psychology. Every method is likely to have some va-
(1955) warning that rejection of the null-hypothesis,
lidity (i.e., non-zero construct variance), but measures
the test has zero validity, is not the end goal of vali-
with less than 30% valid variance are unlikely to have
dation research. “It should be particularly noted that
muchpracticalusefulnesstotestpsychologicaltheories
rejecting the null hypothesis does not finish the job of
and are inadequate for personality assessment (Schim-
construct validation. The problem is not to conclude
mack,2019). Quantificationofconstructvaliditywould
that the test ’is valid’ for measuring the construct vari-
provideanobjectivecriteriontoevaluatenewmeasures
able. Thetaskistostateasdefinitelyaspossiblethede-
and stimulate development of better measures. Thus,
gree of validity the test is presumed to have" (p. 290).
quantifyingvaliditywouldbeanimportantinitiativeto
Cronbach and Meehl are well aware that it is difficult
improvepsychologicalscience.
to quantify validity precisely, even if multiple measures
One notable exception is the literature in industrial
of a construct are available because factors may not be
andorganizationalpsychology,whereconstructvalidity
perfect representations of constructs. “Rarely will it be
has been quantified (Cote & Buckley, 1987). A meta-
possible to estimate definite construct saturations, be-
analysis of construct validation studies suggested that
cause no factor corresponding closely to the construct
less than 50% of the variance was valid construct vari-
will be available (p. 289). However, broad informa-
ance, and that a substantial portion of the variance is
tion about validity is better than no information about
causedbysystematicmeasurementerror. TheI/Oliter-
validity (Schimmack, 2010). One reason why psychol-
ature shows that it is possible and meaningful to quan-
ogists rarely quantify validity could be that estimates
tifyconstructvalidity. Isuggestthatotherdisciplinesin
of construct validity for many tests are embarrassingly
===== PAGE 5/9 =====
5
psychologyfollowtheirexample. cal models would be more complex and better able to
predictbehavior. Structuralequationmodelingissome-
TheNomologicalNet times called confirmatory factor analysis. In my opin-
ion, the term confirmatory factor analysis has led to
Some readers may be familiar with the term “nomo-
the idea that structural equation modeling can only be
logical net” that was popularized by Cronbach and
used to test whether a theoretical model fits the data
Meehl in their 1995 article. However, few readers will
or not. The consequences of the focus on confirmation
be able to explain what a nomological net is, despite
was to hamper use of structural equation modeling for
thefactthatCronbachandMeehlconsiderednomolog-
construct validation because simplistic models did not
ical nets essential for construct validation. “To validate
fitthedata. Ratherthanmodifyingmodelsaccordingly,
a claim that a test measures a construct, a nomologi-
researchers avoided using CFA for construct validation.
cal net surrounding the concept must exist (p. 291).
For example, McCrae, Zonderman, Costa, Bond, and
Cronbach and Meehl state that “the laws in a nomo-
Paunonen (1996) dismissed structural equation model-
logicalnetworkmayrelate(a)observablepropertiesor
ingasausefulmethodtoexaminetheconstructvalidity
quantities to each other; or (b) theoretical constructs
of Big Five measures because it failed to support their
toobservables;or(c)differenttheoreticalconstructsto
conception of the Big Five as orthogonal dimensions
one another. These “laws” may be statistical or deter-
with simple structure. I argue that structural equation
ministic” (p. 290). I argue that Cronbach and Meehl
modelingisastatisticaltoolthatcanbeusedtotestex-
wouldhaveusedthetermstructuralequationmodel,if
isting models and to explore new models. This flexible
structural equation modeling existed when they wrote
use of structural equation model would be in the spirit
their article. After all, structural equation modeling is
ofCronbachandMeehl’svisionthatconstructvalidation
simply an extension of factor analyses, and Cronbach
is an iterative process that improves measurement and
andMeehldidequateconstructswithfactors,andstruc-
understanding of constructs as the nomological net is
tural equation modeling makes it possible to relate (a)
alteredtoaccommodatenewinformation. Thissugges-
observed indicators to each other, (b) observed indica-
tionhighlightsasimilaritybetweenthevalidationcrisis
tors to latent variables, and (c) latent variables to each
and the replication crisis. One cause of the replication
other. Thus, Cronbach and Meehl essentially proposed
crisis was the use of statistics as a tool that could only
to examine construct validity by modeling multi-trait-
confirm theoretical predictions, p <.05. In the same
multi-methoddatawithstructuralequations. Cronbach
way,confirmatoryfactoranalysiswasonlyusedtocon-
and Meehl also realize that constructs can change as
firm models. In both cases, confirmation bias impeded
moreinformationbecomesavailable. Inthissense,con-
scientificprogressandtheorydevelopment. Abetteruse
structvalidationisanongoingprocessofimprovedun-
ofstructuralequationmodelingistouseitasageneral
derstandingofconstructsandmeasures. Empiricaldata
statisticalframeworkthatcanbeusedtofitnomological
can suggest changes in measures or changes in con-
networks to data and to use the results in an iterative
cepts. For example, empirical data might show that in-
processthatleadstobetterunderstandingofconstructs
telligence is a general disposition that influences many
andbettermeasuresoftheseconstructs. ThisIstheway
differentcognitiveabilitiesorthatitisbetterconceptu-
CFAwasintendedtobeused(Jöreskog,1969).
alized as the sum of several distinct cognitive abilities.
Ideally this iterative process would start with a simple
NetworkModelsareNotNomologicalNets
structural equation model that is fitted to some data.
If the model does not fit, the model can be modified In the past decade, it has become popular to ex-
andtestedwithnewdata. Overtime, themodelwould amine correlations among items with network mod-
become more complex and more stable because core els (Schmittmann et al., 2013). Network models are
measures of constructs would establish the meaning of graphic representations of correlations or partial corre-
aconstruct,whileperipheralrelationshipsmaybemod- lations among a set of variables. Importantly, network
ified if new data suggest that theoretical assumptions models do not have latent variables that could corre-
need to be changed. “When observations will not fit spondtoconstructs. “Networkmodelingtypicallyrelies
into the network as it stands, the scientist has a cer- ontheassumptionthatthecovariancestructureamong
tainfreedominselectingwheretomodifythenetwork” a set of the items is not due to latent variables at all”
(p. 290). The increasing complexity of a model is only (Epskamp et al., 2017, p. 923). Instead, “psychologi-
an advantage if it is based on better understanding of calattributesareconceptualizedasnetworksofdirectly
a phenomenon. Weather models have become increas- relatedobservables”(Schmittmannetal.,2013,p. 43).
ingly more complex and better able to forecast future It is readily apparent that network models are not
weather changes. In the same way, better psychologi- nomologicalnetsbecausetheyavoiddefiningconstructs
===== PAGE 6/9 =====
6
independent of specific operationalizations. “Since has been known for a long time that implicit measures
there is no latent variable that requires causal rele- of self-esteem have low convergent validity (Bosson et
vance,nodifficultquestionsconcerningitsrealityarise” al.,2000),butthisfindinghasnotdeterredresearchers
(Schmittmannetal.,2013,p. 49). Thus,networkmod- fromclaimingthattheself-esteemIATisavalidmeasure
els return to operationalism at the level of the network of implicit self-esteem (Greenwald & Farnham (2000).
components. Eachcomponentinthenetworkisdefined Properevaluationofthisclaimwithmulti-methoddata
by a specific measure, which is typically a self-report shows no evidence of construct validity (Falk et al.,
item or scale. The difficulty of psychological measure- 2015;Schimmack,2019).
ment is no longer a problem because self-report items Consumersshouldalsobewaryofnewconstructs. It
aretreatedasperfectlyvalidmeasuresofnetworkcom- is very unlikely that all hunches by psychologists lead
ponents. The example in Table 1 shows the problem to the discovery of useful constructs. Given the current
withthisapproach. Ratherthanhavingsixindependent state of psychological science, it is rather more likely
network components, the six items in Table 1 appear thatmanyconstructsturnouttobenon-existent. How-
to be six indicators of a single construct that are mea- ever,thehistoryofpsychologicalmeasurementhasonly
sured with systematic and random measurement error. seen development of more and more constructs and
At least for these data, but probably for multi-method more and more measures to measure this expanding
data in general, it makes little sense to postulate direct universeofconstructs. Sincethe1990s,constructshave
causal effects between observed scores. For example, doubled because every construct has been split into an
it makes little sense to postulate that father’s ratings of explicit and an implicit version of the construct. Pre-
forgetfulnesscausallyinfluencedteachers’ratingsofat- sumably, there is even implicit political orientation or
tention. gender identity with little empirical support for these
It is noteworthy that recent trends in network mod- implicit constructs (cf. Schimmack, 2019). The prolif-
eling acknowledge the importance of latent variables eration of constructs and measures is not a sign of a
and relegate the use of network modeling to model- healthy science. Rather it shows the inability of empir-
ingresidualcorrelations(Epskamp, Rhemtulla, &Bors- ical studies to demonstrate that a measure is not valid,
boom, 2017). These network models with latent vari- a construct does not exist, or a construct is redundant
ables are functionally equivalent to structural equation withotherconstructs. Thisismostlyduetoself-serving
models with correlated residuals. Thus, they are no biases and motivated reasoning of test developers. The
longer conceptually distinct from structural equation gains from a measure that is widely used are immense.
models. Articles that introduced popular measures like the Im-
Adetaileddiscussionoflatentnetworkmodelsisbe- plicit Association Test (Greenwald et al., 1998) have
yond the scope of this article. The main point is that someofthehighestcitationrates. Thus,itistemptingto
networkmodelswithoutlatentvariablescannotbeused use weak evidence to make sweeping claims about va-
toexamineconstructvaliditybecauseconstructsareby liditybecausetherewardsforpublishingawidelyused
definition unobservable and can be studied only indi- measureareimmense. Onetaskformeta-psychologists
rectly by examining their influence on observable mea- could be to critically evaluate claims of construct va-
sures. Any direct relationships between observables ei- lidity by original authors because original authors are
ther operationalize constructs or avoid the problem of likelytobebiasedintheirevaluationofconstructvalid-
measurement and implicitly assume perfect measure- ity(Cronbach,1989).
ment.
TheValidationCrisis
Recommendations for Users of Psychological Mea-
Cronbach and Meehl make it clear that they were
sures
skeptical about the construct validity of many psycho-
The main recommendation for users of psychologi- logical measures. “For most tests intended to measure
cal measures is to be skeptical of claims that measures constructs, adequate criteria do not exist. This being
have construct validity. Many of these claims are not the case, many such tests have been left unvalidated,
based on proper validation studies. At a minimum a or a fine-spun network of rationalizations has been of-
measureshouldhavedemonstratedatleastmodestcon- fered as if it were validation. Rationalization is not
vergent validity with another measure that used a dif- construct validation. One who claims that his test re-
ferent method. Ideally, a multi-method approach was flects a construct cannot maintain his claim in the face
used to provide some quantitative information about ofrecurrentnegativeresultsbecausetheseresultsshow
construct validity. Researchers should be wary of mea- that his construct is too loosely defined to yield veri-
suresthathavelowconvergentvalidity. Forexample,it fiable inferences" (p. 291). In my opinion, nothing
===== PAGE 7/9 =====
7
much has changed in the world of psychological mea- havecausaltheoriesofimportantconstructssuchasat-
surement. Flake et al. (2017) reviewed current prac- titudes,personalitytraits,andwellbeingthatcaninform
ticesandfoundthatreliabilityisoftentheonlycriterion aprogramofconstructvalidation. Theindustriallitera-
that is used to claim construct validity. However, relia- tureshowsthatitispossibletoestimateconstructvalid-
bilityofasinglemeasurecannotbeusedtodemonstrate ityevenwithrudimentarycausaltheories(Cote&Buck-
construct validity because reliability is only necessary, ley, 1987), and there are some examples in social and
but not sufficient for validity. Thus, many articles pro- personality psychology where structural equation mod-
vide no evidence for construct validity and even if the eling was used to quantify validity (Schimmack, 2019,
evidenceweresufficienttoclaimthatameasureisvalid, Schimmack, 2010; Zou et al., 2013). Thus, I believe
itremainsunclearhowvalidameasureis. Anothersign improvement of psychological science requires a quan-
thatpsychologyhasavaliditycrisisisthatpsychologists titativeprogramofresearchonconstructvalidity.
today still use measures that were developed decades
ago (cf. Schimmack, 2010). Although these measures Conclusion
could be highly valid, it is also likely that they have
Justlikepsychologisthavestartedtoappreciaterepli-
not been replaced by better measures because quanti-
cation failures in the past years, they need to embrace
tative evaluations of validity are lacking. For example,
validation failures. Some of the measures that are cur-
Rosenberg’s(1965)10-itemself-esteemscaleisstillthe
rently used in psychology are likely to have insufficient
mostwidelyusedmeasureofself-esteem(Bossonetal.,
constructvalidity. Ifthe2010swerethedecadeofrepli-
2000; Schimmack, 2019). However, the construct va-
cation, the 2020s may become the decade of valida-
lidityofthismeasurehasneverbeenquantifiedanditis
tion. It is time to examine how valid the most widely
not clear whether it is more valid than other measures
used psychological measures actually are. Cronbach
ofself-esteem.
andMeehl(1955)outlinedaprogramofconstructvali-
dation research. Ample citations show that they were
WhatistheAlternative?
successful in introducing the term, but psychologists
While there is general agreement that current prac- failed in adopting the rigorous practices they were rec-
ticeshaveseriouslimitations(Kane,2017;Maul,2017), ommending. It is time to change this and establish
there is no general agreement about the best way to clear standards of construct validation that psychologi-
address the validation crisis. Some comments suggest calmeasuresshouldmeet. Mostimportant,validityhas
that psychology might fare better without quantitative tobeexpressedinquantitativetermstoencouragecom-
measurement (Maul, 2017). If we look to the natu- petition for developing new measures of existing con-
ral sciences, this does not appear to be an attractive structswithhighervalidity.
alternative. In the natural sciences progress has been
madebyincreasinglymoresophisticatedmeasurements AuthorContact
of basic units such as time and length (nanotechnol-
I am grateful for the financial support of this
ogy). Meehlwasanearlyproponentofmoreratherthan
work by the Canadian Social Sciences & Hu-
less rigorous methods in psychology. If psychologists
manities Research Council (SSHRC). Correspon-
had followed his advice to quantify validity, psycholog-
dence regarding this article should be addressed
ical science would have made more progress. Thus, I
to ulrich.schimmack@utoronto.ca, Department of
do not think that abandoning quantitative psychology
Psychology, University of Toronto Mississauga,
is an attractive alternative. Others believe that Cron-
3359 Mississauga Road, ON L5L 1C6. ORCID
bachandMeehl’sagendaistooambitious(Kane,2016,
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9456-5536.
2017). “Where the theory is strong enough to support
such efforts, I would be in favor of using them, but in ConflictofInterestandFunding
most areas of research, the required theory is lacking”
Idonothaveaconflictofinterest.
(Kane, 2017, p. 81). This may be true for some areas
of psychology, such as educational testing, but it is not
AuthorContributions
trueforbasicpsychologicalsciencewherethesolepur-
pose of measures is to test psychological theories. In Iamthesolecontributortothecontentofthisarticle.
this context, construct validation is crucial for testing
of causal theories. For example, theories of implicit so- OpenSciencePractices
cialcognitionrequirevalidmeasureofimplicitcognitive
This article earned no Open Science Badges because
processes (Greenwald et al., 1998; Schimmack, 2019).
it is theoretical and does not contain any data or data
Thus,IammoreoptimisticthanKanethatpsychologists
analyses.
===== PAGE 8/9 =====
8
References C.W.(2015). Areimplicitself-esteemmeasures
valid for as-sessing individual and cultural dif-
Anusic, I., Schimmack, U., Pinkus, R. T., & Lock-
ferences? Journal of Personality, 83, 56-68.
wood, P. (2009). The nature and structure
DOI:10.1111/jopy.12082
of correlations among Big Five ratings: The
Flake, J. K., Pek, J., & Hehman, E. (2017).
halo-alpha-beta model. Journal of Personal-
Construct valida-tion in social and per-
ity and Social Psychology, 97(6), 1142-1156.
sonality research: Current practice and
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0017159
recommendations. Social Psychological
Baumeister, R. F., Vohs, K. D., & Funder, D. C.
and Personality Science, 8(4), 370–378.
(2007). Psy-chology as the science of
https://doi.org/10.1177/1948550617693063
self-reports and finger movements: What-
Greenwald, A. G., & Farnham, S. D. (2000). Us-
ever happened to actual behavior? Per-
ing the Implicit Association Test to mea-
spectives on Psychological Science, 2(4),
sure self-esteem and self-concept. Journal
396–403. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1745-
of Personality and Social Psychology, 79(6),
6916.2007.00051.x
1022-1038. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-
Borsboom, D. & Wijsen, L. D. (2016). Frankenstein’s
3514.79.6.1022
validity monster: The value of keeping politics
Greenwald, A.G., McGhee, D.E., & Schwartz, J.L.K.
andscienceseparated. AssessmentinEducation:
(1998). Measuringindividualdifferencesinim-
Principles, Policy & Practice, 23, 281-283. DOI:
plicit cognition: The Implicit Association Test.
10.1080/0969594X.2016.1141750
JournalofPersonalityandSocialPsychology,74,
Bosson, J. K., Swann, W. B., Jr., & Pennebaker,
1464–1480.
J. W. (2000). Stalking the perfect mea-
John, L. K., Loewenstein, G., & Prelec, D. (2012).
sure of implicit self-esteem: The blind
Measuring the prevalence of questionable re-
men and the elephant revisited? Journal
search practices with incentives for truth
of Personality and Social Psychology, 79(4),
telling. Psychological Science, 23, 524–532.
631-643. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-
doi:10.1177/0956797611430953
3514.79.4.631
Jöreskog, K.G. (1969). A general approach to
Campbell, D. T., & Fiske, D. W. (1959). Con-
confirmatory maximum likelihood fac-
vergent and dis-criminant validation
tor analysis. Psychometrika, 34, 183-202.
by the multitrait-multimethod ma-trix.
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02289343
Psychological Bulletin, 56(2), 81-105.
Kane, M. T. (2016) Explicating validity. Assessment in
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/h0046016
Education: Principles,Policy&Practice,23,198-
Cohen, J. (1962). Statistical power of abnormal–social
211,DOI:10.1080/0969594X.2015.1060192
psy-chological research: A review. Journal of
Kane, M. T. (2017) Causal interpretations of psy-
Abnormal and Social Psychology, 65, 145–153.
chological attributes.Measurement: Interdisci-
doi:10.1037/h0045186
plinary Research and Perspectives, 15, 79-82,
Connelly, B. S., & Ones, D. S. (2010). An other-
DOI:10.1080/15366367.2017.1369771
perspective on personality: Meta-analytic inte-
Martel, M. M., Schimmack, U., Nikolas, M., & Nigg, J.
gration of observers’ accuracy and predictive
T.(2015). Integrationofsymptomratingsfrom
validity. Psychological Bulletin, 136(6), 1092-
multiple informants in ADHD diagnosis: a psy-
1122.http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0021212
chometricmodelwithclinicalutility. Psycholog-
Cote,J.A.,&Buckley,M.R.(1987). Estimating
icalAssessment,27(3),1060-71.
trait,method,anderrorvariance: Generalizing
Maul. A. (2017). Moving beyond traditional methods
across 70 construct validation studies. Journal
of survey validation. Measurement: Interdis-
ofMarketing,24,315-318.
ciplinaryResearchandPerspectives,15,103-109.
Cronbach, L.J.(1989). Constructvalidationafterthirty
https://doi.org/10.1080/15366367.2017.1369
years. InR.L.Linn(Ed.), Intelligence: Measure-
786
ment, theory, and public policy(pp. 147-171).
McCrae, R. R., Zonderman, A. B., Costa, P. T., Jr.,
Chicago: UniversityofIllinoisPress
Bond, M. H., & Paunonen, S. V. (1996). Eval-
Cronbach, L. J., & Meehl, P. E. (1955). Con-
uating replicability of factors in the Revised
struct validity in psychological tests.
NEO Personality Inventory: Confirmatory fac-
Psychological Bulletin, 52(4), 281-302.
tor analysis versus Procrustes rotation.Journal
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/h0040957
of Personality and Social Psychology, 70(3),
Falk, C., Heine, S. J., Takemura, K., Zhang, C., & Hsu,
===== PAGE 9/9 =====
9
552-566. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022- ticles. Psychological Methods, 17(4), 551-566.
3514.70.3.552 http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0029487
Open Science Collaboration. (2015). Estimating the
Schimmack (2019). The Implicit Association
repro-ducibility of psychological science. Sci-
Test: A method in search of a con-
ence,349,(6251),943-950.
struct. Perspectives on Psychological Science,
Podsakoff, P. M., MacKenzie, S. B., Podsakoff, N. P.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1745691619863798
(2012). Sources of Method Bias in Social Sci-
Schmittmann, V. D., Cramer, A. O. J., Waldorp, L. J.,
ence Research and Recommendations on How
Epskamp, S., Kievit, R. A., & Borsboom, D.
to Control It. Annual Review of Psychology, 63,
(2013). Deconstructing the construct: A net-
539-569.
workperspectiveonpsychologicalphenomena.
Rosenberg, M. (1965). Society and the Adolescent Self-
NewIdeasinPsychology,31,43-53.
Image. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.newideapsych.2011.
Press.
02.007
Schimmack, U. (2010). What multi-method data
tell us about construct validity. European Zou, C., Schimmack, U., & Gere, J. (2013). The
Journal of Personality, 24, 241–257. DOI: validity of well-being measures: A multiple-
10.1002/per.771 indicator–multiple-rater model. Psycho-
Schimmack, U. (2012). The ironic effect of significant logical Assessment, 25(4), 1247-1254.
results on the credibility of multiple-study ar- http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0033902