
===== PAGE 1/14 =====
Meta-Psychology, 2021, vol 5, MP.2019.1916, Open data: N/A Edited by: Moritz Heene
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2019.1916 Open materials: N/A Reviewed by: J. McGrane, A. Kyngdon
Article type: Original Article Open and reproducible analysis: Yes Analysis reproduced by: André Kalmendal
Published under the CC-BY4.0 license Open reviews and editorial process: Yes All supplementary files can be accessed at the OSF pro-
Preregistration: No ject page: https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/GTN9C
Levels of measurement and statistical analyses
Matt N. Williams
School of Psychology, Massey University
Most researchers and students in psychology learn of S. S. Stevens’ scales or “levels” of
measurement (nominal, ordinal, interval, and ratio), and of his rules setting out which
statistical analyses are admissible with each measurement level. Many are nevertheless
left confused about the basis of these rules, and whether they should be rigidly followed.
In this article, I attempt to provide an accessible explanation of the measurement-theo-
retic concerns that led Stevens to argue that certain types of analyses are inappropriate
with data of particular levels of measurement. I explain how these measurement-theo-
retic concerns are distinct from the statistical assumptions underlying data analyses,
which rarely include assumptions about levels of measurement. The level of measure-
ment of observations can nevertheless have important implications for statistical as-
sumptions. I conclude that researchers may find it more useful to critically investigate
the plausibility of the statistical assumptions underlying analyses than to limit themselves
to the set of analyses that Stevens believed to be admissible with data of a given level of
measurement.
Keywords: Levels of measurement, measurement theory, ordinal, statistical analysis.
place in psychology (specifically psychophysics) did
Introduction not constitute measurement as the term is usually
understood in the natural sciences (i.e., as the esti-
Most students and researchers in psychology mation of the ratio of a magnitude of an attribute to
learn of a division of measurement into four scales: some unit of measurement; see Michell, 1999). Ste-
nominal, ordinal, interval, and ratio. This taxonomy vens attempted to resolve this debate by suggesting
was created by the psychophysicist S. S. Stevens that it is best to define measurement very broadly as
(1946). Stevens wrote his article in response to a “the assignment of numerals to objects or events ac-
long-running debate within a committee of the Brit- cording to rules” (Stevens, 1946, p. 677), but then di-
ish Association for the Advancement of Science vide measurements into four different “scales”.
which had been formed in order to consider the These are now often referred to as “levels” of meas-
question of whether it is possible to measure “sen- urement, and that is the terminology I will predom-
sory events” (i.e., sensations and other psychological inantly use in this paper, as the term “scales” has
attributes; see Ferguson et al., 1940). The committee other competing usages within psychometrics1. Ac-
was partly made up of physical scientists, many of cording to Stevens’ definition of measurement, vir-
whom believed that the numeric recordings taking tually any research discipline can claim to achieve
measurement, although not all may achieve interval
1 For example, the term “scale” is often used to refer to collecting responses (e.g., “a four-point rating scale”).
specific psychological tests or measuring devices (e.g., These contemporary usages are quite different from Ste-
the “hospital anxiety and depression scale”; Zigmond & vens “scales of measurement” and therefore the term
Snaith, 1983). It is also often used to refer to formats for “levels of measurement” is somewhat less ambiguous.
===== PAGE 2/14 =====
WILLIAMS
or ratio measurement. He went on to argue that the In this article, therefore, I attempt to provide an
level with which an attribute has been measured de- accessible description of the rationale for Stevens’
termines which statistical analyses are permissible rules about admissible statistics. I also describe
(or “admissible”) with the resulting data. some major objections to Stevens’ rules, and explain
Stevens’ definition and taxonomy of measure- how Stevens’ measurement-theoretic concerns are
ment has been extremely influential. Although I have different from the statistical assumptions underly-
not conducted a rigorous evaluation, it appears to ing statistical analyses—although there exist im-
be covered in the vast majority of research methods portant connections between the two. I close with
textbooks aimed at students in the social sciences conclusions and recommendations for practice.
(e.g., Cozby & Bates, 2015; Heiman, 2001; Judd et al.,
1991; McBurney, 1994; Neuman, 2000; Price, 2012;
Stevens’ Taxonomy of Measurement
Ray, 2000; Sullivan, 2001). Stevens’ taxonomy is also
often used as the basis for heuristics indicating
Stevens’ definition and taxonomy of measure-
which statistical analyses should be used in particu-
ment was inspired by two theories of measurement:
lar scenarios (see for example Cozby & Bates, 2015).
Representationalism, especially as expressed by
However, the fame and influence of Stevens’ tax-
Campbell (1920), and operationalism, especially as
onomy is something of an anomaly in that it forms
expressed by Bridgman (1927)3. Operationalism (see
part of an area of inquiry (measurement theory)
Bridgman, 1927; Chang, 2009) holds that an attribute
which is rarely covered in introductory texts on re-
is fully synonymous with the operations used to
search methods2. Measurement theories are theo-
measure it: That if I say I have measured depression
ries directed at foundational questions about the
using score on the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI),
nature of measurement. For example, what does it
then when I speak of a participant’s level of depres-
mean to “measure” something? What kinds of attrib-
sion, I mean nothing more or less than the score the
utes can and cannot be measured? Under what con-
participant received on the BDI. Stevens’ definition
ditions can numbers be used to express relations
of measurement— as “the assignment of numerals to
amongst objects? Measurement theory can arguably
objects or events according to rules” (Stevens, 1946,
be regarded as a branch of philosophy (see Tal, 2017),
p. 677)—is based on operationalism. In contrast to
albeit one that has heavily mathematical features.
operationalism, representationalism argues that
The measurement theory literature contains several
measurement starts with a set of observable empir-
excellent resources pertaining to the topic of admis-
ical relations amongst objects. The objects of meas-
sibility of statistical analyses (e.g., Hand, 1996; Luce
urement could literally be inanimate objects (e.g.,
et al., 1990; Michell, 1986; Suppes & Zinnes, 1962), but
rocks), but they could also be people (e.g., partici-
this literature is often written for an audience of
pants in a research study). To a representationalist,
readers who have a reasonably strong mathematical
measurement consists of transferring the knowledge
background, and can be quite dense and challeng-
obtained about the empirical relations amongst ob-
ing. This means that, while many students and re-
jects (e.g., that granite is harder than sandstone) into
searchers are exposed to Stevens’ rules about ad-
numbers which encode the information obtained
missible statistics, few are likely to understand the
about these empirical relations (see Krantz et al.,
basis of these rules. This can often lead to significant
1971; Michell, 2007).
confusion about important applied questions: For
Stevens suggested that levels of measurement
example, is it acceptable to compute “parametric”
are distinguished by whether we have “empirical op-
statistics using observations collected with a Likert
erations” (p. 677) for determining relations (equality,
scale?
rank-ordering, equality of differences, and equality
of ratios). This is an idea that appears to have been
2 By way of example, the well-known textbook “Psycho- measurement theories discussed in this section (opera-
logical Testing: Principles, Applications, & Issues” by tionalism, representationalism, and the classical theory
Kaplan and Saccuzzo (2018) covers Stevens’ taxonomy of measurement).
and rules about permissible statistics (albeit without at- 3 See McGrane (2015) for a discussion of these competing
tribution to Stevens), but does not mention any of the influences on Stevens’ definition of measurement.
===== PAGE 3/14 =====
LEVELS OF MEASUREMENT AND STATISTICAL ANALYSES
influenced by representationalism (representation- other objects are noticeably different. For example,
alism being a theory that concerns the use of num- imagine we have a group of university students, and
bers to represent information about empirical rela- via the empirical operation of looking up their aca-
tions). Nevertheless, an influence of operationalism demic records we can determine that some of the
is apparent here also: To Stevens, the level of meas- students are psychology majors while some are
urement of a set of observations depended on business majors. If we wished to compare the psy-
whether an empirical operation for determining chology students and the business students with re-
equality, rank-ordering, equality of differences spect to some other attribute, we might record in-
and/or equality of ratios was applied (regardless of formation about the participants and their majors in
the degree to which the empirical operation pro- a dataset. For the sake of convenience, we might do
duced valid determinations of these empirical rela- so by recording their majors numerically. Specifi-
tions). cally, we might enter a 0 in a “Major” column in the
While Stevens’ definition and taxonomy of meas- dataset for each of the psychology students, and a 1
urement incorporates both representational and for each of the business students. In doing so, ac-
operationalist influences, there is a third theory of cording to Stevens, we would have accomplished
measurement that he did not incorporate: The clas- nominal measurement. Importantly, there are many
sical theory of measurement. This theory of meas- coding rules that would work just as effectively at
urement has been the implicit theory of measure- conveying the information we have about partici-
ment in the physical sciences since classical antiq- pants’ majors. For example, we could just as well use
uity (Michell, 1999). The classical theory of measure- 1 to indicate a psychology student and 0 to indicate
ment states that to measure an attribute is to esti- a business student, or -10 to indicate a psychology
mate the ratio of the magnitude of an attribute to a student and 437.3745 to indicate a business student.
unit of the same attribute. For example, to say that As long as students’ majors are recorded by assign-
we have measured a person’s height as 185cm means ing the psychology students one fixed number and
that we have estimated that the person’s height is business students another, any two numbers would
185 times that of one centimetre (the unit). The clas- work just as well at conveying what we have ob-
sical theory of measurement suggests that only served about the students.
some attributes—quantitative attributes—have a
Ordinal
structure such that their magnitudes stand in ratios
to one another. A set of axioms demonstrating what Ordinal measurement is produced when we have
conditions need to be met for an attribute to be
an empirical operation that allows us to determine
quantitative were determined by the German math-
that some objects are greater or lesser than others
ematician Otto Hölder (1901; for an English transla-
with respect to some attribute. Imagine, for exam-
tion see Michell & Ernst, 1996). Because the focus of
ple, that we are interested in the attribute satisfac-
this article is on Stevens’ arguments, I will not cover
tion with life. We perform the empirical operation of
the classical theory of measurement further in this
asking three participants (Hakim, Jeff, and Sarah) to
article, but excellent introductions can be found in
respond to the question “In general, how satisfied
Michell (1986, 1999, 2012). It may suffice at this point
are you with your life?” (see Cheung & Lucas, 2014,
to note that from a classical perspective, Stevens’
p. 2811), with response options of very dissatisfied,
“nominal” and “ordinal” levels do not constitute
moderately dissatisfied, moderately satisfied, and
measurement at all.
very satisfied. We discover that Hakim indicates that
Stevens defined his four scales or levels of meas-
he is very satisfied with life, while Jeff is moderately
urement as follows.
satisfied, and Sarah is moderately dissatisfied. We
have thus performed an empirical operation that al-
Nominal
lows us to determine whether each of these partici-
According to Stevens (1946), nominal measure- pants has more or less life satisfaction than another.
ment is produced when we have an empirical oper- If we are to record this information numerically,
ation that allows us to determine that some objects there are many possible coding rules that could con-
are equivalent with respect to some attribute, while
===== PAGE 4/14 =====
WILLIAMS
vey the information collected about the life satisfac- lower than if we placed the thermometer in a living
tion of our participants, but there is a restriction: room. It will be lower again if we place the thermom-
The number assigned to Hakim must be higher than eter in a freezer. If we are willing to assume that
the number assigned to Jeff, which must be higher mercury expands with increasing temperature, this
again than that assigned to Sarah. Any such coding empirical observation allows us to determine that,
rule will record what we have observed: That Hakim with respect to temperature, living room > fridge >
has the highest level of life satisfaction, followed by freezer.
Jeff, followed by Sarah. So, we could assign Hakim a This observation alone would be a purely ordinal
life satisfaction score of 3, Jeff a score of 2, and Sarah one. However, we can also use a ruler to measure
a score of 1. Or we could also assign Hakim a score the highest point reached by the mercury in each lo-
of 1234, Jeff a score of 6, and Sarah a score of 0.45. cation. By this method, we can determine whether
Either of these two coding rules records the ob- the distance the mercury expands by when moved
served ordering Hakim > Jeff > Sarah, and from Ste- from the freezer to the fridge is more, the same, or
vens’ perspective each would be just as adequate as less than the distance it expands by when moved
the other. However, we could not assign Hakim a from the fridge to the living room. If we are willing
score of 3, Jeff a score of 1, and Sarah a score of 2; to assume that the relationship between tempera-
this would imply that Sarah has higher life satisfac- ture and the height of the mercury in the thermom-
tion than Jeff, which conflicts with the empirical in- eter is linear within the range of temperatures ob-
formation we have collected. Formally, any coding served4, then we can also empirically compare dif-
system within the class of monotonic transfor- ferences between observations. For example, we
mations will equivalently convey the information might attach a ruler to our tube of mercury, and ob-
that we have about the participants. In other words, serve that the difference in the height of the mer-
if we have assigned numeric scores to the partici- cury between the living room and the fridge is 5 mm,
pants such that Hakim > Jeff > Sarah, then we can while the difference between the height of the mer-
transform those numeric scores in any way provided cury in the fridge and in the freezer is 10 mm. Given
that the order of the scores (Hakim > Jeff > Sarah) our assumption of linear expansion of mercury with
remains the same. temperature, this implies that the difference in tem-
perature between the fridge and the living room is
Interval twice5 the difference in temperature between the
freezer and the fridge. Because we have an empirical
Interval measurement is produced when, in ad-
operation that allows us to compare differences in
dition to having an empirical operation that allows
temperature, we have achieved interval measure-
us to observe that some objects are greater or less
ment.
than others with respect to some attribute, we have
The information we have collected about the
an empirical operation that allows us to determine
temperature of the fridge, the freezer, and the living
whether the difference between a pair of objects is
room can be recorded via a variety of coding rules,
greater than, less than, or the same as the difference
but there is now an additional restriction: Not only
between another pair of objects. The classic exam-
must the coding rule preserve the observed order-
ple of an interval scale is temperature when meas-
ing living room > fridge > freezer, but the difference
ured via a mercury thermometer (i.e., a narrow glass
between the number we assign to the fridge and the
tube containing mercury, with a bulb at the bottom,
one we assign to the freezer must be twice the dif-
held upright). If we place the thermometer inside a
ference between the number we assign to the living
fridge, we can see that the mercury level will be
4 The fact that this assumption is necessary points to the Suppes and Zinnes’ (1962) description of infinite differ-
important role theory can have in measurements; for a ence systems. For the sake of simplicity and brevity I
sophisticated discussion in the context of thermometers have focused here on the simpler scenario of observa-
and the measurement of temperature, see Sherry (2011). tions about ratios of differences.
5 In fact, it is also possible to produce interval measure-
ment based only on observations about order and equal-
ity of differences along with some other conditions; see
===== PAGE 5/14 =====
LEVELS OF MEASUREMENT AND STATISTICAL ANALYSES
room and the fridge. We could record the freezer as of these pens end to end with one another and ob-
having a temperature of 0, the fridge a temperature serve that the rolling pin appears to be equal in
of 2, and the living room a temperature of 3. Or we length to the three pens6. In other words, we have
could record the freezer as having a temperature of observed that the ratio of the length of the rolling
5, the fridge a temperature of 15, and the living room pin to that of the pen is 3. Therefore, we have
a temperature of 20. But we should not record the achieved ratio measurement.
freezer as having a temperature of 0, the fridge a Once again, these observations can be recorded
temperature of 1, and the living room a temperature numerically, but our choice of coding rule is now
of 3; this would imply that the difference in temper- very restricted: Whatever number we assigned as
ature between the living room and the fridge is the length of the rolling pin must be three times the
greater than that between the fridge and the number assigned to the pen. So we might record the
freezer. More formally, if we have a coding rule that pen as having a length of 1 and the rolling pin a
records the information we have collected about length of 3, or the pen a length of 0.5 and the rolling
these temperature, we can apply any linear trans- pin a length of 1.5, but we could not assign the pen a
formation to it (e.g., by multiplying the existing val- length of 1 and the rolling pin a length of 2.
ues by some number and/or adding a constant) More formally, if we have applied a coding rule that
while still adequately representing the information records the information we have collected about the
we have collected about the temperatures. ratios of the lengths of the objects, then the only
It is worth emphasising here that it is the fact we transformation we can apply to the numeric values
can empirically compare differences between tem- is multiplying them by some constant.
peratures that implies that we have achieved inter-
val measurement. The argument has sometimes
Stevens’ “Admissible Statistics”
been made (e.g., Carifio & Perla, 2008) that while the
responses to a rating scale item (as in the earlier ex-
The connection Stevens drew between levels of
ample for life satisfaction) are ordinal in nature, a
measurement and statistical analysis was this: Given
score created by summing the responses to multiple
observations pertaining to a set of objects, there are
items is interval. This argument confuses the issue
a variety of coding rules that one could use to en-
of level of measurement with that of the distribution
code the information held about the empirical rela-
of a variable. The act of summing ordinal observa-
tions amongst objects. Furthermore, if we consider
tions may increase the degree to which the distribu-
the four levels of measurement on a hierarchy from
tion of scores approximates a normal distribution
ratio at the top to nominal at the bottom, the lower
but does not transform these observations from or-
levels of measurement offer a much more diverse
dinal to interval (because it does not provide an op-
range of coding rules from which one can arbitrarily
eration for determining equality of differences).
select. Statistical analyses, however, may produce
different results depending on which coding rule is
Ratio
used, so we should only use statistical analyses that
Imagine, now, that we wish to compare the produce invariant results across the class of coding
lengths of two objects: A pen and a rolling pin. By rules that are permissible for the data we have col-
placing these objects side-by-side we can quickly lected.
establish that the rolling pin is the longer. Let us as- By way of example, let’s return to our measure-
sume that we have several of the same model of pen, ments of life satisfaction from three participants:
each of identical length. Now imagine we lay three Hakim (who was very satisfied with his life), Jeff
6 For the sake of simplicity, the situation I describe here length of the rolling pin if we had a “standard sequence”
is one where the length of one of the objects is exactly of many replicates of the same short length. A ruler
divisible by the length of the other. In reality, it might be measured in millimetres, for example, just represents a
the case that the rolling pin is slightly longer than three sequence of identical one-millimetre lengths laid end to
pens, such that I can conclude only that the ratio of the end. For a more rigorous treatment of this topic, see
length of the rolling pin to the pen falls in the interval [3, Krantz et al. (1971)
4]. But we could obtain a more precise estimate of the
===== PAGE 6/14 =====
WILLIAMS
(moderately satisfied), and Sarah (moderately dis- hand, if we compare the two samples using a Mann-
satisfied). Imagine now that we recruit a fourth par- Whitney U test, the resulting p value is identical
ticipant, Ming, who transpires to be very dissatisfied across the two coding rules (being p = .33). This is
with life. We wish to use these four participants to the case for the simple reason that the Mann-Whit-
test the hypothesis that owning a pet is associated ney U is calculated using the ranks of the observa-
with increased life satisfaction. We ask our partici- tions rather than their numeric coded values. As
pants whether they each own a pet; it turns out that such, we might argue that the Mann-Whitney U sta-
Hakim and Jeff do, while Sarah and Ming do not. We tistic and its associated p value is invariant across
can now proceed to comparing the life satisfaction the class of permissible transformations with ordi-
of these two groups of participants. Recall, though, nal data, whereas the Student’s t test is not, and that
that we have only ordinal observations of life satis- as such the Mann-Whitney U is the more appropri-
faction, and can apply any coding rule to our obser- ate test.
vations that preserves the ordering Hakim > Jeff > Stevens went on to set out a list of statistical
Sarah > Ming. The outcomes of two such coding analyses that he believed would produce invariant
rules are displayed in Table 1. results for variables of each level of measurement.
For example, he suggested that a median is admissi-
ble as a measure of central tendency for an ordinal
Table 1
variable, since the case (or pair of cases) that falls at
Example Life Satisfaction Data
the median will always be the same across any mon-
Life satisfaction otonic transformation of the variable, even if the nu-
Partici- Owns Qualitative Coding Coding meric value of the median will not. On the other
pant pet? response rule one rule two hand, he suggested that a mean is not an admissible
Hakim Yes Very 4 1002
measure of central tendency with ordinal data, be-
satisfied
cause both the actual value of the mean and the case
Jeff Yes Moderately 3 1000
to which it most closely corresponds will both differ
satisfied
across monotonic transformations of the observa-
Mean (SD) 3.5 (0.71) 1001 (1.41)
tions. In noting these distinctions, it is clear there
Sarah No Moderately 2 1
exists a degree of ambiguity about what constitutes
dissatisfied
Ming No Very 1 0 “invariance”. Michell (1986) and Luce et al. (1990)
dissatisfied provide more formal examination of the type of in-
Mean (SD) 1.5 (0.71) 0.5 (0.71) variance that is implied by Stevens’ arguments.
Note. Coding rule one: Very dissatisfied = 1, moderately
dissatisfied = 2, moderately satisfied = 3, very satisfied = 4. Parametric and Non-Parametric Statistics
Coding rule two: Very dissatisfied = 0, moderately dissat-
It is common for authors to claim that the issue
isfied = 1, moderately satisfied = 1000, very satisfied = 1002.
of admissibility raised by Stevens implies that para-
metric statistical analyses should only be used with
If we applied a Student’s t test to compare the
interval or ratio data (e.g., Jamieson, 2004; Kuzon et
mean life satisfaction ratings of the two groups (pet
al., 1996). Broadly speaking, a parametric analysis is
owners, non- pet owners), we would discover that
one that involves an assumption that observations
the results differ depending on which coding rule we
or errors are drawn from a specific probability dis-
use. For coding rule one, the mean difference in life
tribution, such as the normal distribution (see Alt-
satisfaction between the pet owners and the non-
man & Bland, 2009). Some statistical analyses (e.g.,
pet owners is 2, and this difference is not statistically
rank-based tests such as the Mann-Whitney U) are
significant, t(2) = 2.83, p = .106. But for coding rule
non-parametric and also produce invariant results
two, the mean difference in life satisfaction is
across monotonic transformations of the outcome
1000.5, and this difference is statistically significant,
variable, and thus comply with Stevens’ rules about
t(2) = 894.87, p < .001. Thus, it seems that the out-
admissible statistics with ordinal data. However,
come of the Student’s t test varies across these two
there certainly exist non-parametric tests that
equally permissible coding rules, which does not
would not be considered as admissible for use with
seem like a satisfactory state of affairs. On the other
===== PAGE 7/14 =====
LEVELS OF MEASUREMENT AND STATISTICAL ANALYSES
ordinal data by Stevens. For example, a permutation should act in such a way as to permit such generali-
test to compare two means (see Hesterberg et al., sations.
2002) is non-parametric—it does not assume that The second objection is the presence of internal
the errors or observations are drawn from any spe- inconsistency in Stevens’ prohibitions. Specifically,
cific probability distribution—but it will not produce Stevens was extremely liberal in his definition of
invariant p values across monotonic transfor- measurement (any assignment of numbers to ob-
mations of the observations. As such, Stevens’ rules jects is enough to be measurement), and likewise lib-
about admissibility are not accurately described as eral in how he distinguished levels of measurement.
applying to whether “parametric” analyses can be For example, he argued that all that is needed to
utilised. Cliff (1996) uses the term ordinal statistics achieve interval measurement of an attribute is an
to describe those analyses whose conclusions will be empirical operation for determining equality of dif-
unaffected by monotonic transformations of the ferences of the attribute (regardless of the validity
variables; this term can be helpful when describing of this operation, or the structure of the attribute it-
those analyses that Stevens would have classed as self). Taken literally, this would imply that I could
permissible with ordinal data. achieve “interval” measurements of film quality by
applying the empirical operation of asking a group
Objections to Stevens’ Claims about Admissibility of participants whether they perceive there to be a
larger difference in quality between Saw IV and
A range of objections to Stevens’ claims about the
Maid in Manhattan than between Maid in Manhat-
relationship between levels of measurement and ad-
tan and The Godfather (regardless of whether par-
missible statistical analysis have been offered in the
ticipants actually have any meaningful way of com-
literature. I will not attempt to cover these compre-
paring these differences, or whether “film quality” is
hensively; excellent summaries can be found in Vel-
actually a quantitative attribute). When the defini-
leman and Wilkinson (1993), and Zumbo and Kroc
tion of what constitutes a particular level of meas-
(2019). In this section, I will focus on just three core
urement is so loose it makes little sense to make the
objections.
level of measurement a strict determining factor for
The first fundamental objection to Stevens’ dic-
which statistical analyses may be applied. Even Ste-
tums is simply that researchers may not necessarily
vens himself wavered on the point of how strictly his
desire to make inferences that will be invariant
rules about admissible statistics should be applied:
across all permissible transformations of the meas-
“…most of the scales used widely and effectively by
urements they have observed. For example, con-
psychologists are ordinal scales. In the strictest pro-
sider our earlier example of a researcher attempting
priety the ordinary statistics involving means and
to measure the relationship between owning a pet
standard deviations ought not to be used with these
and satisfaction with life. The researcher might pro-
scales […] On the other hand, for this 'illegal' statis-
ceed by coding responses to a life satisfaction scale
ticizing there can be invoked a kind of pragmatic
as very dissatisfied = 1, moderately dissatisfied = 2,
sanction: In numerous instances it leads to fruitful
moderately satisfied = 3, and very satisfied = 4, and
results” (Stevens, 1946, p. 679).
then perform a statistical analysis. Such a researcher
A final fundamental objection to Stevens’ dictums
might very well see it as entirely irrelevant whether
about admissible statistics is the fact that statistical
her results would remain invariant if she monoton-
tests make assumptions about the distributions of
ically transformed her data using the coding rule
variables and/or errors—not about levels of meas-
very dissatisfied = 0, moderately dissatisfied = 1,
urement. This is the topic I will turn to for the re-
moderately satisfied = 1000, very satisfied = 1002.
mainder of this article.
Amongst the types of generalisations that research-
ers seek (e.g., from samples to populations, from ob-
servations to causes), generalisations from one cod-
Statistical Assumptions
ing rule to another may not always be desired or
claimed. Correspondingly, it may be inappropriate When statisticians evaluate a method for esti-
for methodologists to dictate that researchers mating a parameter (e.g., the relationship between
two variables in a population), an important task is
===== PAGE 8/14 =====
WILLIAMS
to show that the estimation method has particular their nominal Type I error rates and confidence in-
desirable properties. For example, we may desire terval coverage.
that a method for estimating a parameter will pro- In most cases, the assumptions used to prove
duce estimates that are unbiased—that, across re- that statistical tests have particular desirable prop-
peated samplings, do not tend to systematically erties (e.g., unbiasedness, consistency, efficiency),
over- or underestimate the parameter. We may also do not include assumptions about levels of measure-
desire that the estimation method is consistent— ment. It is not correct to say, for example, that a cor-
that the statistic estimated from the sample will relation or a t test or a regression model or an
converge to the true population parameter as we ANOVA directly assume that any of the variables in-
collect more and more observations. And we may volved are interval or ratio. As should be clear by
desire that the estimation method is efficient—that now, the concerns that motivated Stevens’ rules do
it minimises how much variability or noise there is not pertain to statistical assumptions. Rather, they
in the estimates it produces across repeated sam- are measurement-theoretic concerns, pertaining in
ples (see Dougherty, 2007 for more detailed descrip- specific to the question of whether statistical anal-
tions of these concepts). To demonstrate that par- yses will produce results that depend on what has
ticular estimation methods have particular desirable been empirically observed as opposed to arbitrary
properties, statisticians must make assumptions. features of the process used to numerically record
These assumptions are premises that are used to these observations.
form deductive arguments (proofs). If most statistical tests do not make assumptions
For example, a statistical model commonly used about levels of measurement, does this in turn imply
by psychologists is the linear regression model, in that concerns about levels of measurement can
which a participant’s score on an outcome variable7 safely be disregarded? No. The application of statis-
is modelled as a function of their scores on a set of tical analysis with ordinal or nominal data can result
predictor variables multiplied by a set of regression in consequential breaches of statistical assump-
coefficients (plus random error). In this model, the tions. In fact, considering levels of measurement in
distributions of the errors (over repeated samplings) terms of their potential impacts on statistical as-
are typically assumed to be independently, identi- sumptions provides a framework that may be useful
cally and normally distributed with an expected for evaluating the extent to which levels of measure-
value (true mean) of zero, regardless of the combi- ment have implications for data analysis decisions.
nation of levels of the predictor variables for each When researchers apply inferential statistics
participant8 (Williams et al., 2013). Furthermore, we (e.g., significance tests, confidence intervals, Bayes-
assume that the predictor variables are measured ian analyses) they are by definition aiming to make
without error, and that any measurement error in inferences (e.g., from observations to causal effects,
the outcome variable is purely random and uncor- and/or from a sample to a population). The validity
related with the predictors (Williams et al., 2013). If of these inferences will necessarily depend on the
these assumptions hold, then it can be demon- validity of the statistical assumptions made in form-
strated that ordinary least squares estimation will ing these inferences—so, whereas it is possible to
produce estimates of the regression coefficients make an argument that Stevens’ dictums can safely
that are unbiased, consistent, efficient and normally be ignored, this is certainly not the case for statisti-
distributed estimators of the true values in the pop- cal assumptions.
ulation. This in turn means that statistical tests can Below I identify several ways in which the level of
be conducted on the coefficients that will abide by measurement of a set of observations may affect
whether particular statistical assumptions are met. I
7 An outcome variable is often referred to as a “depend- 8 This presentation of assumptions is for a model where
ent” variable, and a predictor variable as an “independ- the predictor values may be either fixed in advance or
ent” variable. I use the more general terminology of pre- sampled from a population. The assumptions of a model
dictor/outcome because some authors reserve the terms where predictor values are fixed in advance are slightly
“independent variable” and “dependent variable” to refer simpler, requiring only that the marginal mean of each
to variables in a true experiment. error term is zero.
===== PAGE 9/14 =====
LEVELS OF MEASUREMENT AND STATISTICAL ANALYSES
make no claim to this being an exhaustive list of such ber line. This implies in turn that values of the un-
mechanisms. I focus specifically on ordinal data be- derlying continuous variable that lie outside the
cause this is the measurement level which most range of the response options will be “censored”. For
commonly causes ambiguity with respect to analysis example, if responses are recorded on a rating scale
decisions in psychology research. I also focus on with response options coded as 1 to 5, values on the
multiple linear regression as the statistical analysis underlying continuous attribute that are higher than
of interest, as this is an analysis framework that en- 5 can only be recorded as 5, while values lower than
compasses many special cases of interest to psy- 1 can only be recorded as 1. This means that, for
chologists (e.g., ANOVA, ANCOVA, t tests), and that those participants whose values of the attribute are
itself forms a special case of other more sophisti- outside the range of the response options, the rec-
cated analysis techniques often applied by psy- orded responses are biased estimates of their levels
chologists (e.g., structural equation models, of the underlying continuous attribute.
mixed/multilevel models, generalised linear mod- Although Liddell and Kruschke do not describe it
els). in these terms, the difference between the ordinal
response and the true underlying values of the con-
Assumption that Measurement Error in Outcome tinuous attribute represents a form of systematic
is Uncorrelated with Predictors measurement error. And because the magnitude of
this error depends on the value of the underlying
One scenario in which a researcher may find
continuous attribute, the presence of any relation-
themselves with a set of ordinal observations is
ship between the predictor variables and the under-
when the attribute they seek to measure is continu-
lying continuous attribute will mean that the meas-
ous, but the observations are obtained in such a way
urement error in the outcome variable is correlated
that this quantitative attribute is discretised. For ex-
with the predictor variables. This constitutes a
ample, we might assume that there exists an under-
breach of the assumptions of a linear regression
lying continuous latent variable “life satisfaction”,
model, and a breach that can seriously distort pa-
and that recording it using a four-point rating scale
rameter estimates and error rates (as demonstrated
such as the one described earlier in this article
by Liddell & Kruschke, 2018). As Liddell and Kru-
means dividing variation in this continuous attribute
schke show, it is also not a problem that is amelio-
into four ordered categories. The assumption that
rated when the predictor variable is formed by sum-
responses to observed items are caused by variation
ming or averaging responses from multiple items. By
in underlying latent attributes reflects a perspective
way of solution, Liddell and Kruschke suggest that
on measurement sometimes referred to as latent
regression models specifically designed for ordinal
variable theory (Borsboom, 2005).
outcome variables (e.g., the ordered probit model)
Liddell and Kruschke (2018) note that when a re-
may be useful in such situations; see also Bürkner
searcher aims to make inferences about the effect of
and Vuorre (2019) for an introduction to a wider
a set of predictor variables on an underlying un-
range of ordinal regression models. Furthermore,
bounded continuous attribute—but the outcome
while the discussion above focuses on ordinal out-
variable is actually recorded as a response in one of
come variables, using an ordinal predictor variable to
a finite number of ordered categories—the partici-
make inferences about the effect of an underlying
pants’ observed ordinal responses can be biased es-
continuous attribute will likewise mean that the un-
timates of their levels of the continuous attribute.
derlying attribute is measured with error, and result
This is the case because a response scale that con-
in a biased estimate of its effect (see Westfall & Yar-
sists of a set of discrete options produces responses
koni, 2016).
that are bounded to fall within a range, whereas the
Admittedly, this is a problem whose salience de-
underlying continuous attribute may not be
pends on whether the researcher believes that a
bounded to fall within that range. For example, if the
continuous attribute underlies an ordinal variable,
underlying continuous attribute is normally distrib-
and wishes to make inferences about the underlying
uted, it will have an unbounded distribution, and
continuous attribute rather than the observed ordi-
could theoretically take any value on the real num-
nal variable. However, making inferences only about
ordinal variables themselves also presents serious
===== PAGE 10/14 =====
WILLIAMS
challenges for statistical analysis, as we will see in as the predictor and procrastination as the out-
the next subsection. come, then we are assuming that increasing perfec-
tionism from 1 to 2 points has exactly the same effect
Non-linearity on procrastination as increasing perfectionism from
2 to 3 points, or from 3 to 4 points, and so forth. But
When social scientists specify statistical models,
if the perfectionism scores are ordinal, this may not
they often assume that relationships between varia-
be plausible: After all, an ordinal scale is one where
bles are linear. For some statistical analyses (e.g.,
we have been unable to compare differences in lev-
Pearson’s correlation), this assumption is intrinsic to
els of the attribute. Consequently, the size of the dif-
the form of analysis itself. In other cases, it is possi-
ference in numeric scores between two participants’
ble to specify that a particular relationship is non-
scores is largely an artefact of the rule we’ve used to
linear, but doing so requires deliberate action from
code observations numerically, and we have no evi-
the data analyst, and the types of non-linear rela-
dence that it bears any connection to the magni-
tionship that can be specified are restricted. For ex-
tudes of the differences in the underlying attribute
ample, multiple linear regression can accommodate
(in this case, perfectionism). As such, even if varia-
some types of non-linear relationships between var-
tion in the attribute underlying the predictor varia-
iables (e.g., polynomial relationships), but the data
ble (perfectionism) has a completely linear effect on
analyst must specify these as part of the model. Fur-
the outcome variable (procrastination), there is no
thermore, only models where the outcome variable
strong reason to assume that there would be a linear
is a linear function of the parameters can be speci-
relationship between the numeric scores.
fied as linear regression models (this is why we call
Exacerbating this problem further is the possibil-
this mode of analysis “linear” regression).
ity that, when we estimate the effect of one psycho-
When a relationship between variables is as-
logical attribute on another, the attribute underlying
sumed to be linear but in fact is not, the applied sta-
the predictor variable may itself not have a linear ef-
tistical model clearly does not capture reality. Even
fect on the outcome variable of interest. After all,
if we accept that a linear regression model is an in-
different scores on a psychological test may not
accurate simplification of reality and wish neverthe-
necessarily represent different levels of some ho-
less to make inferences about the parameters of this
mogenous quantitative attribute, but may instead
model were it fit to the population, the presence of
represent the presence or absence of qualitatively
non-linearity will mean that the statistical assump-
different properties. Consider, for example, the dif-
tion that the expected value of the errors is zero for
ference between a person who has obtained an IQ
all values of the predictors will be breached, imply-
score of 100 on the Wechsler Adult Intelligence
ing that the estimation method may produce biased
Scale (WAIS-IV; Wechsler et al., 2008) and one who
estimates of the population parameters. Admittedly,
has received an IQ score of 120. These different IQ
for some models an assumption of linearity is met by
scores may reflect qualitative differences between
design: For example, if we estimate the effect of an
the participants. For example, the second person
experimentally manipulated binary variable on an
may have elements of general knowledge that the
outcome variable, it will obviously be possible for a
first person does not, thus achieving a higher score
straight line to perfectly connect the two group
on the Information subtest, or know how to apply
means. But in many situations—especially when we
the strategy of “chunking” digits so as to achieve a
are trying to estimate effects of measured psycho-
higher score on the Digit Span subtest. A person
logical variables on one another rather than estimat-
with an IQ score of 140 might have access to quali-
ing the effects of experimental manipulations—an
tatively different items of knowledge and cognitive
implied assumption of linearity could well be false.
skills again. The differences in “intelligence” be-
As an empirical example, consider a study aimed
tween these individuals are not necessarily just dif-
at estimating the effect of perfectionism on procras-
ferences on some homogeneous quantitative attrib-
tination, with both attributes measured using self-
ute, but rather—at least in part—the presence or ab-
report rating scales that we have numerically coded
sence of qualitatively different items of knowledge
such that they each have a range of 1 to 10. If we fit
and cognitive skills. There may be little reason, then,
a simple linear regression model with perfectionism
to assume that each of these qualitative differences
===== PAGE 11/14 =====
LEVELS OF MEASUREMENT AND STATISTICAL ANALYSES
would have identical effects on another psychologi- problem is known as the “bias-variance trade-off”
cal attribute (e.g., job performance; Schmidt, 2002), (James et al., 2013, p. 33). If we apply a simple model
despite the equal differences in numeric scores (100 which incorporates inaccurate assumptions (e.g.,
to 120, 120 to 140). Differences in scores on a variable linear relationships), the resulting estimates may be
that does not represent varying magnitudes of a ho- substantially biased. Applying a more flexible model
mogeneous quantitative attribute but rather quali- (e.g., a polynomial model) may reduce this bias, but
tative differences in the properties of participants at the cost of producing estimates that are more
may result in such a variable having distinctly non- variable across datasets (e.g., overfitting). In the ab-
linear effects on other variables (see Figure 1). sence of a purely statistical solution, this problem
may be addressed by the development of theory to
be more specific about the functional form of rela-
20
tionships, as occurs in mathematical psychology
15 (see Navarro, 2020).
e
m Where models assuming linear relationships are
o 10
c t applied, it is important to apply diagnostic proce-
u
O dures that can detect the presence of non-linearity.
5
Such diagnostics may allow researchers to under-
0 stand and communicate to readers the degree to
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 which an assumption of linearity is a reasonable ap-
Predictor proximation of reality in the specified case, and the
consequent degree to which additional uncertainty
Linear effect Quadratic effect may surround the results. Although a detailed de-
scription of methods for detecting non-linearity in
Segmented effect
relationships is beyond the scope of this paper, per-
haps the most well-known method is plotting resid-
Figure 1. Illustration of three types of effect. The first is a uals against predicted (“fitted”) values to visually
linear effect. The second is a quadratic effect—an effect identify the presence of a non-linear pattern (see
that is not linear, but that can readily be specified within Gelman & Hill, 2007). More formal tests of non-line-
a linear regression framework. The third is a non-linear arity in the context of regression include the RESET
effect that takes the form of a segmented function, where
test (Ramsey, 1969) and the rainbow test (Utts, 1982).
the effect of the predictor variable itself changes abruptly
as the predictor variable increases. This kind of effect is
plausible when the predictor variable is ordinal, but can- Conclusion
not readily be accommodated within a linear regression
framework (at least not without applying a piecewise
At this point it should be clear that I see little rea-
model).
son for contemporary researchers to rigidly follow
Stevens’ dictums about which statistical analyses
What can researchers do about this? Statistical
are admissible with data of particular levels of meas-
analyses that permit the specification of non-linear
urement. A number of strong objections to Stevens’
relationships obviously do exist (e.g., Cleveland &
dictums have been raised in the methodological lit-
Devlin, 1988). However, psychological theories are
erature, of which perhaps the most fundamental is
rarely specific enough to imply the specific func-
that his rules assume a goal on the part of the re-
tional form of relationships. Non-linear models can
searcher to achieve a type of generalisation (infer-
be selected based on empirical data, but basing such
ences that apply across a class of coding rules) that
model specification decisions on empirical data
may not be of interest to the researcher. Further-
alone may (at least in the absence of cross-valida-
more, most statistical tests do not directly require
tion) risk overfitting—i.e., selecting overly complex
assumptions about levels of measurement. How-
nonlinear models that do not generalise well outside
the sample they are trained on (Babyak, 2004; Haw-
kins, 2004). In the field of statistical learning, this
===== PAGE 12/14 =====
WILLIAMS
ever, statistical assumptions and measurement-the- Open Science Practices
oretic concerns do intersect in important ways9. My
suggestion that contemporary researchers do not This article earned no Open Science Badges be-
need to follow Stevens’ rules exactly as he stated cause it is theoretical and does not contain any data
them should not be read as implying that research- or data analyses. However, the R-code provided in
ers can safely set aside measurement-theoretic the OSF project was fully reproducible with the
concerns. Indeed, much as Michell (1986) suggests, given example data.
measurement-theoretic issues do have implications
for statistical analysis, just not the simple implica-
References
tions proposed by Stevens. I suggest that research-
ers focus on whether the statistical assumptions of
Altman, D. G., & Bland, J. M. (2009). Parametric v
the analyses they wish to perform are consistent
non-parametric methods for data analysis.
with the observations they have collected, consider-
BMJ, 338, a3167.
ing in doing so how the plausibility of these assump-
https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.a3167
tions may be affected by the level of measurement
Babyak, M. A. (2004). What you see may not be
of the observations. The assumptions that are made
what you get: A brief, nontechnical introduc-
should be clearly communicated to readers and in-
tion to overfitting in regression-type models.
terrogated for plausibility, based both on a priori
Psychosomatic Medicine, 66(3), 411–421.
considerations (e.g., is it likely that an ordinal varia-
https://doi.org/10.1097/01.psy.0000127692.23
ble could have linear effects?) and empirical ones
278.a9
(e.g., to what extent is this set of observations con-
Borsboom, D. (2005). Measuring the mind: Concep-
sistent with a linear relationship?)
tual issues in contemporary psychometrics.
Cambridge University Press.
Author Contact Bridgman, P. W. (1927). The logic of modern physics.
Macmillan.
Correspondence regarding this article should be Bürkner, P.-C., & Vuorre, M. (2019). Ordinal regres-
addressed to Matt Williams, School of Psychology, sion models in psychology: A tutorial. Advances
Massey University, Private Bag 102904, North Shore, in Methods and Practices in Psychological Sci-
Auckland, New Zealand. Email: M.N.Williams@mas- ence, 2(1), 77–101.
sey.ac.nz ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002- https://doi.org/10.1177/2515245918823199
0571-215X Campbell, N. R. (1920). Physics: The elements. Cam-
bridge University Press.
Carifio, J., & Perla, R. (2008). Resolving the 50-year
Conflict of Interest and Funding
debate around using and misusing Likert
scales. Medical Education, 42(12), 1150–1152.
I report no conflicts of interest. This study did
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-
not receive any specific funding.
2923.2008.03172.x
Chang, H. (2009). Operationalism. In E. N. Zalta
Author Contributions (Ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
https://plato.stanford.edu/ar-
I am the sole contributor to the content of this chives/fall2009/entries/operationalism/
article. Cheung, F., & Lucas, R. E. (2014). Assessing the va-
lidity of single-item life satisfaction measures:
Results from three large samples. Quality of
9 Sometimes this connection between measurement and phenomenon—compounding differences over time be-
analysis is very direct. Consider, for example, the “Mat- tween stronger and weaker readers—clearly requires the
thew effect” in reading, where investigating the claimed empirical comparison of differences (i.e., an interval
scale; see Protopapas et al., 2016).
===== PAGE 13/14 =====
LEVELS OF MEASUREMENT AND STATISTICAL ANALYSES
Life Research, 23(10), 2809–2818. James, G., Witten, D., Hastie, T., & Tibshirani, R.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11136-014-0726-4 (2013). An introduction to statistical learning
Cleveland, W. S., & Devlin, S. J. (1988). Locally (Vol. 112). Springer.
weighted regression: An approach to regres- Jamieson, S. (2004). Likert scales: How to (ab) use
sion analysis by local fitting. Journal of the them. Medical Education, 38(12), 1217–1218.
American Statistical Association, 83(403), 596– https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-
610. 2929.2004.02012.x
https://doi.org/10.1080/01621459.1988.104786 Judd, C. M., Smith, E. R., & Kidder, L. H. (1991). Re-
39 search methods in social relations (6th ed.). Holt
Cliff, N. (1996). Answering ordinal questions with Rinehart and Winston.
ordinal data using ordinal statistics. Multivari- Kaplan, R. M., & Saccuzzo, D. P. (2018). Psychological
ate Behavioral Research, 31(3), 331–350. testing: Principles, applications, and issues (9th
https://doi.org/10.1207/s15327906mbr3103_4 ed.). Cengage.
Cozby, P. C., & Bates, S. C. (2015). Methods in behav- Krantz, D. H., Suppes, P., & Luce, R. D. (1971). Foun-
ioral research (12th ed.). McGraw-Hill. dations of measurement: Additive and polyno-
Dougherty, C. (2007). Introduction to Econometrics mial representations (Vol. 1). Academic Press.
(3rd ed.). Oxford University Press. Kuzon, W., Urbanchek, M., & McCabe, S. (1996). The
Ferguson, A., Myers, C. S., Bartlett, R. J., Banister, seven deadly sins of statistical analysis. Annals
H., Bartlett, F. C., Brown, W., Campbell, N. R., of Plastic Surgery, 37, 265–272.
Craik, K. J. W., Drever, J., Guild, J., Houstoun, R. https://doi.org/10.1097/00000637-
A., Irwin, J. O., Kaye, G. W. C., Philpott, S. J. F., 199609000-00006
Richardson, L. F., Shaxby, J. H., Smith, T., Liddell, T. M., & Kruschke, J. K. (2018). Analyzing or-
Thouless, R. H., & Tucker, W. S. (1940). Final re- dinal data with metric models: What could pos-
port of the committee appointed to consider sibly go wrong? Journal of Experimental Social
and report upon the possibility of quantitative Psychology, 79, 328–348.
estimates of sensory events. Report of the Brit- https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jesp.2018.08.009
ish Association for the Advancement of Science, Luce, R. D., Suppes, P., & Krantz, D. H. (1990). Foun-
2, 331–349. dations of Measurement: Representation, axio-
Gelman, A., & Hill, J. (2007). Data analysis using re- matization, and invariance. Academic Press.
gression and multilevel/hierarchical models. McBurney, D. H. (1994). Research methods (3rd ed.).
Cambridge University Press. Brooks/Cole.
Hand, D. J. (1996). Statistics and the theory of McGrane, J. A. (2015). Stevens’ forgotten crossroads:
measurement. Journal of the Royal Statistical The divergent measurement traditions in the
Society: Series A (Statistics in Society), 159(3), physical and psychological sciences from the
445–492. https://doi.org/10.2307/2983326 mid-twentieth century. Frontiers in Psychology,
Hawkins, D. M. (2004). The problem of overfitting. 6. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00431
Journal of Chemical Information and Computer Michell, J. (1986). Measurement scales and statis-
Sciences, 44(1), 1–12. tics: A clash of paradigms. Psychological Bulle-
https://doi.org/10.1021/ci0342472 tin, 100(3), 398–407.
Heiman, G. W. (2001). Understanding research https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.100.3.398
methods and statistics: An integrated introduc- Michell, J. (1999). Measurement in psychology: A
tion for psychology (2nd ed.). Houghton Mifflin. critical history of a methodological concept.
Hesterberg, T., Moore, D. S., Monaghan, S., Clipson, Cambridge University Press.
A., & Epstein, R. (2002). Bootstrap methods and Michell, J. (2007). Representational theory of meas-
permutation tests. In D. S. Moore & G. P. urement. In M. Boumans (Ed.), Measurement in
McCabe (Eds.), Introduction to the practice of economics: A handbook (pp. 19–39). Elsevier.
statistics (4th ed.). Freeman.
Hölder, O. (1901). Die axiome der quantität und die
lehre vom mass. Teubner.
===== PAGE 14/14 =====
WILLIAMS
Michell, J. (2012). Alfred Binet and the concept of Tal, E. (2017). Measurement in science. In E. N. Zalta
heterogeneous orders. Frontiers in Quantita- (Ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
tive Psychology and Measurement, 3, 261. https://plato.stanford.edu/ar-
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2012.00261 chives/fall2017/entries/measurement-science
Michell, J., & Ernst, C. (1996). The axioms of quan- Utts, J. M. (1982). The rainbow test for lack of fit in
tity and the theory of measurement: Translated regression. Communications in Statistics - The-
from part I of Otto Hölder’s German text “Die ory and Methods, 11(24), 2801–2815.
axiome der quantität und die lehre vom mass.” https://doi.org/10.1080/03610928208828423
Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 40(3), 235– Velleman, P. F., & Wilkinson, L. (1993). Nominal, or-
252. https://doi.org/10.1006/jmps.1996.0023 dinal, interval, and ratio typologies are mis-
Navarro, D. (2020). If mathematical psychology did leading. The American Statistician, 47(1), 65–72.
not exist we would need to invent it: A case https://doi.org/10.2307/2684788
study in cumulative theoretical development Wechsler, D., Coalson, D. L., & Raiford, S. E. (2008).
[Preprint]. PsyArXiv. WAIS-IV technical and interpretive manual.
https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/ygbjp Pearson.
Neuman, W. L. (2000). Social research methods (4th Westfall, J., & Yarkoni, T. (2016). Statistically con-
ed.). Allyn & Bacon. trolling for confounding constructs is harder
Price, P. (2012). Research methods in psychology. than you think. PLOS ONE, 11(3), e0152719.
Saylor Foundation. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0152719
Protopapas, A., Parrila, R., & Simos, P. G. (2016). In Williams, M. N., Grajales, C. A. G., & Kurkiewicz, D.
search of Matthew effects in reading. Journal of (2013). Assumptions of multiple regression:
Learning Disabilities, 49(5), 499–514. Correcting two misconceptions. Practical As-
https://doi.org/10.1177/0022219414559974 sessment, Research & Evaluation, 18(11).
Ramsey, J. B. (1969). Tests for specification errors in https://scholar-
classical linear least-squares regression analy- works.umass.edu/pare/vol18/iss1/11/
sis. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Se- Zigmond, A. S., & Snaith, R. P. (1983). The hospital
ries B (Methodological), 31(2), 350–371. anxiety and depression scale. Acta Psychiatrica
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2517- Scandinavica, 67(6), 361–370.
6161.1969.tb00796.x https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-
Ray, W. J. (2000). Methods: Toward a science of be- 0447.1983.tb09716.x
havior and experience (6th ed.). Wadsworth. Zumbo, B. D., & Kroc, E. (2019). A measurement is a
Schmidt, F. L. (2002). The role of general cognitive choice and Stevens’ scales of measurement do
ability and job performance: Why there cannot not help make it: A response to Chalmers. Edu-
be a debate. Human Performance, 15(1–2), 187– cational and Psychological Measurement, 76(6),
210. 1184–1197.
https://doi.org/10.1080/08959285.2002.9668 https://doi.org/10.1177/0013164419844305
091
Sherry, D. (2011). Thermoscopes, thermometers,
and the foundations of measurement. Studies
In History and Philosophy of Science Part A,
42(4), 509–524.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.shpsa.2011.07.001
Stevens, S. S. (1946). On the theory of scales of
measurement. Science, 103(2684), 677–680.
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.103.2684.677
Sullivan, T. J. (2001). Methods of social research.
Harcourt College Publishers.
Suppes, P., & Zinnes, J. L. (1962). Basic measurement
theory. Stanford University.