
===== PAGE 1/21 =====
Meta-Psychology, 2021, vol 5, MP.2020.2470, Open data: Yes Edited by: Rickard Carlsson
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2020.2470 Open materials: Yes Reviewed by: Emil Persson & Nils Kobis
Article type: Replication report Open and reproducible analysis: Yes Analysis reproduced by: André Kalmendal
Published under the CC-BY4.0 license Open reviews and editorial process: Yes All supplementary files can be accessed at the OSF project
Preregistration: Yes page: https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/WUPF4
Revisiting the status quo bias:
Replication of Samuelson and Zeckhauser (1988)
Qinyu Xiao Choi Shan Lam
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
Muhrajan Piara Gilad Feldman
Maastricht University, Netherlands University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
Status quo bias refers to people’s general preference to stick to, or continue with, a pre-
viously chosen option. In two pre-registered experiments with U.S. participants re-
cruited from the Amazon Mechanical Turk (n = 311, n = 316), we attempted to replicate
1 2
four decision scenarios (Question 1, 2, 4, and 6) from Samuelson and Zeckhauser (1988),
the seminal article that provided the first experimental demonstration of the status quo
bias. We found strong empirical support for the status quo bias in three decision scenar-
ios out of the four, including budget allocation (Scenario 1/Question 1 in the original ar-
ticle), investment portfolios (Scenario 3/Question 2), and college jobs (Scenario 4/Ques-
tion 4). However, we failed to find substantial support for the status quo bias in the wagon
color choice scenario (Scenario 2/Question 6). We discuss the implications of our results
and possible explanations using multiple accounts put forward in the status quo bias lit-
erature.
Keywords: status quo bias, judgment and decision making, replication
People tend to favor things as they are. The sta- replications of the original study, as they differed
tus quo bias refers to people’s general tendency to only in terms of physical settings and contextual
stick with a previously chosen option in the face of variables (i.e., those that are beyond researchers’
other alternatives. In a seminal paper, Samuelson control; please refer to Figure 2S and Table 12S in the
and Zeckhauser (1988) surveyed participants with supplementary for details regarding the criteria and
hypothetical decision questions. They found that the classification). Our goal was to revisit these clas-
framing an option as the status quo resulted in a sic findings, to examine whether they withstand the
higher choice rate of that option, compared with test of time, and to accumulate further evidence to
framing it neutrally or as an alternative to the status try and establish more precise effect size estimates
quo (or non-status quo). Further supplementing the (Nosek & Lakens, 2014). We begin by introducing the
experimental results with field evidence, they literature on the status quo bias and the chosen ar-
demonstrated that the status quo bias is pervasive ticle for replication, i.e., Samuelson and Zeckhauser
and profound in people’s decision-making. (1988). We then highlight the motivation for the cur-
In this article, we report two attempts to repli- rent replication study, present the results, and dis-
cate Samuelson and Zeckhauser (1988). Based on cuss their implications.
LeBel et al.’s (2018) criteria for evaluating replica-
tions, we classified our experiments to be very close
===== PAGE 2/21 =====
XIAO, LAM, PIARA, & FELDMAN
2
Status quo bias models, which states that only preference-relevant
features matter in choosing among alternatives
Samuelson and Zeckhauser (1988) were the first (Samuelson & Zeckhauser, 1988). Economists once
to demonstrate the status quo bias using controlled assumed that decision makers have well-defined
experiments. In part of their investigation, they pre- and relatively stable preferences and make decisions
sented a series of hypothetical decision-making accordingly (Kahneman et al., 1991). These prefer-
scenarios and asked participants to choose among ences are determined by the overall value of options
several available options. The scenarios and options for a decision maker (i.e., utility) after the decision
came in two versions: in the neutral version, all op- maker evaluated those features of their concern.
tions were presented equally as they were, without Once their preferences are set, the decision maker
any framing, whereas in the status quo version (SQ), will go for the option with the highest expected util-
one option was framed as the status quo and the ity, ignoring those preference-irrelevant variables.
other options were reframed either as a change or For instance, the order in which the options are pre-
in reference to the status quo option. The options sented or the labels they carry (e.g., a label of being
were effectively the same in both versions. the status quo) should not influence the decision.
Samuelson and Zeckhauser (1988) found that op- Conversely, if we know a decision maker’s choice
tions were chosen more often when framed as the among several options, we can confidently infer that
status quo, compared with when they were framed the chosen option has the highest expected utility
as an alternative to the status quo or without any for, and hence preferred the most by, that person.
framing. The status quo framing consistently led to We can infallibly predict that the same option will be
the highest rate of choice, followed by the neutral chosen regardless of, e.g., how the available options
framing and then by the non-status quo framing. are presented, if there is no alternative with a higher
Additionally, they showed that preference for status expected utility.
quo options became more pronounced as the num- This assumption no longer holds in the case of
ber of options increased (see also Tversky & Shafir, the status quo bias. Samuelson and Zeckhauser
1992; Redelmeier & Shafir, 1995). (1988) showed that a status quo can drastically influ-
People may sometimes be willing to continue ence decision makers’ choices. An option chosen
with the status quo despite its lower utility com- when framed as the status quo may no longer be as
pared to available alternatives (e.g., Suri et al., 2013). preferred when framed as a non-status quo, despite
For instance, Samuelson and Zeckhauser (1988, p. 10) that available options all remained the same. The
described a case where a small town in Germany implications of their results are profound, if we con-
was to be relocated due to a mining project. The au- sider how often in real life we make decisions where
thority offered the townspeople several planning there is a status quo. Arguably, continuing with the
options for the new town, which would be estab- current choice or situation is almost always an op-
lished at the authority’s expense. Surprisingly, the tion.
townspeople opted for a plan quite much like that of Indeed, empirical evidence so far suggests that
the old town. The intricate layout of the old town the status quo bias has a great influence in real life
that had evolved through centuries was unlikely to judgment and decision-making. Unlike the experi-
be efficient in modern times. Nonetheless, people ments by Samuelson and Zeckhauser (1988, Part
chose it, arguably because of their preference for One), where options became the status quo because
the status quo. Apparently, the status quo bias vio- they were so framed, studies on the status quo bias
lates one of the foremost assumptions in rational in real life involved actual past choices. For instance,
decision-making theory that people aim to maxim- Samuelson and Zeckhauser (1988) went to the field
ize expected utility and minimize loss (Tversky & to examine the choice of health insurance plans by
Kahneman, 1991). Should this assumption have held, Harvard employees and the allocation of retirement
the townspeople would have been happy to see their contributions to different funds by faculty through-
new town be built using modern knowledge of city out the U.S. Again, evidence pointed to a prominent
planning but not as a legacy of centuries’ history. status quo bias: Harvard employees tended to stick
The status quo bias challenges yet another, more with the insurance plan they initially chose, despite
specific assumption in rational decision-making the presence of a more attractive option. Teachers
===== PAGE 3/21 =====
REVISITING THE STATUS QUO BIAS 3
across the States tended to maintain one allocation like a series of revolutions rather than an incremen-
ratio towards different retirement funds, though a tal accumulation of small advances (Kuhn, 2012).
change was easy and bore almost no cost. Similarly, New policies are hard to establish, and old ones are
Hartman et al. (1991) surveyed around 1,500 con- hard to abolish. A well-received scientific paradigm
sumers in the U.S. on the reliability and rate of their could dominate researchers’ attention and re-
electricity service. The researchers found that sources for years and even decades. In sum, our ev-
around 60 percent households, regardless of the ac- idence and theoretical conjectures imply that the
tual reliability of the services they received, indi- status quo bias is pervasive in economic, scientific,
cated that they preferred the status quo the most (p. social, and cultural decision-making situations.
149). Johnson and colleagues (1993) looked into the
automobile insurance industry in New Jersey and
Explaining the status quo bias
Pennsylvania, where different status quos were pre-
sent. They found that when given an option to lower
Numerous accounts have been put forward to
insurance rates by reducing the right to sue, 75% of
explain the status quo bias. They fall roughly into
Pennsylvanians chose to retain their full right; in
two categories. Some attempted to accommodate
contrast, when given an option to obtain the full
the bias into a rational decision-making framework,
right to sue by paying higher rates, only 20% of
arguing that the seemingly irrational preference for
those in New Jersey chose that option (p. 48). These
the status quo option can be consistent with the goal
studies have provided strong evidence for the per-
of utility maximization or accounted for axiomati-
vasiveness of the status quo bias in the real world.
cally without appealing to psychology-based expla-
The status quo bias has been a handy tool in ex-
nations (e.g., Dupont & Lee, 2002; Masatlioglu & Ok,
plaining many social phenomena. For instance, Sam-
2005; Nebel, 2015). Others appealed to a series of
uelson and Zeckhauser (1988, p. 9) linked the bias to
non-rational psychological mechanisms in explain-
incumbent office holders’ advantage in elections
ing the status quo preference, such as heuristics, bi-
(see Cox & Morgenstern, 1993; Erikson, 1971; Mu-
ases, and misperceptions (Eidelman & Crandall,
thukrishnan, 1995). Based on their estimation, an in-
2012; Samuelson & Zeckhauser, 1988; see also Ander-
cumbent officer would claim a 59 over 41 percent
son, 2003). We briefly introduce some of these ac-
victory if the officer and a competitor were equally
counts, beginning with those deeming it rational to
preferred without incumbency. In marketing, a wide
prefer the status quo.
range of soft-selling techniques make use of the sta-
tus quo bias. Experienced marketers often induce
Rational accounts
consumers into what is called a trial purchase (Tha-
ler, 1980), where the product can later be returned For those who consider the status quo bias ra-
with full refund. Though a free trial appears to im- tional, people exhibit this “bias” simply because their
pose no loss to consumers, it becomes the status preferences have not changed, they find switching
quo that the consumers will later find it hard to live to a non-status quo costly, or they feel uncertain
without and, therefore, give up the refundable pay- about the outcome of switching (Anderson, 2003;
ment to continue their ownership of the item. Also, Nebel, 2015). One major reason why people resist
the status quo bias may play a role in brand loyalty changes in real life is the cost associated with tran-
(Shi et al., 2018) and pioneering, or first-mover, ad- sitions. Such cost may be trivial in deciding which
vantages, i.e., first entrants into a market obtain dishes to order, but can be overwhelming in cases of
long-term market share advantages over followers changing jobs, moving home, and implementing new
(Kleiser & Wagner, 1999; Lieberman & Montgomery, public rules (Iyengar & Lepper, 2000). If alternatives
1988). Apart from marketing studies, research has do not show clear superiority, people are likely to
also explored the bias in mating choices (Gunaydin stick with the status quo as it is normally easier to
et al., 2018) and technological reforms (Montpetit & do so and it incurs predictable costs.
Lachapelle, 2017). Decision makers often do not have complete in-
From a broader perspective, the status quo bias formation about available choices, and a thorough
may also explain why public policy making is slug- analysis of the pros and cons of each choice may at
gish (Atkinson, 2011) and scientific progress is more times be costly and impractical, even impossible in
===== PAGE 4/21 =====
XIAO, LAM, PIARA, & FELDMAN
4
some cases (Gigerenzer & Selten, 2002; Lieder & Non-rational accounts
Griffiths, 2020). On such occasions where decision
The status quo bias has been linked to loss aver-
makers have a high degree of uncertainty, maintain-
sion, a cognitive misperception whereby people
ing the status quo is a safe and hence rational choice
weigh losses more than equal gains (Tversky &
(Samuelson & Zeckhauser, 1988). If an option has
Kahneman, 1991; Mrkva et al., 2020). Because of this
worked out in the past, one could reasonably expect
misperception, when faced with a decision involving
it to also work out in the future; if an option has been
risk, people tend to be risk-avoidant when decision
chosen by one in the past, the person could reason-
outcomes are framed as gains and risk-seeking
ably assume that the choice has passed his or her
when the same outcomes are framed as losses
inspection, and possibly the inspection of many oth-
(Tversky & Kahneman, 1981). To explain the status
ers (Eidelman & Crandall, 2012). As Samuelson and
quo bias with loss aversion, consider the situation
Zeckhauser (1988) pointed out, people commonly
where one decides between two different but simi-
use a cut-off strategy in decision-making: as long as
larly appealing options. Since the options are differ-
the current option is good enough (Simon, 1956),
ent but have similar levels of appeal, choosing either
there is no impetus to run an arduous analysis of al-
of them implies gains in some respects and losses in
ternatives and initiate a change. A satisficing strat-
some others, and the gains and losses cancel each
egy, i.e., stay with a sufficiently good option rather
other out. However, if one option is made the status
than continuously look for the best, can be rational
quo and the decision maker takes that option as a
in an uncertain world (Schwartz et al., 2002, 2011).
reference point, the losses of switching to the other
These accounts that subsume the preference for
option would outweigh the gains due to loss aver-
the status quo within the rational decision-making
sion (Moshinsky & Bar-Hillel, 2010; Thaler, 1980).
framework are plausible but may be insufficient. For
Consequently, switching is unlikely if neither option
example, Samuelson and Zeckhauser (1988) explic-
shows a clear advantage. Loss aversion per se can
itly ruled out transitional costs in the descriptions of
explain the status quo bias in the case of multiple
their hypothetical decision-making scenarios and
similarly attractive options.
still observed the status quo bias. Also, with respect
Researchers have invoked heuristics and several
to the account that appeals to decision makers’ lim-
other biases to account for the preference for the
ited information, the scenarios, however, did not
status quo, such as anchoring, the longevity and ex-
provide more information for the status quo option
istence biases, and the mere exposure effect (Eidel-
than for the alternatives. Apart from being framed
man & Crandall, 2012; Samuelson & Zeckhauser,
differently, the options were comparable in terms of
1988). Anchoring is the phenomenon that people’s
the amount of information they carried.
judgments are biased towards initially presented in-
Participants might, however, had assumed that
formation (Ariely et al., 2003; Tversky & Kahneman,
they knew more about the status quo. For instance,
1974). For instance, Ariely et al. (2003) observed a
for Question 4 in Samuelson and Zeckhauser (1988),
positive correlation between participants’ social se-
participants chose from different college job offers.
curity numbers, which were explicitly asked for, and
They were employed by one of the colleges if they
the minimal prices they would like to pay for a bottle
received the status quo version of the question. This
of wine (replicated in Bergman et al., 2010; but chal-
could have led participants to think that they knew
lenged by Fudenberg et al., 2012; Maniadis et al.,
more about their current workplace than the alter-
2014). Samuelson and Zeckhauser (1988) argued that
natives (e.g., about colleagues) and hence choose it
the same phenomenon underlies the status quo bias,
due to factors unspecified in the option descrip-
particularly with respect to decision questions with
tions. Nonetheless, such considerations were not as
continuous options, e.g., Question 7 and 8 in their
prominent in the other questions in the study, and it
study.
was unlikely that participants really read these con-
The existence and longevity biases refer to peo-
siderations into their decision-making processes,
ple’s often unthinking assumptions that existing and
because they were not motivated to do so (Samuel-
longstanding things are good (Eidelman et al., 2009,
son & Zeckhauser, 1988, p. 9). Overall, rational ac-
2010). They are thought to underlie the status quo
counts fall short in explaining the status quo bias on
bias (Eidelman & Crandall, 2012, 2014): we maintain
their own.
===== PAGE 5/21 =====
REVISITING THE STATUS QUO BIAS 5
the status quo simply because it already exists and fear and anxiety (sometimes collectively termed an-
outlasts other alternatives. Additionally, being the ticipatory emotions; Anderson, 2003; Loewenstein
status quo can increase an option’s exposure to the et al., 2001). People can avoid such emotions by
decision maker, and makes the person like the op- maintaining the status quo, particularly when they
tion more due to the mere-exposure effect (Eidel- find it difficult to make trade-offs (per the trade-off
man & Crandall, 2014; Zajonc, 1968). Although inter- avoidance hypothesis; see Luce, 1998; Luce et al.,
related, the mere-exposure effect and existence and 1997). Unless motivated, people may even refrain
longevity biases may work independently in leading from contemplating about a change at the first
to a preference for the status quo. People need not place, which is consistent with organisms’ general
infer existence and longevity from exposure, and ex- tendency to conserve their energy (Anderson, 2003).
istence alone does not necessarily entail more expo- There is no merit in thinking that any of the
sures (Eidelman & Crandall, 2012, 2014). abovementioned factors fully explains the status
People can sometimes be motivated to continue quo bias. Our preference for the status quo can re-
with and even defend the status quo. Cognitive dis- sult from many of them at the same time. The critical
sonance theory predicts that maintaining conflict- task is to determine how option features, decision
ing ideas or stances simultaneously is hard and un- contexts, and individual differences interplay to en-
pleasant, and people continuously strive for con- hance, mitigate, eliminate, or even reverse the bias,
sistency between beliefs and behaviors (Festinger, and ideally, the respective weights of these different
1962; Festinger & Carlsmith, 1959). Past choices re- factors.
veal people’s attitudes and preferences (self-per- One final note concerning the status quo bias:
ception theory; Bem, 1972), and people tend to re- The bias is often discussed together with other con-
member those reasons for (rather than against), or ceptually similar phenomena, such as the omission
even fabricate reasons in support of (i.e., rational- bias (preference for inaction over action; Ritov &
ize), their past decisions (Brehm, 1956; Eyster, 2002; Baron, 1992; Baron & Ritov, 1994), inaction inertia
Eidelman & Crandall, 2014). Deviating from the sta- (initial inaction persists; Tykocinski et al., 1995; Ty-
tus quo can therefore be unpleasant and challeng- kocinski & Pittman, 1998), as well as choice deferral
ing. Consequently, people are driven to stick with (Dhar, 1996). These phenomena share some com-
the status quo and even find it reasonable, desirable, mon mechanisms and are collectively referred to as
and just (Jost et al., 2004; Kay et al., 2009), so that decision avoidance (Anderson, 2003). Nonetheless,
the validity of their reasons is affirmed, and the con- they are still different concepts and cannot be used
sistency between their beliefs and behaviors is interchangeably (Feldman et al., 2020), and there is
maintained. some evidence showing that these phenomena op-
Emotions, particularly regret, may play a role in erate independently (Baron & Ritov, 1994; Schweit-
the status quo bias. Changing the status quo typi- zer, 1994).
cally requires an act, and research has shown that in
many cases, people experience greater regret when Choice of study for replication
a negative outcome results from action rather than
We chose Samuelson and Zeckhauser’s (1988)
inaction (Ritov & Baron, 1992; cf. Inman & Zeelen-
study as our replication target for two reasons: its
berg, 2002; see also Connolly & Zeelenberg, 2002 re-
impact and the absence of direct replications. The
garding the role of justification). Consequently, peo-
article was one of the earliest and most cited works
ple tend to maintain the status quo to avoid regret.
on the status quo bias, with over five thousand
A separate line of research has found that positive
Google Scholar citations at the time of writing. And
moods are associated with a larger status quo bias,
there have been many important follow-up empiri-
suggesting that people may stick to the status quo
cal and theoretical works, such as Kahneman et al.’s
to prolong a desirable mental state (Shevchenko et
(1991) work that linked the status quo bias to loss
al., 2014; Yen & Chuang, 2008). Changing the status
aversion. Despite its high impact, to the best of our
quo often entails material transition costs. On top of
knowledge, there have been no published pre-reg-
that, contemplating about a change and analyzing
istered direct replications of the study thus far.
available alternatives can incur mental costs, which
often manifest as negative emotional states, e.g.,
===== PAGE 6/21 =====
XIAO, LAM, PIARA, & FELDMAN
6
The status quo bias has profound real-world im- rates of options as the status quo and as a non-sta-
plications. It may explain many social phenomena tus quo. Samuelson and Zeckhauser (1988) did not
relevant to human judgment and decision making. report whether there were significant differences in
Hence, it is critical to take this bias into considera- choice rates between status quo options and neu-
tion when we make important decisions. A carefully trally framed options. We conducted these tests and
chosen status quo can have a great social impact to reported the results in the supplementary (Table
the extent that it may save the lives of thousands 3S), because this is a stricter test for the status quo
(Abadie & Gay, 2006; Johnson & Goldstein, 2003). bias. Our hypotheses, therefore, were:
We hence aimed to revisit this classic phenome-
non to examine the replicability of the original find- H: Options have higher choice rates when they
1
ings with independent replications. Although Samu- are framed as the status quo than as a non-status
elson and Zeckhauser’s (1988) results supported a quo (or an alternative to the status quo). This hy-
status quo bias overall, the bias seemed to be less pothesis was tested in the target article, and p-
prominent for some options and in some of their de- values were reported.
cision-making scenarios than in others. By replicat-
ing this classic study, we hoped to examine whether H : Options have higher choice rates when they
2
such effect size differences were random in nature. are framed as the status quo than when they are
If not, there could be something inherent in the de- neutrally framed (or when no option is the status
cision questions that determine the extent to which quo). The target article did not test this hypoth-
decision makers exhibit a preference for the status esis with any significance testing procedure.
quo. The replication attempts also answered calls in
the recent growing recognition of the importance of A summary of the original findings that were rel-
reproducibility and replicability in psychological evant to our replication has been provided in Table
science (Brandt et al., 2014; Open Science Collabo- 2S and Table 3S in the supplementary. For 10 out of
ration, 2015; van ’t Veer & Giner-Sorolla, 2016; Zwaan the 16 options that were included in our replications,
et al., 2018), as well as the importance of orienting the choice rate under a status quo framing was sig-
towards effect sizes (rather than statistical signifi- nificantly higher than that under a non-status quo
cance) and using a meta-analytic thinking in scien- framing. For 11 options, the choice rate under a sta-
tific endeavors (Cumming, 2014). We therefore em- tus quo framing was higher (in the descriptive sense)
barked on well-powered, pre-registered close rep- than that under a neutral framing, which was in turn
lications of Samuelson and Zeckhauser (1988). higher than that under a non-status quo framing.
We conducted post hoc power analyses and sen-
Original findings in target article
sitivity analyses on the original study, with a focus
on the comparisons between status quo framing and
The target article reported a consistent pattern
non-status quo framing (i.e., those comparisons that
of results across decision-making scenarios that an
tested H; please refer to the supplementary for de-
option was chosen more often when it was framed 1
tails, particularly Table 4S and 5S). Our analysis in-
as the status quo than as a non-status quo or with-
dicated that the post hoc power of the original study
out any framing. Additionally, an option was more
ranged from .08 to over .99, with an average of .57
likely to be chosen when it was framed neutrally
across the 16 options. This means that on average,
than when it was framed as a non-status quo option.
the original study had only .57 power to detect the
This pattern was present for 17 out of the 24 options
observed effect sizes. Also, the post hoc power var-
from the six four-option decision questions used in
ied greatly even within scenarios, suggesting that
the target article. For 14 of the options, the choice
the effect sizes estimates were not very precise, and
rates were significantly higher when they were the
the original study might be insufficiently powered to
status quo than when they were alternatives to the
provide consistent estimates (but post hoc power
status quo.
should be interpreted cautiously, if at all; see Gel-
We followed the target article to conduct inde-
man, 2019). Our sensitivity analyses suggested that
pendent-proportions tests to compare the choice
the original tests for H (i.e., two-tailed independ-
1
===== PAGE 7/21 =====
REVISITING THE STATUS QUO BIAS 7
ent-proportions tests) were powered at .80 to de- Methods
tect, on average, a Cohen’s h of 0.58, a medium-to-
large effect by Cohen’s (1988) benchmarks. For some Participants
options, the test could only detect a Cohen’s h over
A total of 311 (M = 38.05, SD = 12.38; 164 (52.7%)
age
0.70 at .80 power. Overall, we concluded that the
females) and 316 (M = 38.79, SD = 11.67; 161 (50.9%)
original study was not sufficiently powered. age
females) Amazon Mechanical Turk (MTurk) partici-
pants completed the first and the second phases of
Overview of replication
our replications, respectively. There was a one-year
The current replications focused on Questions 1, time lag between the two data collections. The sec-
2, 4, and 6 in Part One of Samuelson and Zeckhauser ond data collection was meant to verify results from
(1988) and had two phases. The first-phase replica- first data collection, extend the number of scenar-
tion focused on Questions 1 and 6, and the second- ios, and improve on technical issues such as intro-
phase replication focused on all four questions. We ducing randomized presentation order of the sce-
chose to conduct replications on this subset of de- narios. A comparison of the original sample and the
cision questions to focus on the simplest demon- replication samples has been provided in Table 6S
strations of the status quo bias (i.e., through fram- and 7S in the supplementary. We pre-registered our
ing), meet time and resource constraints, and mini- power analyses and reported that we aimed at 300
mize burden on participants in our target samples, participants in the pre-registrations. Nevertheless,
which are sensitive to task duration. as one reviewer pointed out, those power analyses
For each decision question, participants were ei- were inadequate. Therefore, we conducted an addi-
ther presented a neutral version or a status quo ver- tional “post hoc” (i.e., after data collection) power
sion. In the neutral version, options were presented analysis, which suggested that we would need 355
without any framing, whereas in the status quo ver- participants in order to detect a Cohen’s medium ef-
sion, one option was framed as the status quo, and fect at .95 power with the planned tests. Although
the other options were reframed with reference to we did not meet this number, our sample sizes were
the status quo option or as a change from it. The tar- close to it, and hence our replications may still be
get study used two-option, three-option, as well as considered to have adequate power. We reported
four-option versions for the decision questions. We the full sample results here in the main text. For the
used only the four-option versions in our replica- results after exclusion, please refer to Table 8S to 11S
tions due to online survey administration time con- in the supplementary. There were no major discrep-
straints, and for simplifying the design without look- ancies between these results. Apart from excluding
ing into the number of options as a possible moder- based on the pre-registered criteria, we additionally
ating factor. excluded part of the data as after data collection, we
found an error in the questionnaire used in the sec-
Pre-registration and open science
ond-phase replication (please refer to the supple-
We pre-registered our experiments on the Open mentary for details).
Science Framework (OSF) and data collection was
Design and procedure
launched after that. Pre-registrations, power anal-
yses, and all materials used in these experiments The experiments had a between-subjects design,
have been shared on the OSF (project main page: and the design was the same in both phases of rep-
https://osf.io/kh8q3/; first-phase pre-registra- lication. Four decision questions (Question 1, 6, 2,
tion: https://osf.io/c3phs; second-phase pre-reg- and 4, referred to as Scenarios 1 to 4 in our replica-
istration: https://osf.io/69hzx). Full open-science tions) were adopted from Samuelson and Zeck-
details and disclosures are provided in the supple- hauser (1988). The order of presentation was fixed in
mentary. All measures, manipulations, and exclu- the first phase but randomized in the second phase
sions in this investigation have been reported and (there was no sign that this variation had any major
shared. influence on the results). The questions asked par-
ticipants to evaluate and decide among different (1)
===== PAGE 8/21 =====
XIAO, LAM, PIARA, & FELDMAN
8
budget allocation ratios for safety research pro- The National Highway Safety Commission is de-
grams, (2) color options for a wagon that one just ciding how to allocate its budget between two
purchased, (3) investment portfolios, and (4) college safety research programs: (1) improving automo-
job offers. Each question had four options. Partici- bile safety (bumpers, body, gas tank configura-
pants in the first-phase replication answered Sce- tions, seat-belts), and (2) improving the safety of
nario 1 and 2 only, whereas those in the second interstate highways (guard rails, grading, high-
phase answered all four scenarios. way interchanges, and implementing selective
reduced speed limits). Currently, the commission
Manipulations allocates approximately 70% of its funds to auto
safety and 30% of its funds to highway safety.
Each Scenario was presented in one out of five
Since there is a ceiling on its total spending, it
versions: one neutral version and four status quo
must choose between the options provided be-
versions. In the neutral version, no option was the
low. If you had to make this choice, which of the
status quo. In the status quo versions, one of the
following will you choose?
four options was framed as the status quo, i.e., as a
previously chosen or the default option. Participants
The options for this status quo version were:
were randomly presented with only one version for
each scenario.
a. Maintain present budget amounts for the pro-
Take Scenario 1 as an example. This scenario was
grams.
about different budget allocation ratios for safety
b. Decrease auto program by 10% and raise high-
research programs. The below was the neutral ver-
way program by like amount.
sion:
c. Decrease auto program by 40% and raise high-
way program by like amount.
The National Highway Safety Commission is de-
d. Decrease auto program by 20% and raise high-
ciding how to allocate its budget between two
way program by like amount.
safety research programs: (1) improving automo-
bile safety (bumpers, body, gas tank configura-
The display order of the options was randomized.
tions, seat-belts), and (2) improving the safety of
All scenario descriptions were followed by a few
interstate highways (guard rails, grading, high-
comprehension questions to ensure that partici-
way interchanges, and implementing selective
pants read and understood the texts. Particularly,
reduced speed limits). Since there is a ceiling on
for the status quo versions, participants were addi-
its total spending, it must choose between the
tionally asked what the status quo was. They had to
options provided below. If you had to make this
answer these comprehension questions correctly
choice, which of the following will you choose?
before proceeding to see the options and make their
choices. This design was meant to address partici-
And the four options for the neutral version were:
pants’ inattentiveness. The median response time
for each of the scenarios in the two phases ranged
a. Allocate 70% to auto safety and 30% to high-
from 19.67 seconds to 31.07 seconds. Since the par-
way safety.
ticipants had already read the scenario descriptions
b. Allocate 30% to auto safety and 70% to high-
before the options were presented (i.e., most of the
way safety.
response time reported above was used to read the
c. Allocate 60% to auto safety and 40% to high-
options only), we consider this time sufficient for
way safety.
participants to make informed rather than random
d. Allocate 50% to auto safety and 50% to high-
choices. We provided the response time descrip-
way safety.
tives in our analysis files for interested readers.
With the version manipulation, each option could
One status quo version of Scenario 1, where the
take three positions: as the status quo option in one
“70A30H” option (Option A above) was framed as the
status quo version, as a non-status quo option in
status quo, was as below:
three other status quo versions, or as a neutral op-
===== PAGE 9/21 =====
REVISITING THE STATUS QUO BIAS 9
tion in the neutral version. Participants saw any op- were the least likely to be chosen when they were
tion under only one framing, in accordance with the framed as an alternative to the status quo. This pat-
between-subjects design of the experiments. tern, however, did not emerge in Scenario 2.
Independent-proportions tests were conducted
Replication evaluation to compare the choice rates between the status quo
and non-status quo framing, and between the status
As noted in the beginning, we summarized our
quo and the neutral framing. The options in Scenario
replications as very close replications using the cri-
1 had significantly higher choice rates as the status
teria set by LeBel et al. (2018). We aimed to compare
quo than as a non-status quo, χ2 ≥ 9.38, ps ≤ .002,
the replication effects with the original effects using
smallest odds ratio = 2.47, 95% CI [1.37, 4.44], small-
the criteria set by LeBel et al. (2019) (Figure 1S).
est Cohen’s h = 0.44, 95% CI [0.16, 0.73]. The effects
were of medium sizes (0.5) by Cohen’s (1988) bench-
Results marks. Comparing the choice rates of options under
the status quo framing and the neutral framing, we
First phase found, however, one non-significant difference (for
the option “30A70H”), χ2 = 1.10, p = .294, odds ratio =
In Table 1 and 2, we summarized and presented
1.46, 95% CI [0.72, 2.97], Cohen’s h = 0.19, 95% CI [-
the descriptive statistics and the results of our sta-
0.16, 0.54]. The other three differences were statis-
tistical analyses for the first-phase replication. Sce-
tically significant, ps ≤ .033. The effect sizes ranged
nario 1 and 2 were tested in this phase. We found a
from 2.16 to 4.83 in odds ratio or 0.38 to 0.57 in Co-
consistent pattern in Scenario 1 that an option was
hen’s h. Overall, our data provided strong support
chosen more often when it was the status quo than
for the status quo bias (both H and H ) in Scenario 1.
when it was neutrally framed. In addition, options 1 2
===== PAGE 10/21 =====
XIAO, LAM, PIARA, & FELDMAN
10
We found weak-to-no support for the status quo quo framing with the neutral framing, only one op-
bias, or H and H , in Scenario 2. Comparing the sta- tion (white color) had a significant and small-to-me-
1 2
tus quo framing with the non-status quo framing, we dium difference in the expected direction, χ2 = 5.06,
observed no significant differences in the expected p = .024, odds ratio = 2.81, 95% CI [1.12, 7.07], Cohen’s
direction, χ2 ≤ 2.56, ps ≥ .110. Comparing the status h = 0.41, 95% CI [0.06, 0.76].
hypothesized pattern (i.e., the choice rate of an op-
Second phase tion is the highest under the status quo framing and
the lowest under the non-status quo framing) in 12
In Table 3 and 4, we summarized the descriptive
out of the 16 options from the four scenarios (the ex-
statistics and the results of our statistical analyses
ceptions were: “30A70H” in Scenario 1; silver blue
for the second-phase replication. We observed the
and white in Scenario 2; and College D in Scenario
4).
===== PAGE 11/21 =====
REVISITING THE STATUS QUO BIAS 11
Again, we conducted independent-proportions those significant differences: χ2 ≥ 4.97, ps ≤ .026, low-
test to examine H and H . The status quo framing est odds ratio = 2.40, 95% CI [1.10, 5.21], lowest Co-
1 2
resulted in significantly higher choice rates for hen’s h = 0.40, 95% CI [0.05, 0.74]). The only ex-
nearly all options from Scenario 1, regardless of ception was the “50A50H” option, for which the
whether it was compared against the non-status comparison between the status quo framing and the
quo framing (χ2 ≥ 10.81, ps ≤ .001, lowest odds ratio = neutral framing did not result in a significant differ-
2.78, 95% CI [1.49, 5.17], lowest Cohen’s h = 0.46, 95% ence, χ2 = 2.64, p = .104; though the effect was in the
CI [0.17, 0.74]) or against the neutral framing (for predicted direction, odds ratio = 1.79, 95% CI [0.88,
3.64], Cohen’s h = 0.29, 95% CI [-0.06, 0.64].
===== PAGE 12/21 =====
XIAO, LAM, PIARA, & FELDMAN
12
Although most options from Scenario 3 and 4 ex- framing with the neutral framing, the effect sizes
hibited the hypothesized pattern, the results of our ranged from 1.31 to 1.85 in odds ratio or 0.09 to 0.31
independent-proportions tests did not consistently in Cohen’s h in Scenario 3, and from 1.75 to 3.26 in
meet the criterion for statistical significance. There odds ratio or 0.23 to 0.58 in Cohen’s h in Scenario 4.
was only one option (College C in Scenario 4) for Despite those non-significant differences, our data
which both comparisons (i.e., status quo vs. non- still provide good support overall for the status quo
status quo and status quo vs. neutral) yielded statis- bias in these two scenarios. The bias seemed to be
tically significant differences. There were two op- more pronounced in Scenario 4 than in 3 based on
tions (Moderate Risk and High Risk in Scenario 2) for the observed effect sizes.
which both differences were not significant. Com- Like in the first-phase replication, we found the
paring the status quo framing with the non-status least support for the status quo bias in Scenario 2.
quo framing, the effect sizes ranged from 1.66 to 3.15 Two options from this scenario did not exhibit the
in odds ratio or 0.16 to 0.47 in Cohen’s h in Scenario hypothesized pattern. For silver blue, the non-status
3, and from 1.81 to 4.88 in odds ratio or 0.27 to 0.75 quo framing even led to higher choice rate than the
in Cohen’s h in Scenario 4. Comparing the status quo
===== PAGE 13/21 =====
REVISITING THE STATUS QUO BIAS 13
status quo framing. Comparing the status quo fram- with the neutral framing, all differences were non-
ing with the non-status quo framing, we observed significant, with the option of tan color exhibiting
significant differences for two options (for the tan the largest effect size (odds ratio = 2.00, 95% CI
color: odds ratio = 2.33, 95% CI [0.99, 5.51], Cohen’s [0.68, 5.89], Cohen’s h = 0.23, 95% CI [-0.12, 0.58]).
h = 0.27, 95% CI [-0.02, 0.56]; for the red color: odds Overall, our data provided limited support for the
ratio = 3.11, 95% CI [1.56, 6.20], Cohen’s h = 0.46, 95% status quo bias in Scenario 2.
CI [0.17, 0.74]). Comparing the status quo framing
===== PAGE 14/21 =====
XIAO, LAM, PIARA, & FELDMAN
14
replication results (see Table 5 and 6, and Figure 1S
Comparing replication to original findings in the supplementary), our replication effects in
these scenarios were either signals (i.e., significant
A comparison between the original findings (Ta-
results) in the expected direction or non-signals
ble 2S and 3S in the supplementary; Samuelson &
that were consistent with the original effects (i.e.,
Zeckhauser, 1988, p. 17) and our replication findings
the CIs covered the original effects). The replication
suggests that our replication of the status quo bias
effect sizes were in general comparable with (Sce-
in Scenario 1, 3, and 4 can be considered successful.
nario 1 and 3), or larger than (Scenario 4), the original
Based on LeBel et al.’s (2019) criteria for evaluating
===== PAGE 15/21 =====
REVISITING THE STATUS QUO BIAS 15
effect sizes. A major discrepancy, however, was nario 1, followed by 4 and 3. In what follows, we dis-
found in Scenario 2. Whereas the target study found cuss possible factors that might have resulted in the
a significant status quo bias for all options in this varying magnitudes across the scenarios.
scenario (lowest Cohen’s h = 0.45 in the status quo
vs. non-status quo comparison), our data did not re- Factors affecting status quo bias
veal any consistently significant status quo bias (sta-
The perceived cost of a change and uncertainties
tus quo vs. non-status quo) for any option across the
associated with its outcome could affect the status
two phases of replications. The largest effect size
quo bias (Anderson, 2003; Iyengar & Lepper, 2000).
was Cohen’s h = 0.46 (for the red option in the sec-
In Scenario 2, which was about choosing the color
ond phase).
for one’s preordered wagon, the perceived cost of a
The comparisons between the status quo framing
change should be almost zero even if decision-mak-
and the neutral framing did not reveal consistently
ers seriously take that into consideration; all it takes
significant differences in any of the scenarios in the
for a change is a word to the wagon dealer. In addi-
original study. In contrast, our replication data re-
tion, there is little uncertainty associated with such
vealed consistently significant differences for Sce-
a change. Based on the description of the scenario,
nario 1 options (except for the “30A70H” option in
once a person opts for a change, the person is sure
the first phase and the “50A50H” option in the sec-
to get the color that he or she prefers. In contrast,
ond phase). Meanwhile, in line with the original re-
for the other scenarios, there was still room for de-
sults, we observed a general pattern across Scenar-
cision-makers to infer transition costs that were not
ios 1, 3, and 4 that choice rates of options under the
explicitly ruled out in the descriptions. These costs
status quo framing were higher than under the neu-
could be material or mental. For example, the status
tral framing. Scenario 2 results, however, had the
quo versions of Scenario 4 asked whether one would
largest discrepancy when compared with the origi-
choose to remain in the current job at a college or to
nal results. The original study observed two signifi-
accept a job offer from other colleges at different lo-
cant differences when the status quo framing was
cations. In this scenario, participants could have in-
compared with the neutral framing, whereas in our
ferred the cost of moving and re-establishing per-
replications, only the white color option in the first-
sonal networks. It is also highly uncertain whether
phase replication had a significant difference in the
the job that one switches to would be satisfactory,
status quo vs. non-status quo comparison. Moreo-
as real-life experience tells us that job satisfaction
ver, we had three comparisons that yielded effects
can be influenced by numerous unforeseen factors.
in the opposite direction (red and silver blue in the
Scenario 3 could be an example for potential mental
first phase and white in the second phase). Overall,
costs. Faced with different investment portfolios,
our replication findings for Scenario 2 deviated the
those who were less willing to engage in effortful
most from the original.
thinking (i.e., calculating the expected gains for each
of the options and comparing them) for various rea-
sons (e.g., they may think they lack the expertise)
Discussion
would be prone to stick with the status quo. The
We conducted two phases of pre-registered rep- need to calculate expected gains also implies risks
lications of the status quo bias, focusing on four hy- and uncertainty. Overall, Scenario 2 stood in sharp
pothetical decision scenarios from Samuelson and contrast with the other three scenarios with respect
Zeckhauser (1988). Our results were mostly con- to the perceived cost of changes and uncertainties
sistent with the original findings. We found support associated with the outcomes, which might have re-
for the status quo bias in three scenarios but weak- sulted in our failure of replicating the status quo bias
to-no support in the remaining one (i.e., Scenario 2). with the scenario.
In addition, our results suggest that the magnitude Arguably, Scenario 1, which was about an impact-
of the bias varied depending on the decision-making ful public financial decision, involved more concerns
scenarios. We observed the strongest bias in Sce- (and hence more room for inferred cost of a change)
and a higher level of uncertainty than the other sce-
===== PAGE 16/21 =====
XIAO, LAM, PIARA, & FELDMAN
16
narios. Therefore, participants showed the strong- dealer. I had no choice.”). Consequently, there was
est and most robust status quo bias in this scenario. no reason or motivation for them to stick with the
Also, that it was related to a public financial decision status quo option if they found the alternatives more
might have implied that the status quo has passed attractive. Second, preferences for colors are argu-
many other people’s scrutiny, leading to little per- ably more accessible than preferences for invest-
ceived need for a change and hence a larger status ment portfolios (Scenario 3), job offers (Scenario 4),
quo bias (Simon, 1956). Our measures and data, how- and safety research programs (Scenario 1). Most
ever, did not allow formal tests of these claims. people have clearer preferences for colors than for
Existence and longevity biases, which were said the other things. When prompted, they can tell color
to underlie our preference for the status quo (Eidel- preferences more quickly, firmly, and with reasons
man & Crandall, 2012, 2014), could also explain the that are more subjective (e.g., “I like this color just
varying sizes of the status quo bias across the sce- because of personal aesthetics”). Strong prior pref-
narios. It was explicitly stated in the description of erences are a major hinderance for context effects
Scenario 2 that the status quo color option was set on decision-making because they lead people to ig-
two days ago (“Two days ago, the dealer called say- nore contextual factors and make decisions based
ing that a red wagon was available.”). This relatively on their own likes and dislikes (Huber et al., 2014).
shorter period of existence (as compared with the Our results for Scenario 2, therefore, were con-
status quo options in other scenarios, though how sistent with the claim that people exhibit a weaker
long those options have existed was not specified) status quo bias if some alternative appears substan-
could have been a reason why the status quo bias tially more appealing than its counterparts.
was trivial in Scenario 2.
It is plausible to argue that participants were not Limitations and future directions
so motivated to maintain the status quo in Scenario
We were limited by our inability to experimen-
2 given how the scenario was constructed. The sta-
tally control or manipulate the factors that we dis-
tus quo option, i.e., the color option that the wagon
cussed above, since we aimed primarily at direct
dealer said to be the only one available, was more a
replications. Still, we did not attempt to replicate the
compelled rather than an autonomous choice. For-
original experiment in full, leaving out some original
going the choice and switching to an alternative,
scenarios and using only the four-option versions.
therefore, would produce little cognitive disso-
To what extent the original results for the other sce-
nance, which was thought to be a reason why the
narios and other types of decision questions (e.g.,
status quo is maintained and defended (Eidelman &
Question 7 and 8 that provided a continuum of op-
Crandall, 2014; Festinger, 1962; Jost et al., 2004; Kay
tions; Part Two that elicited sequential decisions
et al., 2009). Additionally, in Scenario 2, the deci-
from participants) can be replicated, and whether
sion-maker was yet to own the wagon when he or
the claim that the more options there are, the
she made the decision about whether to switch or
stronger the status quo bias is remains supported
not; therefore, loss aversion should have little role in
across scenarios (see, e.g., Redelmeier & Shafir,
producing a status quo bias in that scenario.
1995), are questions worth addressing in future
Per the self-perception account of the status quo
studies. To be precise, what we attempted to repli-
bias, people exhibit stronger bias for the status quo
cate was the effect of status quo framing, since our
when they perceive it to reflect their own prefer-
experiments did not involve participants’ actual pre-
ences and needs (Bem, 1972; Eidelman & Crandall,
vious choices. Therefore, more evidence is needed if
2014; Samuelson & Zeckhauser, 1988). And the need
our findings are to be generalized to situations
for consistency drives us to maintain the status quo.
where actual previous choices serve as the status
From this perspective, there could be two reasons
quo.
for the weak-to-no status quo preference in Sce-
Direct replications of the classic and influential
nario 2. First, as said above, the status quo color op-
findings of Samuelson and Zeckhauser (1988) served
tion in Scenario 2 was more like a compelled choice.
to assess whether their results were reliable and ro-
Recognizing this, participants would not think that
bust across time, samples, and experimental set-
they made the initial decision based on their prefer-
tings. Examining how different factors moderate the
ences (“I was only given that option by the wagon
===== PAGE 17/21 =====
REVISITING THE STATUS QUO BIAS 17
status quo bias, however, was beyond the scope of Author Bios
our investigation. Future research on the status quo
bias can measure or control for potential modera- G.F. is an assistant professor at the Department
tors and explore the circumstances that influence of Psychology, University of Hong Kong. Q.X. is an
the manifestation and magnitude of the bias. M.Phil. candidate at the Department of Psychology,
The value of direct replications, particularly of University of Hong Kong, under the supervision of
those on what are perceived to be old and well-es- G.F. C.S.L. was an M.Phil. student at the Department
tablished phenomena, is often questioned. However, of Psychology, Chinese University of Hong Kong.
as psychology is shifting its focus away from identi- M.P. was a master’s student at the Department of
fication of effects to provision of accurate effect size Health and Social Psychology, Maastricht Univer-
estimates (Cumming, 2014), we believe more direct sity.
replications should be conducted, especially those
on classic effects. Only by aggregating, or meta-an-
Author Contributions
alyzing, enough similar studies can we obtain an ac-
curate estimate of the size of a particular effect and
G.F. supervised each step of this project, con-
have an informed expectation on the outcome when
ducted the pre-registrations, and collected the data.
the effect is to be applied in the real world. The dis-
M.P. initiated the project and designed and analyzed
crepancy that we revealed between the original re-
the first phase of this replication project, as part of
sults and our findings does not invalidate the overall
his Master dissertation. C.S.L. reviewed and reana-
claim about the existence of the status quo bias;
lyzed the first phase of the replication and initiated,
nonetheless, we recommend caution regarding the
designed, and analyzed the data from the second
claim that the bias is pervasive in decision-making
phase. Q.X. reviewed the pre-registrations, verified
scenarios (e.g., Samuelson & Zeckhauser, 1988, p. 41).
all data analyses, and drafted the manuscript. Q.X.
Our findings also highlight the need for more direct
and G.F. jointly finalized the manuscript for submis-
replications (ideally in the form of multi-lab collab-
sion. Please refer to the supplementary for author
orative Registered Reports; Klein et al., 2018; Nosek
contribution based on Contributor Roles Taxonomy
& Lakens, 2014) on classic findings, some of which
(CRediT).
were based on insufficiently powered experiments
using unrepresentative university student samples.
Subjecting evidence obtained in original studies and Additional Information
in replications to meta-analyses, we will be able to
obtain more comprehensive and precise pictures of The current replication is part of the larger “mass
existing psychological effects and their boundary pre-registered replications in judgment and deci-
conditions. sion-making” project led by G.F. The project aims to
revisit well known research findings in the field of
judgment and decision-making (JDM) and investi-
Author Contact
gate the replicability of those findings. More infor-
mation is available on: http://mgto.org/pre-regis-
Qinyu Xiao: 0000-0002-9824-9247
tered-replications.
Gilad Feldman: 0000-0003-2812-6599
Correspondence about this article should be ad-
dressed to Gilad Feldman at gfeldman@hku.hk. Open Science Practices
Conflict of Interest and Funding
The authors received no financial support for this
research and/or authorship of this article. The au-
This article earned the Preregistration, Open
thors declared no potential conflicts of interests
Data and the Open Materials badge for preregister-
with respect to the authorship and/or publication
of this article.
===== PAGE 18/21 =====
XIAO, LAM, PIARA, & FELDMAN
18
ing the hypothesis and analysis before data collec- Brehm, J. W. (1956). Postdecision changes in the de-
tion, and for making the data and materials openly sirability of alternatives. The Journal of Abnor-
available. It has been verified that the analysis repro- mal and Social Psychology, 52(3), 384–389.
duced the results presented in the article. The entire https://doi.org/10.1037/h0041006
editorial process, including the open reviews, are Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the
published in the online supplement. behavioral sciences (2nd ed.). L. Erlbaum Asso-
ciates.
Connolly, T., & Zeelenberg, M. (2002). Regret in de-
References
cision making. Current Directions in Psycholog-
ical Science, 11(6), 212–216.
Abadie, A., & Gay, S. (2006). The impact of pre-
https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-8721.00203
sumed consent legislation on cadaveric organ
Cox, G. W., & Morgenstern, S. (1993). The increasing
donation: A cross-country study. Journal of
advantage of incumbency in the US states. Leg-
Health Economics, 25(4), 599–620.
islative Studies Quarterly, 18(4), 495–514.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhealeco.2006.01.003
https://doi.org/10.2307/439852
Anderson, C. J. (2003). The psychology of doing
Cumming, G. (2014). The new statistics: Why and
nothing: Forms of decision avoidance result
how. Psychological Science, 25(1), 7–29.
from reason and emotion. Psychological Bulle-
https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797613504966
tin, 129(1), 139–167.
Dhar, R. (1996). The effect of decision strategy on
https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.129.1.139
deciding to defer choice. Journal of Behavioral
Ariely, D., Loewenstein, G., & Prelec, D. (2003). “Co-
Decision Making, 9(4), 265–281.
herent arbitrariness”: Stable demand curves
https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1099-
without stable preferences. The Quarterly
0771(199612)9:4<265::AID-BDM231>3.0.CO;2-4
Journal of Economics, 118(1), 73–106.
Dupont, D. Y., & Lee, G. S. (2002). The endowment
https://doi.org/10.1162/00335530360535153
effect, status quo bias and loss aversion: Ra-
Atkinson, M. M. (2011). Lindblom’s lament: Incre-
tional alternative explanation. Journal of Risk
mentalism and the persistent pull of the status
and Uncertainty, 25, 87–101.
quo. Policy and Society, 30(1), 9–18.
https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1016371414952
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polsoc.2010.12.002
Eidelman, S., & Crandall, C. S. (2012). Bias in favor of
Baron, J., & Ritov, I. (1994). Reference points and
the status quo. Social and Personality Psychol-
omission bias. Organizational Behavior and Hu-
ogy Compass, 6(3), 270–281.
man Decision Processes, 59(3), 475–498.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1751-
https://doi.org/10.1006/obhd.1994.1070
9004.2012.00427.x
Bem, D. J. (1972). Self-perception theory. In L.
Eidelman, S., & Crandall, C. S. (2014). The intuitive
Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in Experimental So-
traditionalist: How biases for existence and
cial Psychology (Vol. 6, pp. 1–62). Academic
longevity promote the status quo. In Advances
Press. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0065-
in Experimental Social Psychology (Vol. 50, pp.
2601(08)60024-6
53–104). Elsevier.
Bergman, O., Ellingsen, T., Johannesson, M., &
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-800284-
Svensson, C. (2010). Anchoring and cognitive
1.00002-3
ability. Economics Letters, 107(1), 66–68.
Eidelman, S., Crandall, C. S., & Pattershall, J. (2009).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.econlet.2009.12.028
The existence bias. Journal of Personality and
Brandt, M. J., IJzerman, H., Dijksterhuis, A., Farach,
Social Psychology, 97(5), 765–775.
F. J., Geller, J., Giner-Sorolla, R., Grange, J. A.,
https://doi.org/10.1037/a0017058
Perugini, M., Spies, J. R., & van ’t Veer, A. (2014).
Eidelman, S., Pattershall, J., & Crandall, C. S. (2010).
The Replication Recipe: What makes for a con-
Longer is better. Journal of Experimental Social
vincing replication? Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 46(6), 993–998.
Social Psychology, 50, 217–224.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jesp.2010.07.008
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jesp.2013.10.005
===== PAGE 19/21 =====
REVISITING THE STATUS QUO BIAS 19
Erikson, R. S. (1971). The advantage of incumbency attenuating role of decision justifiability. Jour-
in congressional elections. Polity, 3(3), 395– nal of Consumer Research, 29(1), 116–128.
405. https://doi.org/10.2307/3234117 https://doi.org/10.1086/339925
Eyster, E. (2002). Rationalizing the past: A taste for Iyengar, S. S., & Lepper, M. R. (2000). When choice
consistency. Nuffield College Mimeograph. is demotivating: Can one desire too much of a
http://www.lse.ac.uk/economics/As- good thing? Journal of Personality and Social
sets/Documents/personal-pages/erik- Psychology, 79(6), 995–1006.
eyster/rationalising-the-past-a-taste-for- https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.79.6.995
consistency.pdf Johnson, E. J., & Goldstein, D. (2003). Do defaults
Feldman, G., Kutscher, L., & Yay, T. (2020). Omis- save lives? Science, 302(5649), 1338–1339.
sion and commission in judgment and decision https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1091721
making: Understanding and linking action‐in- Johnson, E. J., Hershey, J., Meszaros, J., & Kunreu-
action effects using the concept of normality. ther, H. (1993). Framing, probability distortions,
Social and Personality Psychology Compass, and insurance decisions. Journal of Risk and
14(8), e12557. Uncertainty, 7, 35–51.
https://doi.org/10.1111/spc3.12557 https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01065313
Festinger, L. (1962). A theory of cognitive dissonance Jost, J. T., Banaji, M. R., & Nosek, B. A. (2004). A dec-
(Vol. 2). Stanford University Press. ade of system justification theory: Accumulated
Festinger, L., & Carlsmith, J. M. (1959). Cognitive evidence of conscious and unconscious bol-
consequences of forced compliance. Journal of stering of the status quo. Political Psychology,
Abnormal and Social Psychology, 58(2), 203–210. 25(6), 881–919. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-
https://doi.org/10.1037/h0041593 9221.2004.00402.x
Fudenberg, D., Levine, D. K., & Maniadis, Z. (2012). Kahneman, D., Knetsch, J. L., & Thaler, R. H. (1991).
On the robustness of anchoring effects in WTP Anomalies: The endowment effect, loss aver-
and WTA experiments. American Economic sion, and status quo bias. Journal of Economic
Journal: Microeconomics, 4(2), 131–145. Perspectives, 5(1), 193–206.
https://doi.org/10.1257/mic.4.2.131 https://doi.org/10.1257/jep.5.1.193
Gelman, A. (2019). Don’t calculate post-hoc power Kay, A. C., Gaucher, D., Peach, J. M., Laurin, K., Frie-
using observed estimate of effect size. Annals sen, J., Zanna, M. P., & Spencer, S. J. (2009). In-
of Surgery, 269(1), e9. equality, discrimination, and the power of the
https://doi.org/10.1097/SLA.0000000000002 status quo: Direct evidence for a motivation to
908 see the way things are as the way they should
Gigerenzer, G., & Selten, R. (2002). Bounded ration- be. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
ality: The adaptive toolbox. MIT Press. 97(3), 421–434.
Gunaydin, G., Selcuk, E., Yilmaz, C., & Hazan, C. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0015997
(2018). I have, therefore I love: Status quo pref- Klein, R. A., Vianello, M., Hasselman, F., Adams, B.
erence in mate choice. Personality and Social G., Adams, R. B., Alper, S., Aveyard, M., Axt, J. R.,
Psychology Bulletin, 44(4), 589–600. Babalola, M. T., Bahník, Š., Batra, R., Berkics, M.,
https://doi.org/10.1177/0146167217746339 Bernstein, M. J., Berry, D. R., Bialobrzeska, O.,
Hartman, R. S., Doane, M. J., & Woo, C.-K. (1991). Binan, E. D., Bocian, K., Brandt, M. J., Busching,
Consumer rationality and the status quo. The R., … Nosek, B. A. (2018). Many Labs 2: Investi-
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106(1), 141–162. gating variation in replicability across samples
https://doi.org/10.2307/2937910 and settings. Advances in Methods and Prac-
Huber, J., Payne, J. W., & Puto, C. P. (2014). Let’s be tices in Psychological Science, 1(4), 443–490.
honest about the attraction effect. Journal of https://doi.org/10.1177/2515245918810225
Marketing Research, 51(4), 520–525. Kleiser, S. B., & Wagner, J. A. (1999). Understanding
https://doi.org/10.1509/jmr.14.0208 the pioneering advantage from the decision
Inman, J. J., & Zeelenberg, M. (2002). Regret in re- maker’s perspective: The case of product in-
peat purchase versus switching decisions: The
===== PAGE 20/21 =====
XIAO, LAM, PIARA, & FELDMAN
20
volvement and the status quo bias. NA - Ad- Montpetit, É., & Lachapelle, E. (2017). New environ-
vances in Consumer Research, 26, 593–597. mental technology uptake and bias toward the
http://acrwebsite.org/volumes/8325/vol- status quo: The case of phytoremediation. En-
umes/v26/NA-26 vironmental Technology & Innovation, 7, 102–
Kuhn, T. S. (2012). The structure of scientific revolu- 109. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eti.2016.12.008
tions. University of Chicago Press. Moshinsky, A., & Bar-Hillel, M. (2010). Loss aversion
LeBel, E. P., McCarthy, R. J., Earp, B. D., Elson, M., & and status quo label bias. Social Cognition,
Vanpaemel, W. (2018). A unified framework to 28(2), 191–204.
quantify the credibility of scientific findings. https://doi.org/10.1521/soco.2010.28.2.191
Advances in Methods and Practices in Psycho- Mrkva, K., Johnson, E. J., Gächter, S., & Herrmann,
logical Science, 1(3), 389–402. A. (2020). Moderating loss aversion: Loss aver-
https://doi.org/10.1177/2515245918787489 sion has moderators, but reports of its death
LeBel, E. P., Vanpaemel, W., Cheung, I., & Campbell, are greatly exaggerated. Journal of Consumer
L. (2019). A brief guide to evaluate replications. Psychology, 30(3), 407–428.
Meta-Psychology, 3. https://doi.org/10.1002/jcpy.1156
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2018.843 Muthukrishnan, A. V. (1995). Decision ambiguity and
Lieberman, M. B., & Montgomery, D. B. (1988). First- incumbent brand advantage. Journal of Con-
mover advantages. Strategic Management Jour- sumer Research, 22(1), 98–109.
nal, 9(S1), 41–58. https://doi.org/10.1086/209438
https://doi.org/10.1002/smj.4250090706 Nebel, J. M. (2015). Status quo bias, rationality, and
Lieder, F., & Griffiths, T. L. (2020). Resource-ra- conservatism about value. Ethics, 125(2), 449–
tional analysis: Understanding human cogni- 476. https://doi.org/10.1086/678482
tion as the optimal use of limited computa- Nosek, B. A., & Lakens, D. (2014). Registered Re-
tional resources. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, ports: A method to increase the credibility of
43, E1. published results. Social Psychology, 45(3), 137–
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X1900061X 141. https://doi.org/10.1027/1864-
Loewenstein, G. F., Weber, E. U., Hsee, C. K., & 9335/a000192
Welch, N. (2001). Risk as feelings. Psychological Open Science Collaboration. (2015). Estimating the
Bulletin, 127(2), 267–286. reproducibility of psychological science. Sci-
https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.127.2.267 ence, 349(6251), aac4716.
Luce, M. F. (1998). Choosing to avoid: Coping with https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aac4716
negatively emotion-laden consumer decisions. Redelmeier, D. A., & Shafir, E. (1995). Medical deci-
Journal of Consumer Research, 24(4), 409–433. sion making in situations that offer multiple al-
https://doi.org/10.1086/209518 ternatives. JAMA, 273(4), 302–305.
Luce, M. F., Bettman, J. R., & Payne, J. W. (1997). https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.1995.035202800
Choice processing in emotionally difficult deci- 48038
sions. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Ritov, I., & Baron, J. (1992). Status-quo and omission
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 23(2), 384– biases. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 5(1), 49–
405. https://doi.org/10.1037/0278- 61. https://doi.org/10.1007/bf00208786
7393.23.2.384 Samuelson, W., & Zeckhauser, R. (1988). Status quo
Maniadis, Z., Tufano, F., & List, J. A. (2014). One bias in decision making. Journal of Risk and Un-
swallow doesn’t make a summer: New evidence certainty, 1(1), 7–59.
on anchoring effects. American Economic Re- https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00055564
view, 104(1), 277–90. Schwartz, B., Ben-Haim, Y., & Dacso, C. (2011). What
https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.104.1.277 makes a good decision? Robust satisficing as a
Masatlioglu, Y., & Ok, E. A. (2005). Rational choice normative standard of rational decision mak-
with status quo bias. Journal of Economic The- ing. Journal for the Theory of Social Behaviour,
ory, 121(1), 1–29. 41(2), 209–227. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jet.2004.03.007 5914.2010.00450.x
===== PAGE 21/21 =====
REVISITING THE STATUS QUO BIAS 21
Schwartz, B., Ward, A., Monterosso, J., Lyubo- Tversky, A., & Shafir, E. (1992). Choice under con-
mirsky, S., White, K., & Lehman, D. R. (2002). flict: The dynamics of deferred decision. Psy-
Maximizing versus satisficing: Happiness is a chological Science, 3(6), 358–361.
matter of choice. Journal of Personality and So- https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-
cial Psychology, 83(5), 1178–1197. 9280.1992.tb00047.x
https://doi.org/10.1037//0022-3514.83.5.1178 Tykocinski, O. E., & Pittman, T. S. (1998). The conse-
Schweitzer, M. (1994). Disentangling status quo and quences of doing nothing: Inaction inertia as
omission effects: An experimental analysis. Or- avoidance of anticipated counterfactual regret.
ganizational Behavior and Human Decision Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
Processes, 58(3), 457–476. 75(3), 607–616. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-
https://doi.org/10.1006/obhd.1994.1046 3514.75.3.607
Shevchenko, Y., von Helversen, B., & Scheibehenne, Tykocinski, O. E., Pittman, T. S., & Tuttle, E. E.
B. (2014). Change and status quo in decisions (1995). Inaction inertia: Foregoing future bene-
with defaults: The effect of incidental emotions fits as a result of an initial failure to act. Journal
depends on the type of default. Judgment and of Personality and Social Psychology, 68(5), 793–
Decision Making, 9(3), 287–296. http://jour- 803. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-
nal.sjdm.org/13/13722/jdm13722.pdf 3514.68.5.793
Shi, X., Lin, Z., Liu, J., & Hui, Y. K. (2018). Consumer van ’t Veer, A. E., & Giner-Sorolla, R. (2016). Pre-
loyalty toward smartphone brands: The deter- registration in social psychology—A discussion
mining roles of deliberate inertia and cognitive and suggested template. Journal of Experi-
lock-in. Information & Management, 55(7), 866– mental Social Psychology, 67, 2–12.
876. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.im.2018.03.013 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jesp.2016.03.004
Simon, H. A. (1956). Rational choice and the struc- Yen, H. R., & Chuang, S.-C. (2008). The effect of in-
ture of the environment. Psychological Review, cidental affect on preference for the status
63(2), 129–138. quo. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Sci-
https://doi.org/10.1037/h0042769 ence, 36(4), 522–537.
Suri, G., Sheppes, G., Schwartz, C., & Gross, J. J. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11747-008-0084-2
(2013). Patient inertia and the status quo bias: Zajonc, R. B. (1968). Attitudinal effects of mere ex-
When an inferior option is preferred. Psycho- posure. Journal of Personality and Social Psy-
logical Science, 24(9), 1763–1769. chology, 9(2, Pt. 2), 1–27.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797613479976 https://doi.org/10.1037/h0025848
Thaler, R. H. (1980). Toward a positive theory of Zwaan, R. A., Etz, A., Lucas, R. E., & Donnellan, M. B.
consumer choice. Journal of Economic Behavior (2018). Making replication mainstream. Behav-
& Organization, 1(1), 39–60. ioral and Brain Sciences, 41.
https://doi.org/10.1016/0167-2681(80)90051-7 https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X17001972
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment under
uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Science,
185(4157), 1124–1131.
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.185.4157.1124
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1981). The framing of
decisions and the psychology of choice. Sci-
ence, 211(4481), 453–458.
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.7455683
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1991). Loss aversion in
riskless choice: A reference-dependent model.
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106(4),
1039–1061. https://doi.org/10.2307/2937956