
===== PAGE 1/10 =====
Meta-Psychology,2021,vol5,MP.2020.2506
Opendata:Notapplicable Editedby:HenrikDanielsson
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2020.2506
Openmaterials:Yes Reviewedby:Dixon,P.,BuchananE.,Magnusson,K.
Articletype:OriginalArticle
Openandreproducibleanalysis:Yes Analysisreproducedby:LucijaBatinovi´c
PublishedundertheCC-BY4.0license
Openreviewsandeditorialprocess:Yes AllsupplementaryfilescanbeaccessedatOSF:
Preregistration:No https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/CB78P
What to make of equivalence testing with a
post-specified margin?
Harlan Campbell
University of British Columbia Department of Statistics
Paul Gustafson
University of British Columbia Department of Statistics
Abstract
Inordertodeterminewhetherornotaneffectisabsentbasedonastatisticaltest,therecommendedfrequentisttool
is the equivalence test. Typically, it is expected that an appropriate equivalence margin has been specified before
any data are observed. Unfortunately, this can be a difficult task. If the margin is too small, then the test’s power
will be substantially reduced. If the margin is too large, any claims of equivalence will be meaningless. Moreover,
it remains unclear how defining the margin afterwards will bias one’s results. In this short article, we consider a
series of hypothetical scenarios in which the margin is defined post-hoc or is otherwise considered controversial.
We also review a number of relevant, potentially problematic actual studies from clinical trials research, with the
aimofmotivatingacriticaldiscussionastowhatisacceptableanddesirableinthereportingandinterpretationof
equivalencetests.
Keywords: equivalencetesting,non-inferioritytesting,confidenceintervals,type1error,frequentisttesting,clinical
trials,negativestudies,nullresults
Facts do not accumulate on the blank slates of as the basis for a claim that the effect is null. Unfor-
researchers’mindsanddatasimplydonotspeak tunately, such an argument is logically flawed. As the
for themselves. [...] Interpretation can produce sayinggoes,“absenceofevidenceisnotevidenceofab-
soundjudgmentsorsystematicerror. Onlyhind- sence”(AltmanandBland,1995;Hartungetal.,1983).
sightwillenableustotellwhichhasoccurred.
Instead, to correctly conclude the absence of an effect
Kaptchuk,2003 underthefrequentistparadigm,therecommendedtool
istheequivalencetest(alsoknownasa“non-inferiority
Introduction test”forone-sidedtesting(Wellek,2010)).
Let θ be our parameter of interest. An equivalence
Consider the following hypothetical situation. After
testreversesthequestionthatisaskedinanullhypoth-
having collected data, we want to determine whether
esissignificancetest(NHST).Insteadofaskingwhether
or not an effect is absent based on a statistical test.
we can reject the null hypothesis of no effect, e.g.,
All too often, in such a situation, non-significance (i.e. H : θ = 0, an equivalence test examines whether the
0
p>0.05),oracombinationofbothnon-significanceand
magnitude of θ is at all meaningful: Can we reject the
supposed high power (i.e. a large sample size), is used
===== PAGE 2/10 =====
2
possibilitythatθisaslargeorlargerthanoursmallestef- testing of non-inferiority [or equivalence] may not be
fectsizeofinterest,∆? Thenullhypothesisforanequiv- interpretable.” And Wiens, 2002 observes that: “The
alencetestisdefinedasH :θ(cid:60)(−∆,∆). Inotherwords, potential biases of defining the margin after the study
0
equivalenceimpliesthatθissmallenoughthatanynon- should be weighed against the cost and inconvenience
zero effect would be at most equal to ∆. The interval of betterunderstanding thedifferences [betweenstudy
(−∆,∆) is known as the equivalence margin and repre- groups].” Finally,theCommitteeforProprietaryMedic-
sents a range of values for which θ can be considered inal Products (CPMP), 2001 (the EU scientific advisory
negligible. organization dealing with new human pharmaceuticals
In psychology research and in the social sciences, approval) notes that: “it is prudent to specify a non-
where the practice of equivalence testing is relatively inferiority margin in the protocol in order to avoid the
new –but now “rapidly expanding” (Koh and Cribbie, seriousdifficultiesthatcanarisefromlaterselection.”
2013)– there are many questions about how to best Statements such as these lead one to ask the fol-
conduct and interpret equivalence tests. For example, lowing. Under what circumstances would equivalence
consider the question of a “post-specified” margin. It testing with a data-dependent margin “not be inter-
is generally accepted that one must specify the equiv- pretable?” What are the “potential biases” and “seri-
alence margin a priori, i.e. before any data have been ous difficulties” we should consider in these, less than
observed (Wellek, 2010). However, in our hypothetical ideal,circumstances? WalkerandNowacki,2011stress
situation, suppose that we did not have the foresight that defining the equivalence margin before observing
needed to have pre-specified this margin, are we then the data is “essential to maintain the type I error at
simplyoutofluck? the desired level” suggesting that potential type I error
It is worth noting that lack of foresight is only one inflation is the issue of concern. Yet this too remains
reason we may have failed to have pre-specified an ap- unclear. With equivalence testing becoming more and
propriate equivalence margin. Defining and justifying morecommonforpsychologyresearchers,theseareim-
the equivalence margin is one of the “most difficult is- portantmatterstoaddress.
sues”(Hungetal.,2005)forresearchers. Ifthemargin In this article we will shed light on these curious
wedefineisdeemedtoolarge,thenanyclaimofequiv- questions by considering a series of rather confound-
alence will be considered meaningless. If the margin inghypotheticalscenarios(Sections2and3)aswellas
we define is somehow too small, then the probability a number of relevant case studies from biomedical re-
of declaring equivalence will be substantially reduced search,whereequivalencetestinghasbeenwidelyused
(Wiens, 2002). While the margin is ideally chosen as a for decades (Section 4). We conclude (Section 5) with
boundary to objectively exclude the smallest effect size an invitation for further discussion about how best to
of interest (Lakens et al., 2017), these “ideal” bound- addressthetitlequestion: whattomakeofequivalence
aries can be difficult to define, and there is generally testingwithapost-specifiedmargin?
no clear consensus among stakeholders (Keefe et al.,
2013). Furthermore, previously agreed-upon meaning- ThePseudo-typeIerrorandapathologicalcase
ful effect sizes may be difficult to ascertain as they are
Before going forward, we would be wise to recall
rarelyspecifiedinprotocolsandpublishedresults(Djul-
that, under the frequentist paradigm, hypotheses are
begovicetal.,2011).
statementsaboutparametersandthereforearenonran-
Supposenowthat,havingfailedtopre-specifyanad-
domquantities. Hence,eachhypothesisiseithertrueor
equate equivalence margin, we define the equivalence
false,irrespectiveofhowthedataarerealized.
marginpost-hoc,havingalreadycollectedandobserved
Let θ be the parameter of interest and let X repre-
thedata. Giventhepotentialconsequencesofinterpret-
sent the data. Borrowing from the notation of Wellek,
ing data based on post-hoc decisions, it is understand-
2017, let θ(X;α) be the lower bound of a one-sided
able that this idea may be alarming to some; e.g., see (1 − α)% c¯ onfidence interval (CI); and let θ¯(X;α) be
the “Harkonen case” (as discussed in Lee and Rubin,
the upper bound of a one-sided (1−α)% CI. For exam-
2016) in which the U.S. Department of Justice prose-
ple, a one-sided 95% CI for θ could be written out as
cuted drug-maker InterMune (United States v. Harko-
[−∞, θ¯(X;0.05)]; a two-sided 90% CI could be written
nen, 2013), for making claims based on post-hoc sub-
as[θ(X;0.05),θ¯(X;0.05)].
groupanalyses. ¯
Let us define a symmetric equivalence margin as
Inthebiostatisticsliteraturetherearemanywarnings
(−∆,∆). Thenthestandardequivalencetestinghypothe-
abouthowandwhentospecifytheequivalencemargin.
sesaredefinedas:
Hung et al., 2005 note that: “If the margin can change
depending on what has been observed [...] statistical
===== PAGE 3/10 =====
3
H˜ : θ≤−∆(X), or θ≥∆(X)
0
vs.
H˜ : −∆(X)<θ<∆(X).
1
In this case, we may not necessarily have that
Pr(reject H˜ |H˜ istrue)≤α. Tobetterunderstand,letus
0 0
consider the following admittedly “pathological case.”
Let ∆(X) be chosen, based on the observed data, to
be the smallest possible value for which one can claim
equivalence (known in the literature as the “LEAD”
boundaries, see Meyners, 2007). This is done by set-
ting:
∆(X)=max(|θ(X;α)|,|θ¯(X;α)|)+(cid:15),
¯
where (cid:15) is a small positive real number. For example,
Figure 1. The one-to-one correspondence between if a 90% CI for θ is [−0.2,0.5], the “pathological” equiv-
α and ∆. In the above plot, an equivalence test is alence margin might be defined as [−0.51,0.51], with
conducted on two sample normally distributed data. ∆(X)=0.5+0.01.
The observed mean difference is θˆ = 0.2, and the ob- Given the monotonic relationship between a confi-
served pooled standard deviation is equal to 1, with dence interval and an equivalence test, there is a one-
n 1 = n 2 = 50. The shape of this particular curve is spe- to-onecorrespondencebetweenαand∆. Foranygiven
cific to this particular data. However, for any general value of α, conditional on a fixed sample of data, there
case, the smallest value of α needed to reject the null isavaluefor∆forwhichonecanrejectH . Conversely,
0
(x-axis)decreasesas∆increases(y-axis). Furthermore, foranygivenvalueof∆,thereisavalueofαforwhich
as the dashed lines indicate, when ∆ = θˆ, the corre- onecanreject H ;seeFigure1.
0
spondingvalueofαwillbe0.5. Inourpathologicalcase,wehavethatPr(reject H˜ )=
0
1, i.e., we will always claim equivalence. In this situa-
tion, the margin is entirely “data-dependent.” In other
H : θ≤−∆, or θ≥∆, words,thedata(assummarizedbytheconfidenceinter-
0
vs. val) and the margin are perfectly correlated. We write
H : −∆<θ<∆. cor(f(X),∆) = 1, where f(X) = max(|θ(X;α)|,|θ¯(X;α)|).
1
¯
Figure 2 displays the relationship between type 1 er-
There is a one-to-one correspondence between ror and cor(f(X),∆), see details in the Appendix. In
symmetric confidence intervals and equivalence test- the pathological case, since Pr(reject H˜ ) = 1, we also
0
ing. The null hypothesis, H , can be rejected have that Pr(reject H˜ |H˜ ) = 1. As such, we have
0 0 0
whenever the realized confidence bounds satisfy Pr(reject H˜ |H˜ ) > α, and therefore, the “pseudo-type I
0 0
[θ(X;α),θ¯(X;α)] ⊂ (−∆,∆). Conversely, there will be in- error” is not controlled. When there is less correlation,
¯
sufficient evidence to reject the null hypothesis when- i.e. whenthemarginisnotentirelydata-dependent,we
ever [θ(X;α),θ¯(X;α)] (cid:49) (−∆,∆). For example, with the canexpecttoseelesstype1errorinflation. Inorderfor
standa¯ rd α = 0.05, we can reject H if and only if a the test to be valid, the key is independence between
0
90% CI for θ fits entirely within the equivalence mar- themarginandthedata. Inthecasewhenthedataand
gin. Equivalence testing provides the standard guaran- the margin are entirely independent, the type 1 error
tee about type 1 error that Pr(reject H |H istrue) ≤ α; ratewillbeatmostequaltoα,asdesired.
0 0
seeWellek,2017. Ifwerejectthenullhypothesisifand
only if the 90% CI for θ fits within (−∆,∆), we can rest Asomewhatlesspathologicalcase
assured that we will only make a type 1 error in less
Nowletusconsiderasomewhatlesspathologicalsit-
than5%ofcases.
uation. TheCPMPpublishedanadvisoryreport,“Points
Shouldtheequivalencemarginnotbespecifiedapri-
to consider on switching between superiority and non-
ori,andbedefinedbasedontheobserveddata,wehave
inferiority”(CommitteeforProprietaryMedicinalProd-
thefollowingadmittedlyimproperhypothesistest:
ucts(CPMP),2001),inwhichtheydescribeanotherhy-
potheticalsituationwherethemarginisdeterminedaf-
terthedataisobserved:
===== PAGE 4/10 =====
4
Figure 2. In order for the test to be valid, the key is independence between the margin and the data. The
relationship between type 1 error and the correlation between the margin and the data. The correlation measure,
cor(f(X),∆), isobtained byvarying the probabilityof setting ∆(X) equal tothe LEAD marginvs. setting ∆(X) equal
toavalueentirelyindependentofthedata. Thecurveistheresultofrepeatedsimulationsoftwo-sampledata;see
detailsinAppendix.
“Let us suppose that a bioequivalence trial However, if the trial had resulted in a con-
finds a 90% confidence interval for the rel- fidence interval ranging from 0.75 to 1.20,
ative bioavailability of a new formulation then a post hoc change of equivalence mar-
that ranges from 0.90 to 1.15. Can we gins to +/-25% would not be acceptable
only conclude that the relative bioavailabil- because of the obvious conclusion that the
ity lies between the conventional limits of equivalence margin was chosen to fit the
0.80and1.25becausetheseweretheprede- data.”
fined equivalence margins? Or can we con-
cludethatitliesbetween0.90and1.15? According to this recommendation, it seems that,
without any scrutiny, we are free to shrink a pre-
The narrower interval based on the ac-
specifiedmarginasneeded. However,weshouldalways
tual data is the appropriate one to ac-
avoid widening the pre-specified margin if that is what
cept. Hence, if the regulatory requirement
is necessary. If this is the case, it would suggest that
changedto+/-15%,thisstudywouldhave
a prudent strategy would be to always pre-specify the
produced satisfactory results. There is no
largestpossiblemarginbeforecollectingdata,andthen
question here of a data-derived selection
shrinkthe marginasrequired. Thismay strikesomeas
process.
opportunisticandpotentiallyproblematic.
===== PAGE 5/10 =====
5
Ng, 2003 studies a similar hypothetical situation in oral alternative to warfarin in patients with non-
which a large, possibly infinite number of margins are valvular atrial fibrillation to reduce the risk of
all pre-specified and all the corresponding hypotheses thromboembolic complications. The primary end
are tested (without any Bonferroni-type of adjustment pointineachstudywastheincidenceofallstrokes
formultiplecomparisons). Equivalenceisthenclaimed andsystemicembolicevents,andtheprimaryob-
using the narrowest of all potential pre-specified mar- jectivewastoestablishthenon-inferiorityofxime-
gins for which equivalence is statistically significant. lagatran relative to warfarin with a pre-specified
Ng, 2003 explains why this hypothetical strategy may margin of an absolute 2% difference in the event
be problematic: “Although there is no inflation of the rate;seeHalperin,2003.
typeIerrorrate[duetothefactthatallhypothesesare
Both studies met the primary objectives of non-
nested], simultaneous testing of many nested null hy-
inferioritywiththepre-specifiedmargin. Assuch,
potheses is problematic in a confirmatory trial because
upon completion, the studies were heralded as a
theprobabilityofconfirmingthefindingofsuchtesting
“major breakthrough” (Albers et al., 2005; Kul-
in a second trial would approach 0.5 as the number of
bertus, 2003). However, upon regulatory review
nestednullhypothesesapproachesinfinity.”
bytheFDACardiovascularandRenaldrugsAdvi-
To better understand Ng, 2003’s concern, consider a
soryCommittee(CRAC),thepre-specifiedmargin
similar setup where, for a standard null hypothesis sig-
was judged to be “too generous” (Boudes, 2006).
nificance test, a large, possibly infinite number of pre-
This post-hoc criticism of the “unreasonably gen-
specified α-levels (allowable type I error rates) are de-
erous”(Kauletal.,2005)margin,alongwithcon-
fined. The null is then rejected using the smallest of
cernsaboutpotentiallivertoxicity,ledtoaunani-
all potential pre-specified α values. Under this proce-
mousdecisionbytheCRDACtoconcludethatthe
dure, the probability of confirming a statistical signif-
benefitofximelagatrandidnotoutweightherisk.
icant finding in a second trial (with identical sample
The FDA then refused to grant approval of xime-
size and α) approaches 0.5; see Hoenig and Heisey,
lagatran for any of the proposed indications, see
2001 who describe this (often unappreciated) property
Head et al., 2012 and Boudes, 2006 who provide
of “retrospective power.” As such, it is always expected
adetailedtimelineanddescriptionoftheapproval
that one specifies (and justifies) a single α-level prior
process.
to observing any data; see the recent commentary of
Lakens et al., 2018. (These two situations are in fact 2. TheEVERESTIIstudywasaRCTdesignedtoeval-
identical, due to the aforementioned one-to-one corre- uate percutaneous mitral valve repair relative to
spondence between a data-driven selection of α and a mitral valve surgery (Mauri et al., 2010). The
data-drivenchoiceof∆;seeFigure1.) primary efficacy end point was defined as the
proportion of patients free from death, surgery
Howhypotheticalaresituationslikethese? for valve dysfunction, and with moderate-severe
(3+) or severe (4+) mitral regurgitation at 12
While the cases described in the previous sections
months. Upon completion, researchers claimed
were purely hypothetical, similar situations do arise in
success when the primary non-inferiority objec-
practice. Weconsideranumberofdifferentclinicaltrial
tive was achieved. However, the conclusion of
studies as examples, with the aim of motivating a criti-
non-inferiority was “difficult to accept due to un-
cal discussion as to what is acceptable and desirable in
duly wide margins” (Head et al., 2012). Thus,
thereportingandinterpretationofequivalencetests.
theFDAdeterminedthatdespitethesignificant p-
First, consider cases of post-hoc judgement that of-
value, “non-inferiority is not implied due to the
ten arise in the regulatory approval of drugs seeking a
large margin” and therefore the data “did not
designation of bio-equivalence for approval. When the
demonstrate an appropriate benefit-risk profile
pre-specified margin is deemed too generous (i.e. too
when compared to standard mitral valve surgery
wide)byregulatoryauthoritiesonlyafterthedatahave
and were inadequate to support approval” (FDA,
alreadybeenobservedandanalyzed,theregulatormay
2013).
decidethatforthepurposesofapproval, thedrugdoes
notmeetanappropriatestandardforequivalence. Con-
In other instances, the complete opposite has oc-
sidertwoexamples:
curred. Despite the fact that the researchers fail to
pre-specify a specific margin prior to observing the
1. TheSPORTIFIIIandSPORTIFVrandomizedcon-
data, the regulatory agency will still accept a claim
trolled trials (RCTs) were studies designed to in-
of equivalence/non-inferiority on the basis that, given
vestigatethepotentialofximelagatranasthefirst
===== PAGE 6/10 =====
6
some non-controversial post-hoc margin, there is suffi- two examples. In the first case, the margin was not
cientevidence. Considertwoexamples: pre-defined, yet claims of equivalence were neverthe-
lessputforward. Inthesecondcase,whileamarginwas
1. The goal of MannKind’s “Study 103” was to eval- pre-defined,additionalconclusionsweremadebasedon
uate the inhaled insulin Afrezza for the treat- post-specifiedmargins.
ment of diabetes mellitus in adults. Subjects
wererandomizedto12weeksofcontinuedtreat- 1. A. B. Chang et al., 2008 published the results of
ment in one of three treatment arms. The pre- a RCT with the goal of evaluating a 5- versus 3-
specified primary objective was to show superi- day course of oral corticosteroids (CS) for non-
ority of the Afrezza TI+metformin arm relative hospitalised children with asthma exacerbations.
tothesecretagogue+metforminarm,withrespect The primary outcome was 2-week morbidity of
to change in HbA1c at 12 weeks. Upon comple- children. The study did not show a statistically
tion, the superiority objective was not achieved significant difference between the two treatment
and a non-inferiority margin had not been pre- arms. In the interpretation of the results, Chang
specified by the researchers. However, the reg- etal. (2008)notethat: “Itwouldhavebeenideal
ulators were able to accept a claim of non- todefineanon-inferiorityorequivalencemargina
inferiority. The FDA clinical review states: “The priorionthebasisofaminimallyimportanteffect
sponsor did not specify a non-inferiority margin. or historical controls. Our study was designed as
However, the FDA statistical reviewer noted that a superiority trial, and we did not define a non-
AfrezzaTI+metforminwasnon-inferiortosecret- inferiority margin a priori. Nevertheless, for the
agogue+metformin when the standard margin of primary outcome measure, the chosen symptom
0.4% for insulins is used (the upper bound of the score cut-off of 0.20 (i.e., chosen minimally im-
95% confidence interval for the treatment differ- portantdifference),thestudyshowsequivalence.”
enceinHbA1cis0.3%),”(Yanoff,2014). Assuch,theresearchersconcludedthatthe3-day
and 5-day treatment courses were “equally effi-
2. TheALLY-3trialwasaone-armphase3trialwith
cacious” in reducing the symptoms of asthma (A.
the goal of evaluating the safety and efficacy of
Changetal.,2007).
oral daclatasvir for chronic HCV genotype 3 in-
fection (McCormack, 2015). There was no ac- 2. Jonesetal.,2016studiedtheefficacyofisoflurane
tive or placebo control and as such it was impos- relative to sevoflurane in cardiac surgery. When
sible to conduct a non-inferiority or equivalence interpreting the results, the authors note that:
test based only on the trial data. As such the “our choice of non-inferiority margin may seem
FDA looked to other trials to determine estimates tobeoverlygenerous; however, itisimportantto
for the effectiveness of competitor treatments. In emphasize that, if the margin had been reduced
addition, as noted by the Oregon Health Author- to as low as 1.5%, the conclusions of this trial
ity, “[t]he ALLY-3 trial [...] did not define a non- wouldnothavechanged,”(Jonesetal.,2016).
inferiority margin for determination of efficacy.
TheFDAanalysiscalculateditbasedonhistorical
data and concluded that DCV [daclatasvir] with If, following a study’s publication, other researchers
SOF [sofosbuvir] achieved non-inferiority com- takeissuewithhowthestudy’sequivalencemarginwas
paredtoSOF[sofosbuvir]withRBV[ribavirin]for justified, they will often respond in a letter to the jour-
24 weeks[...],” (Herink, 2016). In this case, the nal. The post-hoc debate between Groenewoud et al.,
FDA reviewers “clinically justified” their choice of 2017 and Gupta et al., 2016 about the appropriateness
apost-specifiednon-inferioritymarginbasedona of the pre-specified non-inferiority margin defined in
historicaldata;seeStruble,2015. Groenewoud et al., 2016’s study on methods for em-
bryotransferisanexcellentexampleofthis. Intheend,
These studies illustrates the fact that, in some fields, readersarelefttojudgeforthemselves.
there may be well-established “standard” margins or
sufficient “historical data.” Such standards no doubt Conclusion
makepost-specificationlesscontroversialforregulatory
Researchers advocate that equivalence testing has
agencies. When it comes to peer-reviewed journals,
great potential to “facilitate theory falsification” (Quin-
researchers will often note that, while an equivalence
tana, 2018). By clearly distinguishing between what
margin was not pre-specified, a conclusion of equiva-
is “evidence of absence” versus what is an “absence of
lence can still be (cautiously) accepted. We consider
evidence,” equivalence testing may facilitate the long
===== PAGE 7/10 =====
7
“series of searching questions” necessary to evaluate a et al., 2006 find that often studies “reported margins
“failed outcome” (Pocock and Stone, 2016). As a re- [that] were so large that they were clearly unconvinc-
sult, it may encourage greater publication of null re- ing.” Indeed, as Gøtzsche, 2006 conclude: “clinicians
sults which is desperately needed (Fanelli, 2011). Yet, should especially bear in mind that noninferiority mar-
outside of health research, guidelines on how best to gins are often far too large to be clinically meaningful
define andinterpret margins are lacking. We hopethat andthataclaimofequivalencemayalsobemisleading
the question posed in the title of this article will moti- if a trial has not been conducted to an appropriately
vate researchers to further consider the delicate issues highstandard.” Weconcludewiththefollowinggeneral
involved. recommendations:
In clinical trials research, expectations that a mar-
ginbepre-specifiedhavebeenwellestablishedforquite • If the parameter of interest is not measured in
sometime(Piaggioetal.,2006). Thisisnotthecasein units that are interpretable, one should consider
otherdisciplines. Inpsychologyresearchandintheso- standardized effect sizes. Campbell, 2020 notes
cialsciences,discussionsofhowbesttoexecuteequiva- that: “equivalence tests for standardized effects
lencetestsareunderwayandappropriaterecommenda- may help researchers in situations when what is
tionsarecruciallyneeded. “negligible” is particularly difficult to determine.”
Onemightarguethatthepathologicalcaseofequiv- For instance, if the outcome of interest is a de-
alence testing we considered does not actually qualify pressionscale,theclinicalrelevanceofacertain x
as testing per se, and is instead, simply a tool for de- point improvement may not be intuitively mean-
scribingthedata. ThisistheopinionofMeyners,2007, ingful. It may be difficult to define what number
who concludes that, as a descriptor of the data, the ofpointscanbeconsidered“negligible.” However,
“LEAD boundaries”, (−∆(X),∆(X)), provide “useful in- sinceaCohen’sd =0.2iswidelyinterpretedtobe
formation”andinsomecasesare“evenmoreimportant a “small” sized effect (Cohen, 1977; Fritz et al.,
thanconfidenceintervals”forreportingresults. 2012), one could conclude, based on an equiva-
At the end of the day, everyone must arrive at their lence test which rejects the null with ∆ = d = 0.2,
own conclusions as to whether or not a sufficient stan- thatanyeffect,ifitexists,isatmostsmall.
dard of evidence for equivalence has been demon-
• The validity of an equivalence test does not de-
strated. Obviously this is often easier said than done.
pend on the margin being pre-specified. Rather,
Asonefinalexamplefromclinicaltrials,weturntothe
the necessary requirement for a valid test is that
infamousdebateoverusingbevacizumab(avastin)asa
themarginiscompletelyindependentofthedata.
treatmentforage-relatedmaculardegeneration. Anon-
In one of our biomedical examples (Afrezza TI +
inferiority study was conducted to investigate (Group,
metformin), we described a situation where the
2011). However, some considered the pre-specified
researchers had not specified a margin but the
non-inferiority margin of 5 letters (on the ETDRS vi-
FDAadopteda“standardmarginof0.4%.” While
sualacuitychart)as“generous”evenbeforetheresults
therearenocomparableindependentagenciesto
ofthetrialwereannounced(Hirschler,2011). Thissug-
regulate psychology research, peer-review jour-
geststhat,regardlessoftheresults,somewouldhavere-
nalsdopossesssubstantialleverageandwouldbe
mainedskepticalofanyclaimofnon-inferioritywiththe
wise to consider adopting a set of “default mar-
5-letter margin. In stark contrast, the standard of evi-
gins” (based on standardized effect sizes). While
denceformanyhealthcareproviderswasmuchweaker.
“default equivalence margins” may not be appro-
Indeed, many doctors determined that the use of beva-
priate for all studies, their use would be similar
cizumab (avastin) as a substitute for ranibizumab (lu-
to that of “default priors” for Bayesian inference
centis) was justified (particularly given the “too big to
(Rouder et al., 2012) and offer a potential for
ignore” price difference) even before the completion
moreobjectiveanalyses.
of the non-inferiority trial and were comfortable treat-
ing large numbers of patients with Avastin “off-label” • Simply because a margin has been pre-specified
(Steinbrook, 2006). In this situation, financial incen- (and is therefore guaranteed to be independent
tivesclearlyplayedacompetingrolewithstatisticalcon- of the data), it is not necessarily an appropriate
siderationsofclinicalefficacyinwhatwastobeconsid- choice. Regardless of whether the margin is pre-
ered“equivalent.” specified, or defined post-hoc, we must acknowl-
While the use of equivalence testing should be en- edge that a claim of “noninferiority [or equiva-
couraged, caution is warranted. In a review of equiv- lence]isalmostcertainwithlenientnoninferiority
alence and non-inferiority clinical trials, Le Henanff margins”(Flaccoetal.,2016). Oneshouldalways
===== PAGE 8/10 =====
8
criticallyconsiderthepracticalimplicationsofthe ConflictofInterestandFunding
givenmargin.
We have no conflicts of interest to declare. The
• If one is to suggest equivalence based on a post- research was supported by NSERC Discovery Grant
hoc margin, one must, at the very least, be forth- RGPIN-2019-03957.
comingandhonestaboutthepotentialforbias. In
such cases, every effort should be made to justify AuthorContributions
the appropriateness of the post-specified margin
H.CampbellandP.Gustafsonbothcontributedtothe
based on factors entirely independent of the ob-
conceptandwritingofthisarticle. H.Campbelldrafted
serveddata.
theoriginalmanuscript,andP.Gustafsonprovidedcrit-
ical revisions. Both authors approved the final version
• In the absence of a pre-specified margin, one can
ofthemanuscriptforsubmission.
always resort to simply reporting the associated
confidenceinterval. Iftheconfidenceintervalcon-
OpenScienceStatement
tainsthenullandis“narrowenough,”theabsence
ofaneffectcanbedeemedlikely. Thistacticlacks
the formalism of equivalence testing, yet avoids
the difficulties of interpretation and justification
withapost-hocmargin.
This article earned the Open Materials badge for mak-
• Deliberate ornot, questionable researchpractices ing the materials available. It was not pre-registered
causemajorharmtothecredibilityofpsychology andhadnocollecteddatatoshare. Ithasbeenverified
research (Sijtsma, 2016). With this in mind, re- thattheanalysisreproducedtheresultspresentedinthe
searchers, given their incentive to publish (Nosek article. Theentireeditorialprocess, includingtheopen
et al., 2012), are not in the best position to de- reviews,arepublishedintheonlinesupplement.
finetheirownmargins. Thisistruewheneverthe
margin is pre-specified, and especially true when References
a margin is suggested post-hoc. As such, in or-
Albers,G.W.,Diener,H.-C.,Frison,L.,Grind,M.,Nevin-
der to avoid any potential scrutiny, researchers
son, M., Partridge, S., Halperin, J. L., Horrow,
wouldbewisetoseekanindependentparty,void
J., Olsson, S. B., Petersen, P., et al. (2005).
of any potential biases, to define an appropriate
Ximelagatran vs warfarin for stroke prevention
margin. This is already common practice in clin-
in patients with nonvalvular atrial fibrillation:
ical trial research, where sponsors have undeni-
Arandomizedtrial.JAMA,293(6),690–698.
able incentives to further drug development and
Altman, D. G., & Bland, J. M. (1995). Statistics notes:
the FDA and other regulators will (ideally) set
Absenceofevidenceisnotevidenceofabsence.
a clear guidance for an acceptable margin. In
TheBMJ,311(7003),485.
other fields, such as psychology, the suggestion
Boudes,P.F.(2006).Thechallengesofnewdrugsbene-
thatanequivalencemarginbedefined/scrutinized
fitsandrisksanalysis:Lessonsfromtheximela-
byanindependentpartyhasrecentlybeenconsid-
gatranFDAcardiovascularadvisorycommittee.
eredwithintheframeworkofaproposedpublica-
ContemporaryClinicalTrials,27(5),432–440.
tion policy. In the conditional equivalence testing
Campbell, H. (2020). Equivalence testing for stan-
(CET)publicationpolicy,theindependentjournal
dardized effect sizes in linear regression. arXiv
editor/reviewers are tasked with critically evalu-
preprintarXiv:2004.01757.
ating a given margin prior to the start of a study
Campbell, H., & Gustafson, P. (2018). Conditional
(CampbellandGustafson,2018).
equivalence testing: An alternative remedy for
publicationbias.PloSOne,13(4),e0195145.
AuthorContact
Chang, A., Clark, R., Thearle, D., Stone, G., Petsky,
H. Campbell: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0959- H., Champion, A., Wheeler, C., & Acworth, J.
1594 and P. Gustafson: https://orcid.org/0000-0002- (2007).Longerbetterthanshorter?amulticen-
2375-5006. Please contact H. Campbell at har- trerandomisedcontroltrial(rct)of5vs3days
lan.campbell@stat.ubc.cawithanyinquiries. of oral prednisolone for acute asthma in chil-
dren.Respirology,12,A67.
===== PAGE 9/10 =====
9
Chang,A.B.,Clark,R.,Sloots,T.P.,Stone,D.G.,Petsky, Halperin, J. L. (2003). Ximelagatran compared with
H. L., Thearle, D., Champion, A. A., Wheeler, warfarin for prevention of thromboembolism
C., & Acworth, J. P. (2008). A 5-versus 3-day in patients with nonvalvular atrial fibrillation:
course of oral corticosteroids for children with Rationale, objectives, and design of a pair of
asthmaexacerbationswhoarenothospitalised: clinical studies and baseline patient character-
A randomised controlled trial. Medical Journal istics(sportifiiiandv).AmericanHeartJournal,
ofAustralia,189(6),306–310. 146(3),431–438.
Cohen, J. (1977). Statistical power analysis for the be- Hartung, J., Cottrell, J. E., & Giffin, J. P. (1983). Ab-
havioralsciences.Academicpress. sence of evidence is not evidence of absence.
CommitteeforProprietaryMedicinalProducts(CPMP). Anesthesiology: The Journal of the American So-
(2001). Points to consider on switching be- cietyofAnesthesiologists,58(3),298–299.
tween superiority and non-inferiority. British Head, S. J., Kaul, S., Bogers, A. J., & Kappetein, A. P.
JournalofClinicalPharmacology,52(3),223. (2012). Non-inferiority study design: Lessons
Djulbegovic,B.,Kumar,A.,Magazin,A.,Schroen,A.T., to be learned from cardiovascular trials. Euro-
Soares, H., Hozo, I., Clarke, M., Sargent, D., & peanHeartJournal,33(11),1318–1324.
Schell,M.J.(2011).Optimismbiasleadstoin- Herink,M.(2016).Classupdatewithnewdrugevalua-
conclusive results - an empirical study. Journal tion:DirectantiviralsforHepatitisC.%5Curl%
ofClinicalEpidemiology,64(6),583–593. 7Bhttps://www.orpdl.org/durm/meetings/
Fanelli, D. (2011). Negative results are disappearing meetingdocs/2016_01_28/archives/2016_01_
from most disciplines and countries. Sciento- 28_HepatitisCClassUpdate_FINAL.pdf%7D
metrics,90(3),891–904. Hirschler, B. (2011). Head-to-head eye drug results
FDA. (2013). Pma p100009: FDA summary of safety tipped for early may. Reuters. https://www.
andeffectivenessdata.accessdata.fda.gov. reuters.com/article/novartis-roche-lucentis/
Flacco, M. E., Manzoli, L., & Ioannidis, J. (2016). Non- head-to-head-eye-drug-results-tipped-for-
inferiority is almostcertain with lenient nonin- early-may-idUSLDE72S1T620110330
feriority margins. Journal of Clinical Epidemiol- Hoenig, J. M., & Heisey, D. M. (2001). The abuse of
ogy,71,118. power: The pervasive fallacy of power calcu-
Fritz, C. O., Morris, P. E., & Richler, J. J. (2012). Effect lations for data analysis. The American Statis-
size estimates: Current use, calculations, and tician,55(1),19–24.
interpretation. Journal of Experimental Psychol- Hung,H.,Wang,S.-J.,&O’Neill,R.(2005).Aregulatory
ogy:General,141(1),2. perspective on choice of margin and statistical
Gøtzsche,P.C.(2006).Lessonsfromandcautionsabout inferenceissueinnon-inferioritytrials.Biomet-
noninferiority and equivalence randomized tri- ricalJournal,47(1),28–36.
als.JAMA,295(10),1172–1174. Jones, P. M., Bainbridge, D., Chu, M. W., Fernandes,
Groenewoud, E., Cohlen, B., Al-Oraiby, A., Brinkhuis, P. S., Fox, S. A., Iglesias, I., Kiaii, B., Lavi,
E., Broekmans, F., De Bruin, J., Van Den Dool, R., & Murkin, J. M. (2016). Comparison of
G., Fleisher, K., Friederich, J., Goddijn, M., isoflurane and sevoflurane in cardiac surgery:
et al. (2016). A randomized controlled, non- A randomized non-inferiority comparative ef-
inferiority trial of modified natural versus ar- fectiveness trialcomparaison de l’isoflurane et
tificial cycle for cryo-thawed embryo transfer. du sévoflurane en chirurgie cardiaque: Une
HumanReproduction,31(7),1483–1492. étuderandomiséed’efficacitécomparativeetde
Groenewoud, E., Macklon, B. K. N., & Cohlen, B. non-infériorité. Canadian Journal of Anesthesi-
(2017). Response to: The impact of an in- a/JournalCanadiend’Anesthésie,63(10),1128–
appropriate non-inferiority margin in a non- 1139.
inferiority trial. Endometrial preparation meth- Kaptchuk, T. J. (2003). Effect of interpretive bias on
odsinfrozen-thawedembryotransfer,31,93. researchevidence.TheBMJ,326(7404),1453–
Group, C. R. (2011). Ranibizumab and bevacizumab 1455.
for neovascular age-related macular degenera- Kaul, S., Diamond, G. A., & Weintraub, W. S. (2005).
tion.NewEnglandJournalofMedicine,364(20), Trials and tribulations of non-inferiority: The
1897–1908. ximelagatran experience. Journal of the Amer-
Gupta, R., Gupta, H., & Banker, M. (2016). The impact icanCollegeofCardiology,46(11),1986–1995.
of an inappropriate non-inferiority margin in a Keefe, R. S., Kraemer, H. C., Epstein, R. S., Frank, E.,
non-inferioritytrial.HumanReproduction,1–2. Haynes, G., Laughren, T. P., Mcnulty, J., Reed,
===== PAGE 10/10 =====
10
S.D.,Sanchez, J.,&Leon,A.C. (2013).Defin- to promote truth over publishability. Perspec-
ingaclinicallymeaningfuleffectforthedesign tivesonPsychologicalScience,7(6),615–631.
andinterpretationofrandomizedcontrolledtri- Piaggio,G.,Elbourne,D.R.,Altman,D.G.,Pocock,S.J.,
als.InnovationsinClinicalNeuroscience,10(5-6 Evans,S.J.,Group,C.,etal.(2006).Reporting
SupplA),4S. of noninferiority and equivalence randomized
Koh, A., & Cribbie, R. (2013). Robust tests of equiva- trials: An extension of the consort statement.
lence for k independent groups. British Jour- JAMA,295(10),1152–1160.
nal of Mathematical and Statistical Psychology, Pocock, S. J., & Stone, G. W. (2016). The primary out-
66(3),426–434. come fails -what next? New England Journal of
Kulbertus, H. (2003). Sportif III and V trials: A ma- Medicine,375(9),861–870.
jor breakthrough for long-term oral anticoag- Quintana, D. S. (2018). Revisiting non-significant ef-
ulation. Revue medicale de Liege, 58(12), 770– fects of intranasal oxytocin using equivalence
773. testing. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 87, 127–
Lakens, D., Adolfi, F., Albers, C., Anvari, F., Apps, M., 130.
Argamon, S., Baguley, T., Becker, R., Benning, Rouder,J.N.,Morey,R.D.,Speckman,P.L.,&Province,
S., Bradford, D., et al. (2018). Justify your al- J. M. (2012). Default bayes factors for anova
pha.NatureHumanBehavior,2,168–171. designs. Journal of Mathematical Psychology,
Lakens,D.,Scheel,A.M.,&Isager,P.M.(2017).Equiv- 56(5),356–374.
alence testing for psychological research: A tu- Sijtsma, K. (2016). Playing with data—or how to dis-
torial. pre-print Retrieved from the Open Science courage questionable research practices and
Framework. stimulate researchers to do things right. Psy-
Le Henanff, A., Giraudeau, B., Baron, G., & Ravaud, chometrika,81(1),1–15.
P. (2006). Quality of reporting of noninferior- Steinbrook,R.(2006).Thepriceofsight:Ranibizumab,
ity and equivalence randomized trials. JAMA, bevacizumab,andthetreatmentofmacularde-
295(10),1147–1151. generation. New England Journal of Medicine,
Lee,J.J.,&Rubin,D.B.(2016).Evaluatingthevalidity 355(14),1409–1412.
of post-hoc subgroup inferences: A case study. Struble,K.(2015).Clinicalreview,crossdisciplineteam
TheAmericanStatistician,70(1),39–46. leaderreview.Centerfordrugevaluationandre-
Mauri,L.,Garg,P.,Massaro,J.M.,Foster,E.,Glower,D., search,Applicationnumber:206843Orig1s000.
Mehoudar, P., Powell, F., Komtebedde, J., Mc- Walker, E., & Nowacki, A. S. (2011). Understanding
Dermott,E.,&Feldman,T.(2010).Theeverest equivalence and noninferiority testing. Journal
ii trial: Design and rationale for a randomized ofGeneralInternalMedicine,26(2),192–196.
study of the evalve mitraclip system compared Wellek,S.(2010).Testingstatisticalhypothesesofequiv-
with mitral valve surgery for mitral regurgita- alenceandnoninferiority.CRCPress.
tion.AmericanHeartJournal,160(1),23–29. Wellek, S. (2017). A critical evaluation of the current
McCormack, P. L. (2015). Daclatasvir: A review of its “p-valuecontroversy”.BiometricalJournal.
use in adult patients with chronic hepatitis c Wiens, B. L. (2002). Choosing an equivalence limit
virusinfection.Drugs,75(5),515–524. for noninferiority or equivalence studies. Con-
Meyners, M. (2007). Least equivalent allowable differ- trolledClinicalTrials,23(1),2–14.
ences in equivalence testing. Food Quality and Yanoff, L. B. (2014). Clinical review, cross disci-
Preference,18(3),541–547. pline team leader review. Center for drug
Ng,T.-H.(2003).Issuesofsimultaneoustestsfornonin- evaluation and research, Application number:
feriorityandsuperiority.JournalofBiopharma- 022472Orig1s000.
ceuticalStatistics,13(4),629–639.
Nosek,B.A.,Spies,J.R.,&Motyl,M.(2012).Scientific
utopiaII.restructuringincentivesandpractices