
===== PAGE 1/11 =====
Meta-Psychology,2021,vol5,MP.2020.2548 Opendata:Yes Editedby:RickardCarlsson
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2021.2548 Openmaterials:Yes Reviewedby:N.Brown&J.Ferreira
Articletype:Commentary Openandreproducibleanalysis:Yes Analysisreproducedby:AndréKalmendal
PublishedundertheCC-BY4.0license Openreviewsandeditorialprocess:Yes AllsupplementaryfilescanbeaccessedatOSF:
Preregistration:Notapplicable https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/72GAC
Collinearity isn’t a disease that needs curing
Jan Vanhove
University of Fribourg
Abstract
Oncetheyhavelearntabouttheeffectsofcollinearityontheoutputofmultipleregressionmodels,researchersmay
unduly worry about these and resort to (sometimes dubious) modelling techniques to mitigate them. I argue that,
to the extent that problems occur in the presence of collinearity, they are not caused by it but rather by common
mental shortcuts that researchers take when interpreting statistical models and that can also lead them astray in
theabsenceofcollinearity. Moreover,Iillustratethatcommonstrategiesfordealingwithcollinearityonlysidestep
the perceived problem by biasing parameter estimates, reformulating the model in such a way that it maps onto
different research questions, or both. I conclude that collinearity in itself is not a problem and that researchers
shouldbeawareofwhattheirapproachesforaddressingitactuallyachieve.
Keywords: regressionassumptions,multipleregression,interpretingregressionmodels
Asresearchersandstudentslearnmoreaboutstatisti- to models with categorical predictors or a mix of cat-
calmodels,theysoonerorlaterstumbleacrosstheterm egorical and continuous predictors as well. I will not
(multi)collinearity. Collinearity, which roughly means discussmethodsforassessingthedegreeofcollinearity
that the predictors in a statistical model are correlated betweenthreeormorepredictorsforthesimplereason
with each other, is often cast as a problem for statis- that I find them a distraction: in what follows, I will
tical analysis. This suggests that the conscientious an- argue that collinearity is not a statistical problem and
alyst has to solve it. I will argue that, to the extent shouldnotbecheckedfor(alsoseeO’Brien,2007).
thatproblemsoccurinthepresenceofcollinearity,these
are not caused by the collinearity itself but rather by a
Collinearityanditsconsequences
faulty way of thinking about statistical models that can
lead analysts astray even in the absence of collinear- Collinearity means that a substantial amount of in-
ity. Commonstrategiesfordealingwithcollinearpredic- formationcontainedinsomeofthepredictorsincluded
tors do not solve these perceived problems but instead in a statistical model can be pieced together as a lin-
sidestep them, often by fitting a model that, perhaps ear combination of some of the other predictors in the
unbeknownst to the analyst, answers a different set of model. The easiest case is when you have a multiple
questionsfromtheoriginalone. linear regression model with two correlated predictors,
This article does not present any novel insights, but as in the examples to follow. These predictors can be
I hope that it will nonetheless be educational to read- continuousorcategorical, butIwillsticktocontinuous
ers who sometimes find the output of regression mod- predictorsforeaseofexposition.
elsbefuddling. Iwillfocusoncollinearitybetweentwo I created four datasets with two continuous predic-
continuous predictors in (ordinary least squares) mul- tors to illustrate collinearity and its consequences. You
tiple regression models. In this case the strength of can find the R code to reproduce all analyses at https:
the collinearity can be gauged from the correlation be- //osf.io/jupd8/. The outcome in each dataset was cre-
tween the predictors. However, all of my points apply atedusingthefollowingequation;theparametervalues
===== PAGE 2/11 =====
2
werechosenarbitrarily: −2 0 1 2
10
outcome i =0.4×predictor1 i+1.9×predictor2 i+ε i, outcome 5
0
(1)
−5
wheretheresiduals(ε)weredrawnfromanormaldis- −10
i
tributionwithastandarddeviationof3.5.1
2
predictor1
ThefourdatasetsarepresentedinFigures1through 1
0.50
0
4. InFigure1,alinearfunctionofpredictor1captures
−1 n = 50
most of the information contained in predictor2, so −2 missing: 0
the two predictors are strongly collinear. In Figure 3, 2
predictor2
by contrast, both predictors are completely unrelated, 0.50 0.98 1
0
and a linear function of one predictor cannot capture n = 50 n = 50 −1
missing: 0 missing: 0
any information in the other. Hence, the two predic- −2
tors are not collinear at all. Some readers may be sur-
−10 0 10 −2 0 1 2
prised to see that I consider a situation where two pre- Figure1. Adatasetwithstronglycollinearpredictors(r
dictors are correlated at r = 0.50 (Figure 2) to be a =0.98).
case of weak rather than moderate or strong collinear-
ity. But in fact, the consequences of having two pre-
dictors that are correlated at r = 0.50 (rather than at illustratedinFigure6: Ifyoufitmultipleregressionson
r = 0.00) are negligible. Finally, Figure 4 highlights the datasets plotted in Figures 1 to 4, the confidence
the linear part in collinearity: while the two predictors intervals are considerably wider if the predictors are
in this figure are related in that predictor2 perfectly strongly collinear than when they are not. Moreover,
determines predictor1, there is no linear relationship the confidence intervals retain their nominal coverage
between them whatsoever. (You cannot uniquely de- rates(i.e.,x%ofthex%confidenceintervalscontainthe
termine the value for predictor2 when you know the trueparametervalue). Sothestatisticalconsequenceof
value for predictor1, though.) The dataset in Figure collinearityisautomaticallytakencareofinthemodel’s
4 is not affected by any of the statistical consequences output and requires no additional computations on the
ofcollinearity,butitwillbeusefultoillustrateapointI partoftheanalyst.
wanttomakebelow. The greater variability in the estimates, and the ap-
Toillustratethestatisticalconsequencesofcollinear- propriatelylargerstandarderrorsandwiderconfidence
ity, I simulated 10,000 samples of 50 observations in intervals all reflect a relative lack of information in the
which the two predictors were highly correlated (sam- sample(alsoseeMorrisseyandRuxton,2018). Itisdif-
ple correlation of r = 0.98, yielding datasets similar to ficult to improve on York’s (2012) explanation of the
theoneinFigure1)and10,000samplesof50observa- problemandpossiblesolutions:
tions in which they were completely orthogonal (sam-
ple r = 0.00, yielding datasets similar to the one in “Collinearity is at base a problem about in-
Figure 3). In all cases, both predictors were indepen- formation. If two factors are highly corre-
dently related to the outcome according to Equation 1. lated, researchers do not have ready access
On each simulated sample, I ran a multiple regression
1Some researchers examining the consequences of
model from which I extracted the estimated model co-
collinearitygenerateboththepredictorsandtheoutcomedi-
efficients. Figure5showstheestimatedcoefficientsfor rectlyfrommultivariatenormaldistributionsinwhichthecor-
the first predictor, whose true parameter value is 0.4. relationbetweenthepredictorsvariesbutthecorrelationsbe-
Clearly, the estimates vary more when the predictors tweentheoutcomeandtheindividualpredictorsdonot(e.g.,
are strongly correlated than when they are not, such WurmandFisicaro,2014)ratherthangeneratingtheoutcome
that individual estimates can lie farther from the true asafunctionofthepredictorsasIdid. Indoingso, theyim-
parameter value and often have the opposite sign from plicitly allow the true regression equation to vary from sim-
ulationtosimulation: Ifyoufixthecorrelationsbetweenthe
this true parameter value. However, on average, the
predictors and the outcome, but you want to vary the inter-
estimates equal the true parameter value. In statistics
correlation between the predictors, you have to vary the β
parlance,theyare“unbiased.”
parameters (fixed at 0.4 and 1.9 in my example) and the σ
Crucially, and happily, this greater variability is re-
parameter (fixed at 3.5 in my example). The result of this is
flected in the standard errors and confidence intervals
thatsuchsimulationsmayparadoxicallyshowthatyouobtain
around these estimates: The standard errors and con- more significant estimates when the predictors are strongly
fidence intervals are automatically wider when the es- collinear (see Wurm and Fisicaro, 2014, Table 6), but they
timated coefficients are affected by collinearity. This is actuallycomparedifferentdatageneratingprocesses.
===== PAGE 3/11 =====
3
tomuchinformationaboutconditionsofthe
−2 0 2
dependent variables when only one of the
factors actually varies and the other does
outcome 5
0 not. Ifwearefacedwiththisproblem,there
−5 arereallyonlythreefundamentalsolutions:
−10
(1) find or create (e.g. via an experimen-
2 predictor1 tal design) circumstances where there is re-
0 0.31 ducedcollinearity;(2)getmoredata(i.e.in-
n = 50 crease the N size), so that there is a greater
−2 missing: 0
quantityofinformationaboutrareinstances
predictor2 2 wherethereissomedivergencebetweenthe
0.46 0.50
0 collinear variables; or (3) add a variable or
n = 50 n = 50
missing: 0 missing: 0 −2 variablestothemodel,withsomedegreeof
independence from the other independent
−10 0 5 −2 0 2 variables, that explain(s) more of the vari-
Figure 2. A dataset with weakly collinear predictors (r
ance of Y, so that there is more informa-
=0.50).
tion about that which is being modeled.”
(p.1384)
−2 0 2
Iscollinearityaproblem?
outcome 5
For the most part, I think that collinearity is a prob-
0
−5 lem for statistical analyses in the same way that Bel-
−10
gium’slackofmountainsisdetrimentaltothecountry’s
2 predictor1 chances of hosting the Winter Olympics: It is an un-
0.13 fortunate fact of life, but not something that has to be
0
n = 50 solved. The three solutions that York (2012) mentions,
−2 missing: 0
i.e., running another study, obtaining more data or re-
predictor2 2 ducingtheerrorvarianceusingcovariates,areallsensi-
1
0.43 0.00
0 ble,butifyouhavetoworkwiththedatathatyouhave,
min s s= i n5 g0 : 0 min s s= i n5 g0 : 0 −1 the model output will be unbiased and will appropri-
−2
atelyreflectthedegreeofuncertaintyintheestimates.
−10 0 5 −2 0 1 2 So I do not consider collinearity a problem. What is
Figure3. Adatasetwithcompletelyunrelatedpredictors
the case, however, is that collinearity highlights prob-
(r=0.00).
lems with the way many people think about statistical
models and inferential statistics. Let’s look at a couple
ofthese.
−1.5 0.0 1.5
outcome 5 “Collinearitydecreasesstatisticalpower.”
0
−5 You may have heard that collinearity decreases sta-
tistical power, i.e., the chances of obtaining a statisti-
1.5 predictor1 cally significant coefficient estimate if the true param-
0.5 0.15
eter value is different from zero. This is true, but the
−0.5
n = 50
−1.5 missing: 0 lower statistical power is a direct result of the larger
standarderrors, whichappropriatelyreflectthegreater
1.5
predictor2
0.52 0.00 0.5 sampling variability of the estimates. This is only a
n = 50 n = 50 −0.5 problemifyouinterpret“lackofstatisticalsignificance”
missing: 0 missing: 0 −1.5 as “zero effect.” But then the problem does not lie
withcollinearitybutwiththebeliefthatnon-significant
−5 0 5 −1.5 0.0 1.5
Figure 4. A dataset with orthogonal (r = 0.00) but per- estimates indicate zero effects. (Schmidt (1996) calls
fectly related predictors: Once you know the value of this false belief “the most devastating of all to the re-
predictor2,youknowthevalueofpredictor1. search enterprise” (p. 126).) It is just that this false
belief is even more likely than usual to lead you astray
===== PAGE 4/11 =====
4
no collinearity strong collinearity
(r = 0.00) (r = 0.98)
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
−10 −5 0 5 10−10 −5 0 5 10
estimated regression coefficient for first predictor
in multiple regression models
ytisned
Figure5. Theparametersforthefirstpredictorin10,000samplesasestimatedbymultiplelinearregressionmodels.
When the predictors are strongly collinear, the estimates vary more from sample to sample, but the estimates are
unbiasedineithercase. Thedashedverticallinesshowthetrueparametervalue(0.4).
(Intercept) predictor1 predictor2
strong collinearity
weak collinearity
no collinearity
(unrelated predictors)
no collinearity
(related predictors)
−1 0 1 −2.5 0.0 2.5 5.0 −2.5 0.0 2.5 5.0
estimated coefficient with 95% confidence interval
Figure 6. Estimated coefficients and their 95% confidence intervals for the models fitted to the four datasets. The
dashedverticallinesshowthetrueparametervalues.
when your predictors are collinear. If instead of focus- is misleading as it suggests that, in the presence of
ing solely on the p-value, you take into account both collinearity,standarderrorsandp-valuesarelargerthan
the estimate and its uncertainty interval, then there is theyshouldhavebeen. Theyarenot,asperthediscus-
noproblem. sionintheprevioussection(seeMorrisseyandRuxton,
Incidentally, I think that some people may be misled 2018).
when they hear that collinearity “decreases” statistical
power or “increases” standard errors as this wording “Noneofthepredictorsissignificantbuttheoverall
may be taken to suggest that collinearity is a process modelfitis.”
thatcanbehaltedorreversed. Itistruethatcompared
tosituationsinwhichthereislessornocollinearityand Withcollinearpredictors,youmayendupwithasta-
allotherthingsareequal,thestandarderrorsarelarger tistical model for which the F-test of the overall model
and statistical power is lower when there is stronger fitishighlysignificantbutthatdoesnotcontainasingle
collinearity. But outside of computer simulations, you significant predictor. This is illustrated in Table 1. The
cannotreducecollinearitywhilekeepingallotherthings overall model fit for the dataset with strong collinear-
equal. Intherealworld,collinearityisnotanunfolding ity (see Figure 1) is highly significant, but as shown in
processthatcanbenippedinthebudwithoutbringing Figure 6, neither predictor has an estimated coefficient
about other changes in the research design, the sam- that is significantly different from zero: Both 95% con-
pling procedure, or the statistical model and its inter- fidenceintervalscontainzero.
pretation. If this seems strange, you need to keep in mind that
Similarly, you may have heard that collinearity “in- thetestsfortheindividualcoefficientestimatesandthe
flates” standard errors or p-values. This wording, too, test for the overall model fit seek to answer different
===== PAGE 5/11 =====
5
Table1
F-testsandp-valuesfortheoverallmodelfitforthemultipleregressionmodelsonthefourdatasets. Eventhoughneither
predictorhasasignificantestimatedcoefficientinthe‘strongcollinearity’dataset(asshowninFigure6),theoverallfit
ishighlysignificant.
Dataset F-test p-value
strongcollinearity F(3,47)=8.0 0.001
weakcollinearity F(3,47)=6.6 0.003
nocollinearity(unrelatedpredictors) F(3,47)=5.9 0.005
nocollinearity(relatedpredictors) F(3,47)=9.8 0.000
questions, so there is no contradiction if they yield dif- actuallyoutperformyoungerones. Youcouldchalkthis
ferent answers. To elaborate, the test for the overall one up to collinearity, but the problem really is related
model fit asks if all predictors jointly can account for to a faulty mental shortcut you took when interpreting
variance in the outcome; the tests for the individual yourmodel: Youforgottotakeintoaccountthecrucial
coefficients ask whether these are different from zero. “but whose other predictor values are the same” clause.
With collinear predictors, it is possible that the answer If your model also includes measures of the children’s
to the first question is “yes” and the answer to the sec- previous exposure to the L2, their motivation to learn
ond is “I have no idea.” The reason for this is that the L2, and their L2 vocabulary knowledge, then what
with collinear predictors, either predictor could act as theestimatedcoefficientmeansisemphaticallynotthat,
the stand-in of the other so that, as far as the model is according to the model, older children perform on av-
concerned,eithercoefficientcouldwellbezero,aslong erage more poorly on a writing task than younger chil-
as the other is not. But due to the lack of information dren. What it means is that, according to the model,
in the collinear sample, it is not sure which, if any, is older children perform more poorly than younger chil-
zero(seeMcElreath,2020,Chapter6,foralucidexpla- dren with the same values on the previous exposure, mo-
nation). tivation, and vocabulary knowledge measures. If, on re-
So again, there is no real problem: The tests answer flection, this is not what you are actually interested in,
differentquestions,sotheymayyielddifferentanswers. then you should fit a different model (also see Miller
It is just that when you have collinear predictors, this and Chapman, 2001, for a similar point in the context
tendstohappenmoreoftenthanwhenyoudonot. of analysis of covariance). For instance, if you are in-
terested in the overall difference between younger and
older children regardless of their previous exposure,
“Collinearity means that you can’t take model coef-
motivation and vocabulary knowledge, do not include
ficientsatfacevalue.”
thesevariablesaspredictors. Butthenyoushouldhave
It is sometimes said that collinearity makes it more alsonotincludedthesepredictorsifthecollinearityhad
difficult to interpret estimated model coefficients. But notbeenasstrong.
the appropriate interpretation of an estimated regres- Another interpretational difficulty emerges if you re-
sion coefficient is always the same, regardless of the cast the interpretation of the estimate as follows: Ac-
degree of collinearity: According to the model, what cording to the model, what would the expected differ-
would the difference in the mean outcome be if you enceinmeanoutcomebeifyoutookanobservationand
took two large groups of observations that differed by increaseditsvalueonthefocalpredictorbyoneunitbut
one unit in the focal predictor but whose other predic- kepttheotherpredictorvaluesconstant? Thedifference
torvalues werethe same. The emphasisedclauseis cru- between this interpretation and the one that I offered
cial, and note the absence of any appeal to causality in earlieristhatwehavemovedfromapurelydescriptive
the previous sentence. The interpretational difficulties onetobothacausalandaninterventionistone(viz.,the
that become obvious when there is collinearity are not ideathatonecouldchangesomepredictorvalueswhile
causedbythecollinearityitselfbutbymentalshortcuts keepingtheothersconstantandthatthiswouldhavean
thatpeopletakewheninterpretingregressionmodels. effect on the outcome). In the face of strong collinear-
For instance, you may obtain a coefficient estimate ity, it becomes clear that this interventionist interpreta-
inamultipleregressionmodelwithcollinearpredictors tion may be wishful thinking: It may be impossible to
that you interpret to mean that older children perform change values in one predictor without also changing
more poorly on a foreign-language (L2) writing task values in the predictors that are collinear with it. But
than younger children. This would be counterintuitive, the problem here again is not the collinearity but the
and you may find that, in your sample, older children mentalshortcutintheinterpretation. Statisticalmodels
===== PAGE 6/11 =====
6
describe associations; imbuing them with a causal or 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
even interventionist interpretation requires strong ad-
diversity rating 8
ditional assumptions (for guidance, see Elwert, 2013; 6
Rohrer,2018;Shmueli,2010). 4
2
In fact, you can run into the same difficulties when
youapplytheinterventionistmentalshortcutintheab- 1.0
type/token ratio
sence of collinearity: In the dataset shown in Figure 4, 0.8 −0.17
it is impossible to change the second predictor without 0.6 n = 1000
alsochangingthefirstsincethefirstisatransformation 0.4 missing: 0
of the second. Yet the two variables are not collinear, 8
log−2 tokens
sincethetransformationiscompletelynonlinear. Orsay 0.58 −0.66 7
6
you want to model quality ratings of texts in terms of n = 1000 n = 1000 5
thenumberofwordsinthetext(“tokens”),thenumber missing: 0 missing: 0 4
of unique words in the text (“types”), and the type/to-
2 4 6 8 4 5 6 7 8
ken ratio. The model will output estimated coefficients Figure 7. The type/token ratio tends to be negatively
for the three predictors, but as an analyst you should correlated with text length (here: log-2 number of to-
realisethatitisimpossibletofindtwotextsdifferingin kens). But the problem is not that the type/token ratio
thenumberoftokensbuthavingboththesamenumber iscollinearwithtextlength;itisthatthetype/tokenra-
of types and the same type/token ratio: If you change tio also measures something it is not supposed to mea-
thenumberoftokensandkeepconstantthenumberof sure (length) and is a poor measure of what it is sup-
types,thetype/tokenratiochanges,too. posedtomeasure(lexicaldiversity,representedhereby
A final mental shortcut that is laid bare in the pres- humanratings). DatafromtheFrenchcorpuspublished
ence of collinearity is conflating a measured variable byVanhoveetal.,2019.
with the theoretical construct that this variable is as-
sumed to capture. Conflating measurements and con-
structscancompletelyinvalidatetheconclusionsdrawn is hidden if researchers mentally equate the TTR with
from a model even in the absence of collinearity (see the construct of lexical diversity rather than remaining
BertheleandVanhove,2020;BrunnerandAustin,2009; cognizantofthefactthatitisbutanattempttoquantify
Loftus, 1978; Wagenmakers et al., 2012; Westfall and theconstruct—andnotasuccessfuloneatthat.
Yarkoni,2016). Theliteratureonlexicaldiversityoffers To be clear, it is not necessarily a problem that mea-
another case in point. The type/token ratio (TTR) dis- sures of lexical diversity empirically correlate with text
cussed in the previous paragraph is one of several pos- length. Afterall,itispossiblethatthelexicaldiversityof
sible measures of a text’s lexical diversity. If you take longer texts is greater than that of shorter texts or vice
a collection of otherwise comparable texts, chances are versa: Texts may be pithy but lexically diverse if the
thatthelongertextstendtohavelowerTTRvalues(see writers often used le mot juste instead of elaborate cir-
Malvern et al., 2004, Chapter 2). This text-size depen- cumlocutions, and long texts may be lexically more di-
dence has led quantitative linguists to abandon the use versethanshorteronesiftheywerewrittenbymoreso-
of the TTR, even though the relationship in any given phisticatedwriterswithmoretotell. Theproblemwith
datasetneednotbethatstrong(seeFigure7foranex- theTTRisthatitalmostnecessarilycorrelateswithtext
ample). length, even if, at the construct level, the texts’ lexical
However, the reason why researchers have aban- diversitydoesnot. Forinstance,ifyoutakeincreasingly
doned the use of the TTR is not collinearity per se. longer snippets of texts from the same book, you will
Rather, it is that the TTR is a poor measure of what findthattheTTRgoesdown(seeTweedieandBaayen,
it is supposed to capture, viz., the lexical diversity dis- 1998). Thisdoesnotmeanthatthewriter’svocabulary
played in a text. Specifically, because of the statistical skillswentdownintheprocessofwritingthebook,but
properties of language, the TTR is pretty much bound that s/he had to reuse common words (e.g., articles,
to conflate a text’s lexical diversity with its length. The pronouns, prepositions, copula verbs, common or im-
negative correlation between the TTR and text length portant content words). More generally, if your predic-
is not a big problem for statistical modelling, but it is a tors correlate strongly when they are not supposed to,
symptom of a more fundamental problem: A measure your problem is not collinearity, but it may be that in
of lexical diversity should not as a matter of fact be re- tryingtocaptureoneconstruct,youhavealsocaptured
latedtotextlength. ThefactthattheTTRisshowsthat theonerepresentedbytheotherpredictor.
it is a poor measure of lexical diversity. This problem In sum, the interpretational challenges encountered
===== PAGE 7/11 =====
7
when predictors are collinear are not caused by the (Everything following but describes what it means for
collinearityitselfbutbymentalshortcutsthatmaylead the estimated residuals to be held constant.) Perhaps
researchersastrayevenintheabsenceofcollinearity. suchestimatescanbeuseful,buthardlymorethanonce
inabluemoon.
Collinearitydoesnotrequireastatisticalsolution
Ihavearguedthatcollinearityisnotagenuinestatis-
Droppingcollinearpredictors
ticalproblem,soIdonotthinkitshouldbeaddressedby
statistical means. Let’s take a closer look at some pop-
ularstrategiesthatanalystsresorttowhentheirpredic- A second approach is to drop one or more of the
tors are collinear and the repercussions of these strate- collinear predictors from the model. I have no prob-
gies. lem with this approach per se. But the problem that
it solves is not collinearity but rather that the original
Residualisingpredictors modelwasmisspecified. Thisapproachonlyrepresents
asolutionifthenewmodeliscapableofansweringthe
The first popular strategy for dealing with collinear-
researchquestionsince,crucially,estimatedcoefficients
ity is to residualise one collinear predictor against the
from models with different predictors do not have the
other. This means that one of the predictors is fitted as
samemeaning.
the dependent variable in a regression model with the
For instance, say you are interested in the associa-
other predictor(s) as the independent variable(s). The
tion between L2 grammatical knowledge and L2 read-
estimated residuals are extracted from this model and
ing proficiency and you fit a model with L2 reading
thenusedasareplacementfortheoriginalpredictorin
test scores as the outcome, the learners’ scores on an
the multiple regression model. York (2012) and Wurm
L2 grammar test as the focal predictor and their scores
andFisicaro(2014)comprehensivelydiscusstheconse-
on an L2 vocabulary test as a ‘control variable.’ If
quences of this approach; Figure 8 highlights the main
you decide to drop the vocabulary test scores from the
points.
model because of their correlation with the grammar
Asseeninthetopleftandbottomrightpanels,resid-
test scores, you change the meaning of the estimate
ualising one of the predictors against the other and us-
of the coefficient for the grammar test scores. In the
ingtheseresidualsinlieuoftheoriginalpredictordoes
full model, this estimate captures the mean difference
notbiastheestimatesfortheresidualisedpredictorrel-
in reading proficiency between learners with the same
ative to the original true parameter values in Equation
vocabularyscorebutwithaone-unitdifferenceingram-
(1). It also does not reduce the sample-to-sample vari-
mar test scores. In the reduced model, the estimate
ability of these estimates. So, as far as the residualised
capturesthemeandifferenceinreadingproficiencybe-
predictor is concerned, there is no downside or upside
tween learners with a one-unit difference in grammar
to this approach. However, as seen in the top right
test scores, regardless of their performance on the vo-
andbottomleftpanels,theestimatesoftheresidualiser
cabulary test score. Either estimate may be useful for
(i.e., the predictor that was not residualised) show less
addressing the research question, but this depends on
sample-to-sample variability, but they are substantially
theresearchquestion,notonthedegreeofcollinearity.
biased relative to the original true parameter values in
If the reduced model makes more sense than the full
Equation(1)whentheoriginalpredictorsarecollinear.2
modelinthepresenceofcollinearity,itwouldhavealso
The reason for this is that any variance in the outcome
mademoresenseintheabsenceofcollinearity.
that could be accounted for by both predictors is now
assignedwhollytotheresidualiser(seeYork,2012). Somethingtobeparticularlyawareofisthatbydrop-
Residualisingoneofthepredictorsagainsttheother, ping one of the collinear predictors, you bias the esti-
then, changes the meaning of the estimated coefficient mates of the other predictors relative to their original
for the residualiser in a way that I suspect is opaque to parametervaluesasshowninFigure9(andseeNote2).
most analysts and consumers. In fact, I cannot wrap The reason is that, thanks to their correlation with the
my head around the sentence that I am about to foist droppedpredictor,theremainingpredictorscannowdo
uponyou: What,accordingtothemodel,wouldbethe some of its job in accounting for variance in the out-
meandifferenceifyoutookalargegroupofdatapoints come.
that differed by one unit in the residualiser but whose
otherpredictorvaluesdifferedbythesameamountand 2Isay“relativetotheoriginaltrueparametervalues”since,
in the same direction from the values that you would technically,theestimatesinthenewmodelarenotbiasedei-
expect this predictor to have based on the linear asso- ther,buttheyestimatesomethingdifferentfromtheestimates
ciation between it and the residualiser in the sample? intheoriginalmodel.
===== PAGE 8/11 =====
8
predictor1 predictor2
residualised
residualised
predictor1
predictor2
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
−10 −5 0 5 10 −5 0 5 10
estimated regression coefficients for the predictors
in multiple regression models
after one of them has been residualised against the other
ytisned
Figure8. Inthepresenceofstrongcollinearity(r =0.98),residualisingoneofthepredictorsagainsttheotherdoes
notbiastheestimatesfortheresidualisedpredictororreducetheirsample-to-samplevariability(topleftandbottom
right),butitdoesbiastheestimatesoftheresidualiser(toprightandbottomleft)relativetotheoriginalparameter
values(shownasdashedverticallines).
no collinearity strong collinearity
(r = 0.00) (r = 0.98)
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0 2 4 0 2 4
estimated regression coefficient for first predictor
in simple regression models
ytisned
Figure 9. Dropping a collinear predictor changes the meaning of the estimate for the predictor retained (right
panel). The reduced model now yields biased estimates of the original parameters (represented by the dashed
verticallines). Whenthepredictorsareperfectlyorthogonal,thisdoesnothappen,butthisisaspecialcase.
Averagingpredictors ponentsorfactorsfromthisanalysistousetheseinlieu
oftheoriginalpredictors.
A third strategy for dealing with collinearity is to
I do not mind this approach per se, either, but ana-
compress the information in the collinear predictors
lysts should be aware that the meaning of their model
into a smaller set of less strongly correlated predictors.
estimatesisnowdifferentfromthoseinthemodelthat
For instance, analysts sometimes take the average of
they originally fitted. The estimates now express the
several(possiblyz-standardised)predictorsandusethis
model’s best guess of the mean difference in the out-
averageinsteadoftheoriginalpredictors. Alternatively,
comewhensamplingalargenumberofdatapointsthat
they might submit these predictors to a principal com-
differinoneunitinthenewlycreatedvariablebuthave
ponentorfactoranalysisandextractoneormorecom-
===== PAGE 9/11 =====
9
no collinearity strong collinearity
(r = 0.00) (r = 0.98)
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
−1 0 1 2 −5 0 5
estimated regression coefficient for first predictor
in ridge regression models
ytisned
Figure10. Ridgeregressionisaformofbiasedestimation,sonaturallytheestimatesityieldsarebiased. Whenthe
predictorsareorthogonal,allestimatesarebiasedtowardszero(leftpanel). Whenthepredictorsarecollinear,the
estimatesfortheweakerpredictorarebiasedawayfromzero(rightpanel),whereastheestimatesforthestronger
predictorarebiasedtowardszero(notshown).
otherwise identical predictor variables. Depending intheestimates, butatthecostof, well, biasedestima-
on the research question, such a model may be more tion. Moreover, the usefulness of standard errors and
defensiblethanthemodeloriginallyfitted. Butthisde- confidenceintervalsforridgeregressionsanditscousins
pends on the research question, not on the degree of is contested (see Goeman et al., 2018), so a further
collinearitybetweenthepredictors. drawbackisdebatablestatisticalinference.3
In sum, popular strategies to address collinearity in-
Usingestimationmethodssuchasridgeregression volvegivinguptheunbiasedestimatesofordinaryleast
squares regression, redefining the statistical model so
Withindependentlyandidenticallydistributederrors
that it answers different questions from the original
(i.e., when the independence and homoskedasticity as-
model,orboth. AsYork(2012)writes,
sumptionsaremet),ordinaryleastsquaresregressionis
guaranteedtoyieldunbiasedestimateswiththelowest “Statistical ‘solutions,’ such as residualiza-
possible sample-to-sample variability. Ridge regression tionthatareoftenusedtoaddresscollinear-
and its cousins (lasso, elastic net) sacrifice unbiased- ityproblemsdonot,infact,addressthefun-
ness in order to obtain estimates with an even lower damental issue, a limited quantity of infor-
sample-to-sample variability. This can be particularly mation,butratherservetoobfuscateit. Itis
usefulinmodelsoptimisedforpredicting(asopposedto perhaps obvious to point out, but nonethe-
describing or explaining; see Kuhn and Johnson, 2013; less important in light of the widespread
Shmueli, 2010). Since collinearity is associated with confusion on the matter, that no statistical
morevariableestimates,itisunderstandablethatridge procedure can actually produce more infor-
regression and the like are used to tackle it. But the mationthanexistsinthedata.” [p.1384]
result of using models that deliberately bias the esti-
mates is, quite naturally, that you end up with biased Summary
estimates.
I illustrate this in Figure 10, for which I reanalysed Collinearity is a form of lack of information that is
the data underlying Figure 5 using ridge regression. already appropriately reflected in the output of your
(Details of the choice of the λ parameter are available statistical model. When collinearity is associated with
inthesupplementarymaterials,buttheyarenotimpor-
3With informative prior distributions on the parameters,
tant here.) For orthogonal predictors, all estimates are
Bayesian models can yield fairly narrow posterior distribu-
biased towards zero. For strongly collinear predictors,
tions(i.e.,afairlylowdegreeofuncertainty)fortheestimates
the estimates for the weaker predictor will be biased
even in the presence of collinearity. But this is achieved by
awayfromzero(showninthefigure),andthoseforthe
virtue of incorporating information from outside the sample
strongerpredictorwillbebiasedtowardszero. intothemodelbymeansofthepriordistributions,notbycon-
Biasedestimation,then,reducessamplingvariability juringinformationoutofthinair.
===== PAGE 10/11 =====
10
interpretational difficulties, these difficulties are not References
caused by the collinearity itself. Rather, they reveal
Berthele, R., & Vanhove, J. (2020). What would dis-
that the model was poorly specified (in that it answers
prove interdependence? Lessons learned from
a question different from the one of interest), that the
a study on biliteracy in Portuguese heritage
analyst has overly focused on significance rather than
languagespeakersinSwitzerland.International
estimates and the uncertainty about them, or that the
JournalofBilingualEducationandBilingualism,
analysttookamentalshortcutininterpretingthemodel
23(5), 550–566. https://doi.org/10.1080/
that could have also led them astray in the absence of
13670050.2017.1385590
collinearity. These shortcuts include failing to interpret
Brunner, J., & Austin, P. C. (2009). Inflation of Type I
parameterestimatesconditionalonalltheotherpredic-
errorrateinmultipleregressionwhenindepen-
tors in the model, lending a causal or interventionist
dent variables are measured with error. Cana-
interpretation to what is a descriptive model without
dian Journal of Statistics, 37(1), 33–46. https:
proper justification, and conflating a measure with the
//doi.org/10.1002/cjs.10004
construct that it is supposed to represent. Lastly, if you
Elwert, F. (2013). Graphical causal models (S. L. Mor-
do decide to deal with collinearity, make sure you can
gan, Ed.). In S. L. Morgan (Ed.), Handbook of
stillanswerthequestionofinterestandthatanybiasin
causal analysis for social research. Dordrecht,
theestimatescanbejustified.
The Netherlands, Springer. https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-94-007-6094-3\_13
AuthorContact
Goeman, J., Meijer, R., & Chaturvedi, N. (2018). L1
Jan Vanhove, University of Fribourg, Department and L2 penalized regression models. https://
of Multilingualism, Rue de Rome 1, 1700 Fri- cran.r-project.org/web/packages/penalized/
bourg, Switzerland. ORCID ID: https://orcid.org/ vignettes/penalized.pdf
0000-0002-4607-4836. Website: https://janhove. Kuhn,M.,&Johnson,K.(2013).Appliedpredictivemod-
github.io. eling. New York, Springer. https://doi.org/10.
IthankTwitteruser@facupalacio12forthereference 1007/978-1-4614-6849-3
to Morrissey and Ruxton (2018), and Johan Ferreira, Loftus,G.R.(1978).Oninterpretationsofinteractions.
NickBrown,andRickardCarlssonfortheircomments. Memory&Cognition,6(3),312–319.
Malvern, D., Richards, B., Chipere, N., & Durán, P.
ConflictofInterestandFunding (2004). Lexical diversity and language devel-
opment: Quantification and assessment. Bas-
The author declares no conflict of interest and did
ingstoke, UK, Palgrave Macmillan. https://doi.
receivespecificfundingforthepresentwork.
org/10.1007/978-0-230-51180-4
AuthorContributions McElreath, R. (2020). Statistical rethinking: A Bayesian
coursewithexamplesinRandStan(2nd).Boca
JV was the sole author of this article. This article Raton,FL,CRCPress.
is based on a blog post with the same title (https:// Miller, G. A., & Chapman, J. P. (2001). Misunderstand-
janhove.github.io/analysis/2019/09/11/collinearity). ing analysis of variance. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 110(1), 40–48. https://doi.org/
OpenSciencePractices
10.1037/0021-843X.110.1.40
Morrissey, M. B., & Ruxton, G. D. (2018). Multiple re-
gressionisnotmultipleregressions:Themean-
ingofmultipleregressionandthenon-problem
of collinearity. Philosophy, Theory, and Practice
ThisarticleearnedtheOpenDataandtheOpenMa-
in Biology, 10(3). https://doi.org/10.3998/
terials badge for making the data and materials openly
ptpbio.16039257.0010.003
available. It has been verified that the analysis repro-
O’Brien, R. M. (2007). A caution regarding rules of
duced the results presented in the article. The entire
thumb of variance inflation factors. Quality &
editorial process, including the open reviews, are pub-
Quantity, 41, 673–690. https://doi.org/10.
lishedintheonlinesupplement.
1007/s11135-006-9018-6
Rohrer, J. M. (2018). Thinking clearly about correla-
tions and causation: Graphical causal models
forobservationaldata.AdvancesinMethodsand
===== PAGE 11/11 =====
11
Practices in Psychological Science, 1(1), 27–42. Wagenmakers, E.-J., Krypotos, A.-M., Criss, A. H., &
https://doi.org/10.1177/2515245917745629 Iverson,G.(2012).Ontheinterpretationofre-
Schmidt,F.L.(1996).Statisticalsignificancetestingand movable interactions: A survey of the field 33
cumulative knowledge in psychology: Implica- years after Loftus. Memory & Cognition, 40(2),
tions for training of researchers. Psychological 145–160. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13421-
Methods,1,115–129.https://doi.org/10.1037/ 011-0158-0
1082-989X.1.2.115 Westfall, J., & Yarkoni, T. (2016). Statistically control-
Shmueli,G.(2010).Toexplainortopredict?Statistical ling for confounding constructs is harder than
Science, 25(3), 289–310. https://doi.org/10. you think. PLOS ONE, 11(3), e0152719. https:
1214/10-STS330 //doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0152719
Tweedie, F. J., & Baayen, R. H. (1998). How variable Wurm, L. H., & Fisicaro, S. A. (2014). What residualiz-
mayaconstantbe?Measuresoflexicalrichness ing predictors in regression analyses does (and
in perspective. Computers and the Humanities, what it does not do). Journal of Memory and
32(5), 323–352. https://doi.org/10.1023/A: Language,72,37–48.https://doi.org/10.1016/
1001749303137 j.jml.2013.12.003
Vanhove, J., Bonvin, A., Lambelet, A., & Berthele, R. York, R. (2012). Residualization is not the answer: Re-
(2019). Predicting perceptions of the lexical thinking how to address multicollinearity. So-
richness of short French, German, and Por- cial Science Research, 41, 1379–1386. https://
tuguese texts using text-based indices. Journal doi.org/10.1016/j.ssresearch.2012.05.014
of Writing Research, 10(3), 499–525. https://
doi.org/10.17239/jowr-2019.10.03.04