
===== PAGE 1/19 =====
Meta-Psychology, 2021, vol 5, MP.2020.2625, Open data: Not applicable Edited by: Erin M. Buchanan
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2020.2625 Open materials: Not applicable Reviewed by: Williams, M. & Dunleavy, D.
Article type: Tutorial Open and reproducible analysis: Not applicable Analysis reproduced by: Not applicable
Published under the CC-BY4.0 license Open reviews and editorial process: Yes All supplementary files can be accessed at the OSF project
Preregistration: No page: https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/U68Y7
Preregistration of secondary data analysis: A template and tutorial
Olmo R. van den Akker Sara J. Weston
Department of Methodology and Statistics, Tilburg Uni- Department of Psychology, University of Oregon
versity
William J. Chopik
Lorne Campbell
Department of Psychology, Michigan State University
Department of Psychology, University of Western On-
tario Pamela E. Davis-Kean
Department of Psychology, University of Michigan
Rodica Ioana Damian
Department of Psychology, University of Houston
Jessica E. Kosie
Department of Psychology, Princeton University
Andrew N. Hall
Department of Psychology, Northwestern University Jerome Olsen
Department of Applied Psychology: Work, Education
Elliott Kruse and Economy, University of Vienna Max Planck Insti-
EGADE Business School, Tec de Monterrey tute for Research on Collective Goods
K. D. Valentine
Stuart J. Ritchie
Division of General Internal Medicine, Massachusetts
Social, Genetic and Developmental Psychiatry Centre,
General Hospital
King’s College
Marjan Bakker
Anna E. van ‘t Veer
Department of Methodology and Statistics, Tilburg Uni-
Methodology and Statistics Unit, Institute of Psychol-
versity
ogy, Leiden University
Preregistration has been lauded as one of the solutions to the so-called ‘crisis of confi-
dence’ in the social sciences and has therefore gained popularity in recent years. How-
ever, the current guidelines for preregistration have been developed primarily for studies
where new data will be collected. Yet, preregistering secondary data analyses--- where
new analyses are proposed for existing data---is just as important, given that research-
ers’ hypotheses and analyses may be biased by their prior knowledge of the data. The
need for proper guidance in this area is especially desirable now that data is increasingly
shared publicly. In this tutorial, we present a template specifically designed for the pre-
registration of secondary data analyses and provide comments and a worked example
that may help with using the template effectively. Through this illustration, we show that
completing such a template is feasible, helps limit researcher degrees of freedom, and
may make researchers more deliberate in their data selection and analysis efforts.
Keywords: preregistration, secondary data analysis
===== PAGE 2/19 =====
2
VAN DEN AKKER ET AL.
Preregistration has been lauded as one of Because secondary data analyses are partic-
the key solutions to the replication crisis in the so- ularly sensitive to data-driven researcher decisions,
cial sciences, mainly because it has the potential to preregistering them is especially important. Other
prevent p-hacking by restricting researcher degrees options exist to increase error control and illustrate
of freedom, but also because it improves transpar- sensitivity to flexibility in data analysis, however. For
ency and study planning, and can reduce publication example, a multiverse analysis (Steegen, Tuerlinckx,
bias. However, despite its growing popularity, pre- Gelman, & Vanpaemel, 2016) or specification-curve
registration is still in its infancy and preregistration analysis (Simonsohn, Simmons, & Nelson, 2015)
practices are far from optimal (Claesen, Gomes, would be useful if researchers are unsure about
Tuerlinckx, & Vanpaemel, 2019; Veldkamp et al., which specific analysis is most suitable to test their
2018). Moreover, the current guidelines for prereg- hypothesis. In these approaches, all plausible ana-
istration are primarily relevant for studies in which lytic specifications are implemented to get an over-
new data will be collected. In this paper, we suggest all picture of the evidence without the need to
that preregistration is also attainable when testing choose a specific (and potentially biased) statistical
new hypotheses with pre-existing data and provide analysis. This makes it impossible for researchers to
a tutorial on how to effectively preregister such sec- cherry-pick variables or analyses based on their
ondary data analyses. prior knowledge. However, it would still be possible
Secondary data analysis involves the analy- to cherry-pick the range of analyses, and it is diffi-
sis of existing data to investigate research questions, cult to weight the results from the different analyses
often in addition to the main ones for which the data in an unbiased manner. It would thus be appropriate
were originally gathered (Grady, Cummings, & to complement these methods with a preregistra-
Hulley, 2013). Analyzing these datasets comes with tion, especially when the aim is to limit the potential
its own challenges (Cheng & Phillips, 2014; Smith et for p-hacking and HARKing, for both primary and
al., 2011). For instance, common secondary datasets secondary data analysis.
often include many different variables from many To facilitate the preregistration of second-
different respondents, sometimes measured at dif- ary data analyses, a session was organized at the So-
ferent points in time (e.g., the World Values Survey, ciety for the Improvement of Psychological Science
Inglehart et al., 2014; the Wisconsin Longitudinal (SIPS, see https://improvingpsych.org) conference
Study, Herd, Carr, & Roan, 2014). This provides am- in 2018 with the aim of creating an expert-generated
ple opportunity for researchers to p-hack and in- preregistration template specifically tailored to sec-
creases the likelihood of obtaining spurious statisti- ondary data analysis. Providing guidance on how to
cally significant results (Weston, Ritchie, Rohrer, & preregister is vital as preregistration is hard and re-
Przybylski, 2019). quires practice and effort to be effective (Nosek et
In addition, because secondary data are of- al., 2019). Participants in the session were experts on
ten extensive and difficult to collect initially, re- or had experience with secondary data analysis,
searchers frequently analyze the same dataset mul- preregistration, or both, thereby providing a good
tiple times to answer different research questions. mix of expertise for the task at hand. The session be-
Researchers are therefore not likely to come to a da- gan with analyzing the standard OSF Preregistration
taset with completely fresh eyes, and may have in- template (Bowman et al., 2016) and through succes-
sight regarding associations between at least some sive rounds of discussion and testing, participants
of the variables in the dataset. Such prior knowledge decided whether items could be edited, omitted, or
may steer the researchers toward a hypothesis that added to make the template suitable for secondary
they already know is in line with the data. This prac- data analysis. The resulting first draft of the tem-
tice is called HARKing (Hypothesizing After Results plate was further improved in the months following
Are Known; Kerr, 1998) and can lead to false positive the conference through a digital back and forth in-
results (Rubin, 2017). If HARKing goes undisclosed, it volving the preregistration of an actual secondary
is not possible for third parties to evaluate whether data analysis. These efforts---the generation of the
the statistical tests for the hypotheses are well template and the preregistration of an example
founded, as statistical hypothesis tests (e.g., null hy- analysis---culminated in the preregistration tem-
pothesis significance tests, NHST) are only valid plate presented here.
when the hypotheses are drawn up a priori Specific templates like this can greatly facil-
(Wagenmakers, Wetzels, Borsboom, Van der Maas, & itate preregistration as it gives the author guidance
Kievit, 2012; but see Devezer et al., 2020). about what to include in the preregistration so that
===== PAGE 3/19 =====
3
PREREGISTRATION OF SECONDARY DATA ANALYSIS: A TEMPLATE AND TUTORIAL
all researcher degrees of freedom are covered preregistrations differently than they look at pre-
(Veldkamp et al., 2018). As such, the template would registrations of primary data analyses.
also be well-suited as a framework for a registered
report submission that focuses on secondary data. Question 2: Name the authors of this pre-
Some of the questions in the preregistration tem- registration.
plate for secondary data analysis are similar to the Josiah Carberry (JC) – ORCID iD:
questions in more ‘traditional’ templates; others aim https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1825-0097
to solve the challenges unique to the preregistration Pomona Sprout (PS) – Personal webpage:
of secondary data analysis, such as the increased https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hog-
need for transparency about the process leading up warts_staff#Pomona_Sprout
to the preregistration.
The template presented here is not the only When listing the authors, add an ORCID iD
preregistration template for secondary data analy- or a link to a personal webpage so that you and your
sis. Mertens and Krypotos (2019) simultaneously de- co-authors can be easily identified. This is particu-
veloped a template consisting of 10 questions based larly important when preregistering secondary data
on the AsPredicted template (see https://aspre- analyses because you may have prior knowledge
dicted.org). Our template differs from that template about the data that may influence the contents of
in two ways. First, it involves 25 questions and there- the preregistration. If a reader has access to a per-
fore captures a wider array of researcher degrees of sonal profile that lists prior research, they can judge
freedom. For example, our template includes spe- whether any prior knowledge of the data is plausible
cific questions about defining and handling outliers, and whether it potentially biased the data analysis.
and the specification of robustness checks, both of That is, whether it introduced systematic error in
which give leeway for data-driven decisions in sec- the testing because researchers selected or encour-
ondary data analyses (Weston et al., 2019). Moreo- aged one outcome or answer over others (Merriam-
ver, a more comprehensive template gives research- Webster, n.d.).
ers the option to use as many or as few of the ques-
tions as they want, in order to tailor their preregis- Question 3: List each research question in-
tration to specific study needs. Second, our tem- cluded in this study.
plate comes with elaborate comments and a worked RQ1 = Are more religious people more pro-
example that we hope makes the preregistration of social than less religious people?
secondary data analysis more concrete. We think RQ2 = Does the relationship between religi-
both these contributions are helpful to researchers osity and prosociality differ for people with different
looking to preregister their secondary data analysis. religious affiliations?
Research questions are often used as a step-
Using the template to preregister a secondary data
pingstone for the development of specific and test-
analysis: Template questions and example answers, able hypotheses and can therefore be phrased on a
with guiding comments in italics more conceptual level than hypotheses. Note that it
is perfectly fine to skip the research questions and
Part 1: Study information only preregister your hypotheses.
Question 1: Provide the working title of
your study.
Question 4: Please provide the hypotheses
Do religious people follow the golden rule?
of your secondary data analysis. Make sure they are
Assessing the link between religiosity and prosocial
specific and testable, and make it clear what your
behavior using data from the Wisconsin Longitudi-
statistical framework is (e.g., Bayesian inference,
nal Study.
NHST). In case your hypothesis is directional, do not
forget to state the direction. Please also provide a
We specifically mention the data set we are
rationale for each hypothesis.
using so that readers know we are preregistering a
secondary data analysis. Clarifying this from the
“Do to others as you would have them do to
outset is helpful because readers may look at such
you” (Luke 6:31). This golden rule is taught by all ma-
===== PAGE 4/19 =====
4
VAN DEN AKKER ET AL.
jor religions, in one way or another, to promote pro- Part 2: Data description
sociality (Parliament of the World’s Religions, 1993).
Question 5: Name and describe the da-
Religious prosociality is the idea that religions facil-
taset(s), and if applicable, the subset(s) of the data
itate behavior that is beneficial for others at a per-
you plan to use. Useful information to include here
sonal cost (Norenzayan & Shariff, 2008). The en-
is the type of data (e.g., cross-sectional or longitudi-
couragement of prosocial behavior by religious
nal), the general content of the questions, and some
teachings appears to be fruitful: a considerable
details about the respondents. In the case of longi-
amount of research shows that religion is positively
tudinal data, information about the survey’s waves is
related to prosocial behavior (e.g., Friedrichs, 1960;
useful as well.
Koenig, McGue, Krueger, & Bouchard, 2007; Mor-
gan, 1983). For instance, religious people have been
To answer our research questions we will
found to give more money to, and volunteer more
use a dataset from the Wisconsin Longitudinal Study
frequently for, charitable causes than their non-re-
(WLS; Herd, Carr, & Roan, 2014). The WLS provides
ligious counterparts (e.g., Grønbjerg & Never, 2004;
long-term data on a random sample of all the men
Lazerwitz, 1962; Pharoah & Tanner, 1997). Also, the
and women who graduated from Wisconsin high
more important people viewed their religion, the
schools in 1957. The WLS involves twelve waves of
more likely they were to do volunteer work (Youniss,
data. Six waves were collected from the original par-
McLellan, & Yates, 1999). Based on the above we ex-
ticipants or their parents (1957, 1964, 1975, 1992,
pect that religiosity is associated with prosocial be-
2004, and 2011), four were collected from a selected
havior in our sample as well. To assess this predic-
sibling (1977, 1994, 2005, and 2011), one from the
tion, we will test the following hypotheses using a
spouse of the original participant (2004), and one
null hypothesis significance testing framework:
from the spouse of the selected sibling (2006). The
H0(1) = In men and women who graduated from
questions vary across waves and are related to do-
Wisconsin high schools in 1957, there is no associa-
mains as diverse as socio-economic background,
tion between religiosity and prosociality. H1(1) = In
physical and mental health, and psychological
men and women who graduated from Wisconsin
makeup. We will use the subset consisting of the
high schools in 1957, there is a positive association
1957 graduates who completed the follow-up 2003-
between religiosity and prosociality.
2005 wave of the WLS dataset because it includes
specific modules on religiosity and volunteering.
Just like in primary data analysis, a good hy-
pothesis is specific (i.e., it includes a specific popu-
Like the WLS data we use in our example,
lation), quantifiable, and testable. A one-sided hy-
many large-scale datasets are outlined in detail in an
pothesis is suitable if theory, previous literature, or
accompanying paper. It is important to cite papers
(scientific) reasoning indicates that your effect of in-
like this, but also to mention the most relevant in-
terest is likely to be in a certain direction (e.g., A <
formation in the preregistration so that readers do
B). Note that we provided detailed information
not have to search for the information themselves.
about the theory and previous literature in our an-
Sometimes information about the dataset is not
swer. This is crucial for secondary data analysis be-
readily available. In those cases, be especially candid
cause it allows the reader to assess the thought pro-
with the information you have about the dataset be-
cess behind the hypotheses. Readers can then judge
cause the data you provide may be the only infor-
for themselves whether they think the hypotheses
mation about the data available to readers of the
logically follow from the theory and previous litera-
preregistration.
ture or that they may have been tainted by the au-
thors’ prior knowledge of the data. Ideally, your pre-
Question 6: Specify the extent to which the
registration already contains the framework for the
dataset is open or publicly available. Make note of
introduction of the final paper. Moreover, writing up
any barriers to accessing the data, even if it is pub-
the introduction now instead of post hoc forces you
licly available.
to think clearly about the way you arrived at the hy-
potheses and may uncover flaws in your reasoning
The dataset we will use is publicly available,
that can then be corrected before data collection
but you need to formally agree to acknowledge the
begins.
funding source for the Wisconsin Longitudinal
Study, to cite the data release in any manuscripts,
===== PAGE 5/19 =====
5
PREREGISTRATION OF SECONDARY DATA ANALYSIS: A TEMPLATE AND TUTORIAL
working papers, or published articles using these State here for each author when the dataset
data, and to inform WLS about any published papers was initially downloaded (e.g., for previous analyses
for use in the WLS bibliography and for reporting or merely to obtain the data) and when either
purposes. To do this you need to submit some infor- metadata or the actual data (specify which) was first
mation about yourself on the website: (https: accessed (e.g., to identify variables of interest or to
//www.ssc.wisc.edu/wlsresearch/data/down- help fill out this form). Also, specify the author
loads). You will then receive an email with a down- whose downloaded data you will use for the statisti-
load link. cal analyses. This information is crucial in light of
the reproducibility of your study because it is possi-
It is important to check whether the data is ble that the data has been edited since you last
open or publicly available also to other researchers. downloaded or accessed it. If you cannot retrieve
For example, it could be that you have access via the when you downloaded or accessed the data, esti-
organization providing the data (explain this in your mate those dates. In case you collected the data
answer to Q7), but that does not necessarily mean yourself to answer another research question,
that it is publicly available to others. An example of please state the date you first looked at the data. Fi-
publicly available data that is difficult to access nally, because not everybody will use the same date
would be data for which you need to register a pro- format it is important to state the date you down-
file on a website, or for which the owners of the data loaded or accessed the data unambiguously. For ex-
need to accept your request before you can have ac- ample, avoid dates like 12/02/2019 and instead use
cess. 12 February 2019 or December 2nd, 2019.
Question 7: How can the data be accessed? Question 9: If the data collection procedure
Provide a persistent identifier or link if the data are is well documented, provide a link to that infor-
available online or give a description of how you ob- mation. If the data collection procedure is not well
tained the dataset. documented, describe, to the best of your ability,
how data were collected.
The data can be accessed by going to the fol-
lowing link and searching for the variables that are The WLS data was and is being collected by
specified in Q12 of this preregistration: https: the University of Wisconsin Survey Center for use
//www.ssc.wisc.edu/wlsresearch/documenta- by the research community. The origins of the WLS
tion/browse/?label=&variable=&wave_108=on& can be traced back to a state-sponsored question-
searchButton=Search naire administered during the spring of 1957 at all
Wisconsin high school to students in their final year.
When available, report the dataset’s persis- Therefore, the dataset constitutes a specific sample
tent identifier (e.g., a DOI) so that the data can al- not necessarily representative of the United States
ways be retrieved from the Internet. In our example, as a whole. Most panel members were born in 1939,
we could only provide a link, but we added instruc- and the sample is broadly representative of white,
tions for the reader to retrieve the data. In general, non-Hispanic American men and women who com-
try to bring the reader as close to the relevant data pleted at least a high school education. A flowchart
as possible, so instead of giving the link to the over- for the data collection can be found here: https://
arching website, give the link to the part of the web- www.ssc.wisc.edu/wlsresearch/about/flowchart/
site where the data can easily be located. cor459d7.pdf
Question 8: Specify the date of download While describing the data collection proce-
and/or access for each author. dure, pay specific attention to the representative-
ness of the sample, and possible biases stemming
PS: Downloaded 12 February 2019; Accessed from the data collection. For example, describe the
12 February 2019. population that was sampled from, whether the aim
JC: Downloaded 3 January 2019 (estimated); was to acquire a representative / regional / con-
Accessed 12 February 2019. venience sample, whether the data collectors were
We will use the data accessed by JC on 12 aware of this aim, the data collectors’ recruitment
February 2019 for our statistical analyses. efforts, the procedure for running participants,
===== PAGE 6/19 =====
6
VAN DEN AKKER ET AL.
whether randomization was used, and whether par- variable (note that this is not applicable for observa-
ticipants were compensated for their time. All of this tional studies and meta-analyses). If you are collaps-
information can be used to judge whether the sam- ing groups across variables this should be explicitly
ple is representative of a wider population or stated, including the relevant formula. If your fur-
whether the data is biased in some way, which cru- ther analysis is contingent on a manipulation check,
cially determines the conclusions that can be drawn describe your decisions rules here.
from the results. In addition, thinking about the rep-
resentativeness of a dataset is a crucial part of the Not applicable.
planning stage of the research. For example, you
might come to the conclusion that the dataset at Manipulated variables in secondary datasets
hand is not suitable after all and opt for a different usually originate from another study investigating
dataset, thereby preventing research waste. Finally, another research question. You may, therefore,
it is good practice to describe what entity originally need to adapt the manipulated variable to answer
collected the data (e.g., your own lab, another lab, a your own research question. For example, it may be
multi-lab collaboration, a (national) survey collec- necessary to relabel or even omit one of the treat-
tion organization, a private organization) because ment arms. Please provide a careful log of all these
different data sources may have different purposes adaptations so that readers will have a clear grasp of
for collecting the data, which may also result in bi- the variable you will be using and how it differs from
ased data. the variable in the original dataset. Any resources
mentioned in the answer to Q10 may be useful here
Question 10: Some studies offer codebooks as well.
to describe their data. If such a codebook is publicly
available, link to it here or upload the document. If Question 12: If you are going to use meas-
not, provide other available documentation. Also ured variables, identify them here. Describe both
provide guidance on what parts of the codebook or outcome measures as well as predictors and covari-
other documentation are most relevant. ates and label them accordingly. If you are using a
scale or an index, state the construct the scale/in-
The codebook for the dataset we use can be dex represents, which items the scale/index will
found here: https://www.ssc.wisc.edu/wlsresearc consist of, how these items will be aggregated, and
h/documentation/waves/?wave=grad2k. We will whether this aggregation is based on a recommen-
mainly use questions from the mail survey about re- dation from the study codebook or validation re-
ligion and spirituality, and the phone survey on vol- search. When the aggregation of the items is based
unteering, but will also use some questions from on exploratory factor analysis (EFA) or confirmatory
other modules (see the answer to Q12). factor analysis (CFA), also specify the relevant de-
tails (EFA: rotation, how the number of factors will
Any documentation is welcome here, as be determined, how best fit will be selected, CFA:
readers will use this documentation to make sense how loadings will be specified, how fit will be as-
of the dataset. If applicable, provide the codebook sessed, which residuals variance terms will be cor-
for the entire dataset but guide the reader to the rel- related). If you are using any categorical variables,
evant parts of the codebook so they do not have to state how you will code them in the statistical anal-
search for the relevant parts extensively. Alterna- yses.
tively, you can create your own data dictionar-
ies/codebooks (Arslan, 2019; Buchanan et al., 2019). Religiosity (IV): Religiosity is measured using
If, for some reason codebook information cannot be a newly created scale with a subset of items from the
shared publicly, provide an explanation. Religion and Spirituality module of the 2004 mail
survey (described here: https://www.ssc.wisc.edu
Part 3: Variables /wlsresearch/documentation/waves/?wave=grad
2k&module=gmail_religion). The scale includes
general questions about how religious/spiritual the
Question 11: If you are going to use any ma-
individual is and how important religion/spirituality
nipulated variables, identify them here. Describe the
is to them. Importantly, the questions are not spe-
variables and the levels or treatment arms of each
cific to a particular denomination and are on the
===== PAGE 7/19 =====
7
PREREGISTRATION OF SECONDARY DATA ANALYSIS: A TEMPLATE AND TUTORIAL
same response scale. The specific variables are as of that module can be found here: https://www.ssc.
follows: wisc.edu/wlsresearch/documentation/waves
1. il001rer: How religious are you? /?wave=grad2k&module=gvol. The three measures
2. il002rer: How spiritual are you? of prosociality we will use are:
3. il003rer: How important is religion in your 1. gv103re: Did the graduate do volunteer work
life? in the last 12 months?
4. il004rer: How important is spirituality in This dichotomous variable assesses whether or
your life? not the participant has engaged in any volun-
5. il005rer: How important was it, or would it teering activities in the last 12 months. The levels
have been if you had children, to send your of this variable are yes/no. Yes will be coded as
children for religious or spiritual instruc- ‘1’, no will be coded as ‘0’.
tion? 2. gv109re: Number of graduate’s other volun-
6. il006rer: How closely do you identify with teer activities in the past 12 months.
being a member of a religious group? This variable is a summary index providing a
7. il007rer: How important is it for you to be quantitative measure of the participant’s volun-
with other people who are the same religion teering activities. Scores on this variable range
as you? from 1 to 5 and reflect the number of the previ-
8. il008rer: How important do you think it is ous five questions to which the participant an-
for people of your religion to marry other swered YES. The previous five questions assess
people who are the same religion? whether or not the participant volunteered at
9. il009rer: How strongly do you believe that any of the following organization types: (1) reli-
one should stick to a particular faith? gious organizations; (2) school or educational
10. il010rer: How important was religion in your organization; (3) political group or labor union;
home when you were growing up? (4) senior citizen group or related organization;
11. il011rer: When you have important decisions (5) other national or local organizations. For
to make in your life, how much do you rely each of these questions the answer ‘yes’ is coded
on your religious or spiritual beliefs? as 1 and the answer ‘no’ is coded as 0.
12. il012rer: How much would your spiritual or 3. gv111re: How many hours did the graduate
religious beliefs influence your medical de- volunteer during a typical month in the last
cisions if you were to become gravely ill? 12 months?
The levels of all of these variables are indi- This is a numerical variable that provides infor-
cated by a Likert scale with the following options: (1) mation on how many hours per month, on aver-
Not at all; (2) Not very; (3) Somewhat; (4) Very; (5) age, the participant volunteered.
Extremely, as well as ‘System Missing’ (the partici- The three variables will be treated as separate
pant did not provide an answer) and ‘Refused’ (the measures in the dataset and do not require manual
participant refused to answer the question). Varia- aggregation.
bles il006rer, il008rer, and il012rer additionally in-
clude the option ‘Don’t know’ (the participant stated Number of Siblings (Covariate): We will include
that they did not know how to answer the question). the participant’s number of siblings as a control var-
We will use the average score (after omitting non- iable because many religious families are large (Pew
numeric and ‘Don’t know’ responses) on the twelve Research Center, 2015) and it can be argued that co-
variables as a measure of religiosity. This average operation and trust arise more naturally in larger
score is constructed by ourselves and was not al- families because of the larger number of social in-
ready part of the dataset. teractions in those families. To measure partici-
pants’ number of siblings we used the variable
Prosociality (DV): In line with previous re- gk067ss: The total number of siblings ever born from
search (Konrath, Fuhrel-Forbis, Lou, & Brown, 2012), the 2004 phone survey Siblings module (see:https:
we will use three measures of prosociality that //www.ssc.wisc.edu/wlsresearch/documenta-
measure three aspects of engagement in other-ori- tion/waves/?wave=grad2k&module=gsib). This is a
ented activities (see Brookfield, Parry, & Bolton, 2018 numerical variable with the possibility for the par-
for the link between prosociality and volunteering). ticipant to state “I don’t know”. At the interview par-
The prosociality variables come from the Volunteer- ticipants were instructed to include "siblings born
ing module of the 2004 phone survey. The codebook alive but no longer living, as well as those alive now
===== PAGE 8/19 =====
8
VAN DEN AKKER ET AL.
and to include step-brothers and step-sisters and and there may be better solutions in other situa-
children adopted by their parents.” tions, and even in this situation. Please see Rohrer
(2018) for more information about causation in ob-
Agreeableness (Covariate): We will include servational data.
the summary score for agreeableness (ih009rec, see
https://www.ssc.wisc.edu/wlsresearch/docu- Question 13: Which units of analysis (re-
mentation/waves/?wave=grad2k&module=gmail_ spondents, cases, etc.) will be included or excluded
values) in the analysis as a control variable because in your study? Taking these inclusion/exclusion cri-
a previous study (on the same dataset, see the an- teria into account, indicate the (expected) sample
swer to Q18) we were involved in showed a positive size of the data you’ll be using for your statistical
association between agreeableness and prosociality. analyses to the best of your knowledge. In the next
Because previous research also indicates a positive few questions, you will be asked to refine this sam-
association between agreeableness and religiosity ple size estimation based on your judgments about
(Saroglou, 2002) we need to include agreeableness missing data and outliers.
as a control variable to disentangle the influence of
religiosity on prosociality and the influence of Initially, the WLS consisted of 10,317 partici-
agreeableness on prosociality. The variable pants. As we are not interested in a specific group of
ih009rec is a sum score of the variables ih003rer- Wisconsin people, we will not exclude any partici-
ih008rer (To what extent do you agree that you see pants from our analyses. However, only 7,265 partic-
yourself as someone who is talkative / is reserved ipants filled out the questions on prosociality and
[reverse coded] / is full of energy / tends to be quiet the number of siblings in the phone survey and only
[reverse coded] / who is sometimes shy or inhibited 6,845 filled out the religiosity items in the mail sur-
[reverse coded] / who generates a lot of enthusi- vey (Herd et al., 2014). This corresponds to a re-
asm). All of these were scored from 1 to 6 (1 = “agree sponse rate of 73% and 69% respectively. Because
strongly”, 2 = “agree moderately”, 3 = “agree we do not know whether the participants that the
slightly”, 4 = “disagree slightly”, 5 = “disagree mod- mail survey also did the phone survey, our minimum
erately”, 6 = “disagree strongly”), while participants expected sample size is 10,317 * 0.73 * 0.69 = 5,297.
could also refuse to answer the question. If a partic-
ipant refused to answer one of the questions, that Provide information on the total sample size
participant’s score was not included in the sum of the dataset, the sample size(s) of the wave(s) you
score variable ih009rec. are going to use (if applicable), as well as the number
of participants that provided data on each of the
If you are using measured variables, de- questions and/or scales to be used in the data anal-
scribe them in such a way that readers know exactly yses. In our sample we do not exclude any partici-
what variables will be used in the statistical analyses. pants, but if you have a research question about a
Because secondary datasets often involve many certain group you may need to exclude participants
measured variables, there is ample room to select based on one or more characteristics. Be very spe-
variables after doing an analysis. It is therefore es- cific when describing these characteristics so that
sential to be exhaustive here. Variables you do not readers with no knowledge of the data are able to
mention here should not pop up in your analysis redo your moves easily. For our WLS dataset, it is
later unless you have a good reason for it. As you can impossible to know the exact sample size without
see, we clearly label the function of each variable, inspecting the data. If that is the case, provide an es-
the specific items related to that variable, and the timate of the sample size. If you provide an estimate,
item’s response options. It could be that you choose try to be conservative and pick the lowest sample
to combine items into an index or scale that have not size of the possible options. If it is impossible to pro-
been combined like that in previous studies. Care- vide an estimate, it is also possible to mask the data.
fully detail this process and indicate that you con- For example, it is possible to add random noise to all
structed the index or scale yourself to avoid confu- values of the dependent variable. In that case, it is
sion. Finally, note that we include covariates to be impossible to pick up any real effects and you are
able to make statements about the causal effect of essentially blind to the data. Similarly, it is possible
religion on prosociality. This is common practice in to blind yourself to real effects in the data by having
the social sciences, but causal inference is complex someone relabel the treatment levels so you cannot
link them to the treatment levels anymore. These
===== PAGE 9/19 =====
9
PREREGISTRATION OF SECONDARY DATA ANALYSIS: A TEMPLATE AND TUTORIAL
and other methods of data blinding are clearly de-
scribed by Dutilh, Sarafoglou, and Wagenmakers Provide descriptive information, if available,
(2019). on the amount of missing data for each variable you
will use in the statistical analyses and discuss poten-
Question 14: What do you know about miss- tial issues with the pattern of missing data for your
ing data in the dataset (i.e., overall missingness rate, planned analyses. Also provide a plan for how the
information about differential dropout)? How will analyses will take into account the presence of miss-
you deal with incomplete or missing data? Based on ing data. Where appropriate, provide specific details
this information, provide a new expected sample how this plan will be implemented. This can be done
size. by specifying a step-by-step protocol for how you
will impute any missing data. You could first explain
The WLS provides a documented set of how you will assess whether the data are missing at
missing codes. In Table 1 below you can find miss- random (MAR) missing completely at random
ingness information for every variable we will in- (MCAR) or missing not at random (MNAR), and then
clude in the statistical analyses. ‘System missing’ re- state that you will use technique X in case of MAR
fers to the number of participants that did not or data, technique Y in case of MCAR data, and tech-
could not complete the questionnaire. ‘Partial inter- nique Z in case of MNAR data. For an overview of the
view’ refers to the number of participants that did types of missing data, and the different techniques
not get that particular question because they were to handle missing data, see Lang & Little (2018). Note
only partially interviewed. The rest of the codes are that the missing data technique we used in our ex-
self-explanatory. ample, listwise deletion, is usually not the best way
Importantly, some respondents refused to to handle missing data. We decided to use it in this
answer the religiosity questions. These respondents example because it gave us the opportunity to illus-
apparently felt strongly about these questions, trate how researchers can describe potential biases
which could indicate that they are either very reli- arising from their analysis methods in a preregistra-
gious or very anti-religious. If that is the case, the tion.
respondent’s propensity to respond is directly asso- If you cannot specify the exact number of
ciated with their level of religiosity and that the data missing data because the dataset does not provide
is missing not at random (MNAR). Because it is not that information, provide an estimate. If you provide
possible to test the stringent assumptions of the an estimate, try to be conservative and pick the low-
modern techniques for handling MNAR data we will est sample size of the possible options. If it is impos-
resort to simple listwise deletion. It must be noted sible to provide an estimate, you could also mask the
that this may bias our data as we may lose respond- data (see Dutilh, Sarafoglou, & Wagenmakers, 2019).
ents who are very religious or anti-religious. How- It is good practice to state all missingness infor-
ever, we believe this bias to be relatively harmless mation with relation to the total sample size of the
given that our sample still includes many respond- dataset.
ents that provided extreme responses to the items
about the importance of the different facets of reli-
gion (see: https://www.ssc.wisc.edu/wlsresearch
/documentation/waves/?wave=grad2k&module=
gmail_religion). Moreover, because our initial sam-
ple size is very large, statistical power is not sub-
stantially compromised by omitting these respond-
ents. That being said, we will extensively discuss any
potential biases resulting from missing data in the
limitations section of our paper.
Employing listwise deletion leads to an ex-
pected minimum number of 10,317 * 0.30 * 0.70 *
0.64 = 1,387 participants for the binary logistic re-
gression, and an expected minimum number of
10,317 * 0.24 * 0.70 * 0.64 = 1,109 (gv109re) and 10,317
* 0.23 * 0.70 * 0.64 = 1,063 (gv111re) for the linear re-
gressions.
===== PAGE 10/19 =====
10
VAN DEN AKKER ET AL.
Table 1
An overview of the missing values for all variables we will use in our analyses.
Remaining
Variable System missing Don’t know Inappropriate Refused Not ascertained Partial interview Could not code Remaining
(%)
il001rer 3,471 0 0 190 0 0 0 6,656 64
il002rer 3,471 0 0 212 0 0 0 6,634 64
il003rer 3,471 0 0 191 0 0 0 6,655 65
il004rer 3,471 0 0 241 0 0 0 6,605 64
il005rer 3,471 0 0 201 0 0 0 6,645 64
il006rer 3,471 1 0 201 0 0 0 6,644 64
il007rer 3,471 0 0 192 0 0 0 6,654 65
il008rer 3,471 1 0 199 0 0 0 6,646 64
il009rer 3,471 0 0 219 0 0 0 6,627 64
il010rer 3,471 0 0 190 0 0 0 6,656 65
il011rer 3,471 0 0 190 0 0 0 6,656 65
il012rer 3,471 1 0 198 0 0 0 6,647 64
gv103re 3,052 0 3,955 1 0 182 0 3,127 30
gv109re 3,052 0 4,590 0 0 182 0 2,493 24
gv111re 3,052 50 4,716 0 0 182 0 2,317 23
gk067ss 3,052 21 0 0 0 0 0 7,244 70
===== PAGE 11/19 =====
11
PREREGISTRATION OF SECONDARY DATA ANALYSIS: A TEMPLATE AND TUTORIAL
weights as we do not seek to make any claims that
Question 15: If you plan to remove outliers, are generalizable to the national population.
how will you define what a statistical outlier is in
your data? Please also provide a new expected sam- Because secondary data samples may not be
ple size. Note that this will be the definitive expected entirely representative of the population you are in-
sample size for your study and you will use this terested in, it can be useful to incorporate sampling
number to do any power analyses. weights into your analysis. You should state here
whether (and why) you will use sampling weights,
The dataset probably does not involve any and provide specifics on exactly how you will use
invalid data since the dataset has been previously them. To implement sampling weights into your
‘cleaned’ by the WLS data controllers and any clearly analyses, we recommend using the “survey” package
unreasonably low or high values have been removed in R (Lumley, 2004).
from the dataset. However, to be sure we will create
a box and whisker plot for all continuous variables
(the dependent variables gv109re and gv111re, the Part 4: Knowledge of data
covariate gk067ss, and the scale for religiosity) and
Question 17: List the publications, working
remove any data point that appears to be more than
papers (in preparation, unpublished, preprints), and
1.5 times the IQR away from the 25th and 75th per-
conference presentations (talks, posters) you have
centile. Based on normally distributed data, we ex-
worked on that are based on the dataset you will
pect that 2.1% of the data points will be removed this
use. For each work, list the variables you analyzed,
way, leaving 1,358 out of 1,387 participants for the bi-
but limit yourself to variables that are relevant to the
nary regression with gv103re as the outcome varia-
proposed analysis. If the dataset is longitudinal, also
ble and 1,086 out of 1,109 participants, and 1,041 out
state which wave of the dataset you analyzed.
of 1,063 participants for the linear regressions with
Importantly, some of your team members
gv109re and gv111re as the outcome variables, re-
may have used this dataset, and others may not
spectively.
have. It is therefore important to specify the previ-
ous works for every co-author separately. Also men-
Estimate the number of outliers you expect
tion relevant work on this dataset by researchers
for each variable and calculate the expected sample
you are affiliated with as their knowledge of the data
size of your analysis. The expected sample size is re-
may have been spilled over to you. When the pro-
quired to do a power analysis for the planned statis-
vider of the data also has an overview of all the work
tical tests (Q21) but also prevents you from discard-
that has been done using the dataset, link to that
ing a significant portion of the data during or after
overview.
the statistical analysis. If it is impossible to provide
such an estimate, you can mask the data and make a
Both authors (PS and JC) have previously
more informed estimation based on these masked
used the Graduates 2003-2005 wave to assess the
data (see Dutilh, Sarafoglou, & Wagenmakers, 2019).
link between Big Five personality traits and proso-
If you expect to remove many outliers or if you are
ciality. The variables we used to measure the Big Five
unsure about your outlier handling strategy, it is
personality traits were ih001rei (extraversion),
good practice to preregister analyses including and
ih009rei (agreeableness), ih017rei (conscientious-
excluding outliers. To see how decisions about out-
ness), ih025rei (neuroticism), and ih032rei (open-
liers can influence the results of a study, see Bakker
ness). The variables we used to measure prosociality
and Wicherts (2014) and Lonsdorf et al. (2019). For
were ih013rer (“To what extent do you agree that
more information about outliers in the context of
you see yourself as someone who is generally trust-
preregistration, see Leys, Delacre, Mora, Lakens,
ing?”), ih015rer (“To what extent do you agree that
and Ley (2019).
you see yourself as someone who is considerate to
almost everyone?”), and ih016rer (“To what extent
Question 16: Are there sampling weights
do you agree that you see yourself as someone who
available with this dataset? If so, are you using them
likes to cooperate with others?). We presented the
or are you using your own sampling weights?
results at the ARP conference in St. Louis in 2013 and
we are currently finalizing a manuscript based on
The WLS dataset does not include sampling
these results.
weights and we will not use our own sampling
===== PAGE 12/19 =====
12
VAN DEN AKKER ET AL.
Additionally, a senior graduate student in ih013rer, ih015rer, and ih016rer are positively asso-
JC’s lab used the Graduates 2011 wave for explora- ciated with agreeableness (ih009rec). Because pre-
tory analyses on depression. She linked depression vious research (on other datasets) shows a positive
to alcohol use and general health indicators. She did association between agreeableness and religiosity
not look at variables related to religiosity or proso- (Saroglou, 2002) agreeableness may act as a con-
ciality. Her results have not yet been submitted an- founding variable. To account for this we will in-
ywhere. clude agreeableness in our analysis as a control var-
An overview of all publications based on the iable. We did not find any associations between pro-
WLS data can be found here: https://www.ssc.wisc. sociality and the other Big Five variables.
edu/wlsresearch/publications/pubs.php?topic=
ALL. It is important to denote your prior
knowledge diligently because it provides infor-
It is important to specify the different ways mation about possible biases in your statistical anal-
you have previously used the data because this in- ysis decisions. For example, you may have learned at
formation helps you to establish any knowledge of an academic conference or in a footnote of another
the data you may already have. This prior knowledge paper that the correlation between two variables is
will need to be provided in Q18. If available, include high in this dataset. If you do a test of this hypothe-
persistent identifiers (e.g., a DOI) to any relevant pa- sis, you already know the test result, making the in-
pers and presentations. terpretation of the test invalid (Wagenmakers, et al.,
Understandably, there is a subjectivity in- 2012). In cases like this, where you have direct
volved in determining what constitutes “relevant” knowledge about a hypothesized association, you
work or “relevant” variables for the proposed analy- should disregard doing a confirmatory analysis alto-
sis. We advise researchers to use their professional gether or do one based on a different dataset.
judgment and when in doubt always mention the Any indirect knowledge about the hypothe-
work or variable so readers can assess their rele- sized association does not preclude a confirmatory
vance themselves. In the worked example, the ex- analysis but should be transparently reported in this
ploratory analysis by the student in JC’s lab is prob- section. In our example, we mentioned that we know
ably not relevant, but because of the close affiliation about the positive association between agreeable-
of the student to JC, it is good to include it anyway. ness and prosociality, which may say something
Listing previous works based on the data about the direction of our hypothesized association
also helps to prevent a common practice identified given the association between agreeableness and
by the American Psychological Association (2019) as religiosity. Moreover, this prior knowledge urged us
unethical: the so-called “least publishable unit” to add agreeableness as a control variable. Thus,
practice (also known as “salami-slicing”), in which aside from improving your preregistration, evaluat-
researchers publish multiple papers on closely re- ing your prior knowledge of the data can also im-
lated variables from the same dataset. Given that prove the analyses themselves.
secondary datasets often involve many closely re- All information like this that may influence
lated variables, this is a particularly pernicious issue the hypothesized association is relevant here. For
here. example, restriction of range (Meade, 2010), meas-
urement reliability (Silver, 2008), and the number of
Question 18: What prior knowledge do you response options (Gradstein, 1986) have been shown
have about the dataset that may be relevant for the to influence the association between two variables.
proposed analysis? Your prior knowledge could You may have provided univariate information re-
stem from working with the data first-hand, from garding these aspects in previous questions. In this
reading previously published research, or from section, you can write about how they may affect
codebooks. Also provide any relevant knowledge of your hypothesized association.
subsets of the data you will not be using. Provide Do note that it is unlikely that you are able
prior knowledge for every author separately. to account for all the effects of prior knowledge on
your analytical decisions. For example, you may have
In a previous study (mentioned in Q17) we prior knowledge that you are not consciously aware
used three prosociality variables (ih013rer, ih015rer, of. The best way to capture this unconscious prior
and ih016rer) that may be related to the prosociality knowledge is to revisit previous work, think deeply
variables we use in this study. We found that about any information that might be relevant for the
===== PAGE 13/19 =====
13
PREREGISTRATION OF SECONDARY DATA ANALYSIS: A TEMPLATE AND TUTORIAL
current project, and present it here to the best of Research Practices” is trying multiple methods and
your ability. This exercise helps you reflect on po- only publishing the ones that “work” (i.e., that sup-
tential biases you may have and makes it possible for port your hypothesis). Almost every method has
readers of the preregistration to assess whether the several options that may be more or less suited to
prior knowledge you mentioned is plausible given the question you are asking. Therefore, it is crucial
the list of prior work you provided in Q17. to specify a priori which one you are going to use
Of course, it is still possible that researchers and how.
purposefully neglect to mention prior knowledge or If you can, include the code you will use to
provide false information in a preregistration. Even run your statistical analyses, as this forces you to
though we believe that deliberate deceit like this is think about your analyses in detail and makes it easy
rare, at the end of our template we require re- for readers to see exactly what you plan to do. Ide-
searchers to formally “promise” to have truthfully ally, when you have loaded the data in a software
filled out the template and that no other preregis- program you only have to press one button to run
tration exists on the same hypotheses and data. A your analyses. If including the code is impossible,
violation of this formal statement can be seen as describe the analyses such that you could give a
misconduct, and we believe researchers are unlikely positive answer to the question: “Would a colleague
to cross that line. who is not involved in this project be able to recreate
this statistical analysis?”
Part 5: Analyses
Question 20: If applicable, specify a pre-
dicted effect size or a minimum effect size of inter-
Question 19: For each hypothesis, describe
est for all the effects tested in your statistical anal-
the statistical model you will use to test the hypoth-
yses.
esis. Include the type of model (e.g., ANOVA, multi-
For the logistic regression with ‘Did the
ple regression, SEM) and the specification of the
graduate do volunteer work in the last 12 months?’
model. Specify any interactions and post-hoc anal-
as the outcome variable, our minimum effect size of
yses and remember that any test not included here
interest is an odds of 1.05. This means that a one-
must be labeled as an exploratory test in the final
unit increase on the religiosity scale would be asso-
paper.
ciated with a 1.05 factor change in odds of having
done volunteering work in the last 12 months versus
Our first hypothesis will be tested using
not having done so.
three analyses since we use three variables to meas-
For the linear regressions with ‘The number
ure prosociality. For each, we will run a directional
of graduate’s volunteer activities in the last 12
null hypothesis significance test to see whether a
months”, and “How many hours did the graduate
positive effect exists of religiosity on prosociality.
volunteer during a typical month in the last 12
For the first outcome (gv103re: Did the graduate do
months?’ as the outcome variables, the minimum re-
volunteer work in the last 12 months?) we will run a
gression coefficients of interest of the religiosity
logistic regression with religiosity, the number of
variables are 0.05 and 0.5, respectively. This means
siblings, and agreeableness as predictors. For the
that a one-unit increase in the religiosity scale
second and third outcomes (gv109re: Number of
would be associated with 0.05 extra volunteering
graduate’s other volunteer activities in the past 12
activities in the last 12 months and with 0.5 more
months; gv111re: How many hours did the graduate
hours of volunteering work in the last 12 months. All
volunteer during a typical month in the last 12
of these smallest effect sizes of interest are based on
months?) we will run two separate linear regres-
our own intuition.
sions with religiosity, the number of siblings, and
To make comparisons possible between the
agreeableness as predictors. The code we will use
effects in our study and similar effects in other stud-
for all these analyses can be found at
ies the unstandardized linear regression coefficients
https://osf.io/e3htr.
will be transformed into standardized regression
coefficients using the following formula: ! =#(%/
Think carefully about the variety of statisti- ! ! !
% ), where # the unstandardized regression coeffi-
cal methods that are available for testing each of " !
cient of independent variable i, and % and % are the
your hypotheses. One of the classic “Questionable ! "
===== PAGE 14/19 =====
14
VAN DEN AKKER ET AL.
standard deviations of the independent and de- we chose the second option. When presenting your
pendent variable respectively. power analysis be sure to state the version of
Comment(s): A predicted effect size is ide- G*Power, R, or any other tool you calculated power
ally based on a representative preliminary study or with, including any packages or add-ons, and also
meta-analytical result. If those are not available, it is report or copy all the input and results of the power
also possible to use your own intuition. For advice analysis.
on setting a minimum effect size of interest, see
Lakens, Scheel, & Isager (2018) and Funder and Ozer Question 22: What criteria will you use to
(2019). make inferences? Describe the information you will
use (e.g., specify the p-values, effect sizes, confi-
Question 21: Present the statistical power dence intervals, Bayes factors, specific model fit in-
available to detect the predicted effect size(s) or the dices), as well as cut-off criteria, where appropriate.
smallest effect size(s) of interest OR present the ac- Will you be using one- or two-tailed tests for each
curacy that will be obtained for estimation. Use the of your analyses? If you are comparing multiple con-
sample size after updating for missing data and out- ditions or testing multiple hypotheses, will you ac-
liers, and justify the assumptions and parameters count for this, and if so, how?
used (e.g., give an explanation of why anything
smaller than the smallest effect size of interest We will make inferences about the associa-
would be theoretically or practically unimportant). tion between religiosity and prosociality based on
the p-values and the size of the regression coeffi-
The sample size after updating for missing cients of the religiosity variable in the three main re-
data and outliers is 1,358 for the logistic regression gressions. We will conclude that a regression analy-
with gv103re as the outcome variable, and 1,086 and sis supports our hypothesis if both the p-value is
1,041 for the linear regressions with gv109re and smaller than .01 and the regression coefficient is
gv111re as the outcome variables, respectively. For all larger than our minimum effect size of interest. We
three analyses this corresponds to a statistical chose an alpha of .01 to account for the fact that we
power of approximately 1.00 when assuming our do a test for each of the three regressions (0.05/3,
minimum effect sizes of interest. For the linear re- rounded down). If the conditions above hold for all
gressions we additionally assumed the variance ex- three regressions, we will conclude that our hypoth-
plained by the predictor to be 0.2 and the residual esis is fully supported, if they hold for one or two of
variance to be 1.0 (see figure below for the full power the regressions, we will conclude that our hypothe-
analysis of the regression with the lowest sample sis is partially supported, and if they hold for none
size). For the logistic regression we assumed an in- of the regressions we will conclude that our hypoth-
tercept of -1.56 corresponding to a situation where esis is not supported.
half of the participants have done volunteer work in
the last year (see the R-code for the full power anal- It is crucial to specify your inference criteria
ysis at https://osf.io/f96rn). before running a statistical analysis because re-
searchers have a tendency to move the goalposts
Advice on conducting a power analysis using when making inferences. For example, almost 40%
G*Power can be found in Faul, Erdfelder, Buchner, of p-values between 0.05 and 0.10 are reported as
and Lang (2009). Advice on conducting a power “marginally significant”, even though these values
analysis using R can be found here: cran.r-project are not significant when compared to the traditional
.org/web/packages/pwr/vignettes/pwr-vignette alpha level of 0.05, and the evidential value of these
.html. p-values is low (Olsson-Collentine, Van Assen, &
Hartgerink, 2019). Similarly, several studies have
Note that power analyses for secondary data found that the majority of studies reporting p-values
analyses are unlike power analyses for primary data do not use any correction for multiple comparisons
analyses because we already have a good idea about (Cristea & Ioannidis, 2018; Wason, Stecher, & Man-
what our sample size is based on our answers to Q13, der, 2014), perhaps because this lowers the chance
Q14, and Q15. Therefore, we are primarily interested of finding a statistically significant result. For an
in finding out what effect sizes we are able to find overview of multiple-comparison correction meth-
for a given power level or what our power is given ods relevant to secondary data analysis, see Thomp-
our minimum effect size of interest. In our example, son, Wright, Bissett, and Poldrack (2019).
===== PAGE 15/19 =====
15
PREREGISTRATION OF SECONDARY DATA ANALYSIS: A TEMPLATE AND TUTORIAL
simulation/sampling/bootstrapping method.
Question 23: What will you do should your
data violate assumptions, your model not converge, To assess the sensitivity of our results to our
or some other analytic problem arises? selection criterion for outliers, we will run an addi-
tional analysis without removing any outliers.
When the distribution of the number of vol-
unteering hours (gv111re) is significantly non-normal There are many methods you can use to test
according to the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test (Massey, the limits of your hypothesis. The options men-
1951), and/or (b) the linearity assumption is violated tioned in the question are not supposed to be ex-
(i.e., the points are asymmetrically distributed haustive or prescriptive. We included these exam-
around the diagonal line when plotting observed ples to encourage researchers to think about these
versus the predicted values), we will log-transform methods, all of which serve the same purpose as
the variable. preregistration: improving the robustness and rep-
licability of the results.
It is, of course, impossible to predict every
single way that things might go awry during the Question 25: If you plan to explore your da-
analysis. One of the variables may have a strange and taset to look for unexpected differences or relation-
unexpected distribution, one of the models may not ships, describe those tests here, or add them to the
converge because of a quirk of the correlational final paper under a heading that clearly differenti-
structure, and you may even encounter error mes- ates this exploratory part of your study from the
sages that you have never seen before. You can use confirmatory part.
your prior knowledge of the dataset to set up a de-
cision tree specifying possible problems that might As an exploratory analysis, we will test the
arise and how you will address them in the analyses. relationship between scores on the religiosity scale
Thinking through such a decision tree will make you and prosociality after adjusting for a variety of so-
less overwhelmed when something does end up go- cial, educational, and cognitive covariates that are
ing differently than expected. available in the dataset. We have no specific hypoth-
However, note that decision trees come eses about which covariates will attenuate the relig-
with their own problems and can quickly become iosity-prosociality relation most substantially, but
very complex. Alternatively, you might choose to se- we will use this exploratory analysis to generate hy-
lect analysis methods that make assumptions that potheses to test in other, independent datasets.
are as conservative as possible; preregister robust-
ness analyses which test the robustness of your Whereas it is not presently the norm to pre-
findings to analysis strategies that make different register exploratory analyses, it is often good to be
assumptions; and/or pre-specify a single primary clear about which variables will be explored (if any),
analysis strategy but note that you will also report for example, to differentiate these from the variables
an exploratory investigation of the validity of distri- for which you have specific predictions or to plan
butional assumptions (Williams & Albers, 2019). Of ahead about how to compute these variables.
course, there are pros and cons to all methods of
dealing with violations, and you should choose a Part 6: Statement of integrity
technique that is most appropriate for your study.
The authors of this preregistration state that
Question 24: Provide a series of decisions
they filled out this preregistration to the best of
about evaluating the strength, reliability, or robust-
their knowledge and that no other preregistration
ness of your focal hypothesis test. This may include
exists pertaining to the same hypotheses and da-
within-study replication attempts, additional co-
taset.
variates, cross-validation efforts (out-of-sample
replication, split/hold-out sample), applying
weights, selectively applying constraints in an SEM
context (e.g., comparing model fit statistics), over-
fitting adjustment techniques used (e.g., regulariza-
tion approaches such as ridge regression), or some
other
===== PAGE 16/19 =====
16
VAN DEN AKKER ET AL.
Summary
Acknowledgments
In this tutorial we presented a preregistra-
tion template for the analysis of secondary data and
have provided guidance for its effective use. We are
The authors would like to thank the participants of
aware that the number of questions (25) in the tem-
the Society for the Improvement of Psychological
plate may be overwhelming, but it is important to
Science (SIPS) conference in 2018 that helped to
note that not every question is relevant for every
create the first draft of the preregistration template
preregistration. Our aim was to be inclusive and
but were unable to help out with the subsequent ex-
cover all bases in light of the diversity of secondary
tensions (Brian Brown, Oliver Clark, Charles Eber-
data analyses. Even though none of the questions
sole, and Courtney Soderberg).
are mandatory, we do believe that an elaborate pre-
registration is preferable over a concise preregistra-
tion simply because it restricts more researcher de-
grees of freedom. We therefore recommend that au- Conflict of Interest and Funding
thors answer as many questions in as much detail as
possible. And, if questions are not applicable, it
would be good practice to also specify why this is This research is based on data from the Wisconsin
the case so that readers can assess your reasoning. Longitudinal Study, funded by the National Institute
Effectively preregistering a study is chal- on Aging (R01 AG009775; R01 AG033285), and was
lenging and can take a lot of time but, like Nosek et supported by a Consolidator Grant (IMPROVE) from
al. (2019) and many others, we believe it can improve the European Research Council (ERC; grant no.
the interpretability, verifiability and rigor of your 726361).
studies and is therefore more than worth it if you
want both yourself and others to have more confi-
Author Contributions
dence in your research findings.
The current template is merely one building
block toward a more effective preregistration infra-
Conceptualization: OA, SW, MB
structure and, given the ongoing developments in
Writing (original draft): OA, LC, WC, RD, PDK, AH, JK,
this area, will be a work in progress for the foresee-
EK, JO, SR, KDV, AV, MB
able future. Any feedback is therefore greatly appre-
Writing (reviewing and editing): OA, SW, LC, WC,
ciated. Please send any feedback to the correspond-
RD, PDK, AH, JK, EK, JO, SR, KDV, AV, MB
ing author, Olmo van den Akker
Project administration: OA
(ovdakker@gmail.com).
Open Science Practices
Author Contact
This article is a tutorial that did not include any data
Correspondence concerning this article should be
or conducted analyses. It was not pre-registered.
addressed to Olmo van den Akker, e-mail:
Therefore, it didn’t receive any badges. The entire
ovdakker@gmail.com. https://orcid.org/0000-
editorial process, including the open reviews, is
0002-0712-3746
published in the online supplement.
===== PAGE 17/19 =====
17
PREREGISTRATION OF SECONDARY DATA ANALYSIS: A TEMPLATE AND TUTORIAL
Devezer, B., Navarro, D. J., Vandekerckhove, J., &
References Buzbas, E. O. (2020). The case for formal meth-
odology in scientific reform. BioRxiv,
American Psychological Association. (2019). Publi- 2020.04.26.048306.
cation Practices & Responsible Authorship. Re- https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.26.048306
trieved from https://www.apa.org/re- Dutilh, G., Sarafoglou, A., & Wagenmakers, E. J.
search/responsible/publication (2019). Flexible yet fair: Blinding analyses in ex-
Arslan, R. C. (2019). How to Automatically Docu- perimental psychology. Synthese, 1-28.
ment Data With the codebook Package to Fa- https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-019-02456-7
cilitate Data Reuse. Advances in Methods and Faul, F., Erdfelder, E., Buchner, A., & Lang, A. G.
Practices in Psychological Science. (2009). Statistical power analyses using G*
https://doi.org/10.1177/2515245919838783 Power 3.1: Tests for correlation and regression
Bakker, M., & Wicherts, J. M. (2014). Outlier re- analyses. Behavior research methods, 41(4),
moval, sum scores, and the inflation of the type 1149-1160.
I error rate in independent samples t tests: The https://doi.org/10.3758/BRM.41.4.1149
power of alternatives and recommendations. Friedrichs, R. W. (1960). Alter versus ego: An explor-
Psychological Methods, 19(3), 409. atory assessment of altruism. American Socio-
https://doi.org/10.1037/met0000014 logical Review, 496-508.
Bowman, S. D., DeHaven, A. C., Errington, T. M., http://doi.org/10.2307/2092934
Hardwicke, T. E., Mellor, D. T., Nosek, B. A., & Funder, D. C., & Ozer, D. J. (2019). Evaluating effect
Soderberg, C. K. (2016, January 1). OSF Prereg size in psychological research: Sense and non-
Template. sense. Advances in Methods and Practices in
https://doi.org/10.31222/osf.io/epgjd Psychological Science, 2(2), 156-168.
Brookfield, K., Parry, J., & Bolton, V. (2018). Getting https://doi.org/10.1177/2515245919847202
the measure of prosocial behaviors: A compari- Gradstein, M. (1986). Maximal correlation between
son of participation and volunteering data in normal and dichotomous variables. Journal of
the national child development study and the Educational Statistics, 11(4), 259-261.
linked social participation and identity study. Grady, D. G., Cummings, S. R., & Hulley, S. B. (2013).
Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, Research using existing data. Designing clinical
47(5), 1081-1101. research, 192-204. Retrieved from
https://doi.org/10.1177/0899764018786470 https://pdfs.seman-
Buchanan, E. M., Crain, S. E., Cunningham, A. L., ticscholar.org/343e/04f26f768c9530f58e1847a
Johnson, H. R., Stash, H. E., Papadatou-Pastou, ff6a4e072d0be.pdf
M., … , & Aczel, B. (2019, May 20). Getting Grønbjerg, K. A., & Never, B. (2004). The role of reli-
Started Creating Data Dictionaries: How to gious networks and other factors in types of
Create a Shareable Dataset. volunteer work. Nonprofit Management and
https://doi.org/10.31219/osf.io/vd4y3 Leadership, 14(3), 263-289.
Cheng, H. G., & Phillips, M. R. (2014). Secondary https://doi.org/10.1002/nml.34
analysis of existing data: opportunities and im- Herd, P., Carr, D., & Roan, C. (2014). Cohort profile:
plementation. Shanghai Archives of Psychiatry, Wisconsin longitudinal study (WLS). Interna-
26(6), 371-375. tional Journal of Epidemiology, 43(1), 34-41.
https://doi.org/10.11919/j.issn.1002- https://doi.org/10.1093/ije/dys194
0829.214171 Inglehart, R., C. Haerpfer, A. Moreno, C. Welzel, K.
Claesen, A., Gomes, S. L. B. T., Tuerlinckx, F., & Kizilova, J. Diez-Medrano, M. Lagos, P. Norris,
Vanpaemel, W. (2019, May 9). Preregistration: E. Ponarin, & B. Puranen et al. (eds.). (2014).
Comparing Dream to Reality. World Values Survey: Round Six - Country-
https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/d8wex Pooled Datafile Version: www.worldvaluessur-
Cristea, I. A., & Ioannidis, J. P. (2018). P values in dis- vey.org/WVSDocumentationWV6.jsp. JD Sys-
play items are ubiquitous and almost invariably tems Institute.
significant: A survey of top science journals. Kerr, N. L. (1998). HARKing: Hypothesizing after the
PloS one, 13(5), e0197440. results are known. Personality and Social Psy-
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0197440 chology Review, 2(3), 196-217.
===== PAGE 18/19 =====
18
VAN DEN AKKER ET AL.
https://doi.org/10.1207/s15327957pspr0203_ 2021, from https://www.merriam-web-
4 ster.com/dictionary/bias.
Koenig, L. B., McGue, M., Krueger, R. F., & Bou- Mertens, G., & Krypotos, A.M. (2019). Preregistra-
chard, T. J. Jr. (2007). Religiousness, antisocial tion of Analyses of Preexisting Data. Psycho-
behavior, and altruism: Genetic and environ- logica Belgica, 59(1), 338–352.
mental mediation. Journal of Personality, 75(2), http://doi.org/10.5334/pb.493
265-290. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467- Morgan, S. P. (1983). A research note on religion
6494.2007.00439.x and morality: Are religious people nice people?
Konrath, S., Fuhrel-Forbis, A., Lou, A., & Brown, S. Social Forces, 61(3), 683-692.
(2012). Motives for volunteering are associated http://doi.org/10.2307/2578129
with mortality risk in older adults. Health Psy- Norenzayan, A., & Shariff, A. F. (2008). The origin
chology, 31(1), 87-96. and evolution of religious prosociality. Science,
http://doi.org/10.1037/a0025226 322(5898), 58-62. http://doi.org/10.1126/sci-
Lang K. M. & Little T. D. (2018). Principled Missing ence.1158757
Data Treatments. Prevention Science, 19(3), Nosek, B. A., Beck, E. D., Campbell, L., Flake, J. K.,
284-294. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11121-016- Hardwicke, T. E., Mellor, D. T., van 't Veer, A. E.,
0644-5 & Vazire, S. (2019). Preregistation is hard, and
Lakens, D., Scheel, A. M., & Isager, P. M. (2018). worthwhile. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
Equivalence testing for psychological research: 23(10), 815-818.
A tutorial. Advances in Methods and Practices https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2019.07.009
in Psychological Science, 1(2), 259-269. Olsson-Collentine, A., Van Assen, M. A., & Hartge-
https://doi.org/10.1177/2515245918770963 rink, C. H. (2019). The prevalence of marginally
Lazerwitz, B. (1962). Membership in voluntary asso- significant results in psychology over time.
ciations and frequency of church attendance. Psychological Science, 30(4), 576-586.
Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion, 2(1), https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797619830326
74-84. Parliament of the World’s Religions. (1993). Toward
http://doi.org/10.2307/1384095 a global ethic: An initial declaration. Retrieved
Leys, C., Delacre, M., Mora, Y. L., Lakens, D., & Ley, from https://www.weltethos.org/1-pdf/10-
C. (2019). How to classify, detect, and manage stiftung/declaration/declaration_english.pdf
univariate and multivariate outliers, with em- Pew Research Center. (2015). America’s changing
phasis on pre-registration. International Re- religious landscape. Pew Research Center. Re-
view of Social Psychology, 32(1). trieved from https://www.pewfo-
http://doi.org/10.5334/irsp.289 rum.org/2015/05/12/americas-changing-reli-
Lonsdorf, T. B., Klingelhöfer-Jens, M., Andreatta, gious-landscape
M., Beckers, T., Chalkia, A., Gerlicher, A., …, & Pharoah, C., & Tanner, S. (1997). Trends in charita-
Merz, C. J. (2019). How to not get lost in the ble giving. Fiscal Studies, 18(4), 427-443.
garden of forking paths: Lessons learned from https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1475-
human fear conditioning research regarding 5890.1997.tb00272.x
exclusion criteria. Rohrer, J. M. (2018). Thinking clearly about correla-
https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/6m72g tions and causation: Graphical causal models
Lumley, T. (2004). Analysis of complex survey sam- for observational data. Advances in Methods
ples. Journal of Statistical Software, 9(1), 1-19. and Practices in Psychological Science, 1(1), 27–
http://doi.org/10.18637/jss.v009.i08 42. https://doi.org/10.1177/2515245917745629
Massey F. J. Jr. (1951). The Kolmogorov-Smirnov test Rubin, M. (2017). When does HARKing hurt? Identi-
for goodness of fit. Journal of the American fying when different types of undisclosed post
statistical Association, 46(253), 68-78. hoc hypothesizing harm scientific progress.
Meade, A. W. (2010). Restriction of Range. In N. J. Review of General Psychology, 21(4), 308-320.
Sand (Ed.), Encyclopedia of Research Design. https://doi.org/10.1037/gpr0000128
SAGE Publishing. Retrieved from Saroglou, V. (2002). Religion and the five factors of
https://sk.sagepub.com/reference/research- personality: A meta-analytic review. Personal-
design/n388.xml ity and Individual Differences, 32(1), 15-25.
Merriam-Webster (n.d.). Bias. In Merriam-Web- https://doi.org/10.1016/S0191-
ster.com dictionary. Retrieved January 26, 8869(00)00233-6
===== PAGE 19/19 =====
19
PREREGISTRATION OF SECONDARY DATA ANALYSIS: A TEMPLATE AND TUTORIAL
Silver, N. C. (2008). Attenuation. In P. J. Lavrakas Williams, M. N., & Albers, C. (2019). Dealing with
(Ed.), Encyclopedia of Survey Research Meth- distributional assumptions in preregistered re-
ods. SAGE Publishing. Retrieved from search. Meta-Psychology, 3.
http://methods.sagepub.com/reference/en- https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2018.1592
cyclopedia-of-survey-research-meth- Youniss, J., McLellan, J. A., & Yates, M. (1999). Reli-
ods/n24.xml gion, community service, and identity in Amer-
Simonsohn, U., Simmons, J. P., & Nelson, L. D. ican youth. Journal of Adolescence, 22(2), 243-
(2015). Better P-curves: Making P-curve analy- 253. https://doi.org/10.1006/jado.1999.0214.
sis more robust to errors, fraud, and ambitious
P-hacking, a Reply to Ulrich and Miller (2015).
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
144(6), 1146-1152.
https://doi.org/10.1037/xge0000104
Smith, A. K., Ayanian, J. Z., Covinsky, K. E., Landon,
B. E., McCarthy, E. P., Wee, C. C., & Steinman,
M. A. (2011). Conducting high-value secondary
dataset analysis: An introductory guide and re-
sources. Journal of General Internal Medicine,
26(8), 920-929.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11606-010-1621-5
Steegen, S., Tuerlinckx, F., Gelman, A., & Vanpae-
mel, W. (2016). Increasing transparency
through a multiverse analysis. Perspectives on
Psychological Science, 11(5), 702-712.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1745691616658637
Thompson, W. H., Wright, J., Bissett, P. G., &
Poldrack, R. A. (2019). Dataset Decay: the prob-
lem of sequential analyses on open datasets.
bioRxiv, 801696.
https://doi.org/10.1101/801696
Veldkamp, C. L. S., Bakker, M., van Assen, M. A. L.
M., Crompvoets, E. A. V., Ong, H. H., Nosek, B.
A., ..., & Wicherts, J. M. (2018). Ensuring the
quality and specificity of preregistrations.
https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/cdgyh
Wagenmakers, E.-J., Wetzels, R., Borsboom, D., Van
der Maas, H. L. J., & Kievit, R. A. (2012). An
Agenda for Purely Confirmatory Research. Per-
spectives on Psychological Science, 7(6), 632–
638. https://doi.org/10.1177/1745691612463078
Wason, J. M., Stecher, L., & Mander, A. P. (2014).
Correcting for multiple-testing in multi-arm
trials: Is it necessary and is it done? Trials, 15(1),
364.
https://doi.org/10.1186/1745-6215-15-364
Weston, S. J., Ritchie, S. J., Rohrer, J. M., & Przybyl-
ski, A. K. (2019). Recommendations for increas-
ing the transparency of analysis of pre-Existing
Datasets. Advanced Methods and Practices in
Psychological Science.
https://doi.org/10.1177/2515245919848684