
===== PAGE 1/15 =====
Editedby:RickardCarlsson
Meta-Psychology,2021,vol5,MP.2018.869 Opendata:Yes Reviewedby:F.D.Schönbrodt,A.Stefan,
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2018.869 Openmaterials:Yes S.R.Martin,C.O.Brand
Articletype:Tutorial Openandreproducibleanalysis:Yes Analysisreproducedby:AndréKalmendal
PublishedundertheCC-BY4.0license Openreviewsandeditorialprocess:Yes AllsupplementaryfilescanbeaccessedatOSF:
Preregistration:Notapplicable https://osf.io/v2pnc/
A fully automated, transparent, reproducible,
and blind protocol for sequential analyses
Brice Beffara Bret
LPPL - EA 4638, Université de Nantes, Nantes, France
Laboratoire de psychologie - EA 3188, Université de Franche-Comté, Besançon, France
The Walden III Slowpen Science Laboratory, Villeurbanne, France
Amélie Beffara Bret
LPPL - EA 4638, Université de Nantes, Nantes, France
The Walden III Slowpen Science Laboratory, Villeurbanne, France
Ladislas Nalborczyk
Department of Experimental Clinical and Health Psychology, Ghent University, Belgium
The Walden III Slowpen Science Laboratory, Villeurbanne, France
Abstract
Despite many cultural, methodological, and technical improvements, one of the major obstacle to results repro-
ducibility remains the pervasive low statistical power. In response to this problem, a lot of attention has recently
beendrawntosequentialanalyses. Thistypeofprocedurehasbeenshowntobemoreefficient(torequirelessobser-
vationsandthereforelessresources)thanclassicalfixed-Nprocedures. However,theseproceduresaresubmittedto
bothintrapersonalandinterpersonalbiasesduringdatacollectionanddataanalysis. Inthistutorial,weexplainhow
automation can be used to prevent these biases. We show how to synchronise open and free experiment software
programs with the Open Science Framework and how to automate sequential data analyses in R. This tutorial is
intended to researchers with beginner experience with R but no previous experience with sequential analyses is
required.
Keywords: Sequential analysis, Sequential testing, Sequential Bayes factor, Automation, Expectancy effects, Repro-
ducibility,Blindanalyses
Onreproducibility reform(foranoverview,seeFidler&Wilcox,2018;Nel-
son et al., 2018). Although many of the practices that
It may be referred to as a crisis, a revolution, or a
are currently recognised as part of the problem (e.g.,
renaissance, but Psychology has undeniably known a
poorunderstandingofstatisticalmethods,questionable
decade of unparalleled methodological reflection and
===== PAGE 2/15 =====
2
researchpractices)havelongbeenacknowledged(e.g., a long history of scrutiny in Psychology, one of the ma-
Babbage, 1830),1 recently introduced practices have jor threats to results reproducibility remains statistical
brought considerable improvements to the reliability of power,wherepowercanbebroadlydefinedastheprob-
findings in psychological science (e.g., see Smaldino et abilityofachievingacertaingoal,giventhatasuspected
al.,2019). underlying state of the world is true (Kruschke, 2015).
There are many ways to define what reproducibility Weknowthatalowpoweredresulthas(allotherthings
is,anditisoftenunclearwhatismeantbythetermsof being equal) a lower probability to replicate, the initial
reproducibility, replicability, repeatability, or reliability. result being attached with a higher probability of erro-
To avoid these confusions, we adopt the terminology neous inference (e.g., type-M or type-S errors, Gelman
suggested by Goodman et al. (2016). When discussing & Carlin, 2014). Even though there are many ways to
researchreproducibility,wemakeadistinctionbetween increase statistical power (e.g., see Hansen & Collins,
i) methods reproducibility: the ability to reproduce, as 1994), we focus here on sequential testing, that is, the
closely as possible, the methodological procedures de- continuous analysis of data during its collection. This
veloped by a certain team (i.e., what is usually meant procedure has been shown to optimise the amount of
byreproducibility),ii)resultsreproducibility: theability resources (e.g., money and time) to be spent in order
to reproduce a certain result in a given methodologi- toattainacertaingoal,ascomparedtoclassicalapriori
calsettings(i.e.,whatisusuallymeantbyreplicability), poweranalysesstrategies(Lakens,2014;Schönbrodtet
andiii)inferentialreproducibility: theability(foranin- al.,2017).
dependent team) to replicate an inferential conclusion, We turn now to a brief presentation of several se-
thatis,toarriveatthesameconclusion. quential analyses procedures, followed by a discussion
Whereas results reproducibility concerns the out- of the methodological precautions that need to be un-
come of a computational or experimental procedure, dertaken to ensure the validity of these procedures. Fi-
methodsreproducibilityisapropertyofthemethodsbe- nally, we outline the core aspects of a "born-open" (fol-
ing used to produce this particular outcome. As put by lowing the terminology of Rouder, 2016), fully auto-
Meehl(1990),ascientificstudyisakintoarecipe,and mated, and reproducible workflow for sequential anal-
a good methods description should allow other cooks yses.
to prepare the same kind of cake as the person that
wrote the recipe did. As such, methods reproducibility Abriefintroductiontosequentialanalyses
isessentialtoresultsreproducibility. Fortunately,recent procedures
technical developments have made the task far easier
In this section, we briefly introduce three sequential
thanitusedtobe. Keycomponentsofamodernrepro-
analysis procedures that address three distinct goals.
ducibleworkflowmayinclude:
More precisely, these procedures permit to either i) ac-
cumulaterelativeevidenceforahypothesis(thesequen-
• Transparency: exhaustiveandintelligibledescrip-
tial Bayes factor procedure) or ii) efficiently accept or
tion and sharing of all materials, scripts, etc. (for
reject a value or range of values for a parameter (the
apracticalintroduction,seeKleinetal.,2018)
sequential HDI+ROPE procedure) or iii) sample obser-
• Self-containment: writing reproducible docu- vations until a desired level of estimation precision is
ments in LaTeX or RMarkdown (e.g., see reached.
the R package papaja, Aust & Barth, 2018)
and sharing self-contained code (e.g., see SequentialBayesfactor
https://codeocean.com)
Schönbrodt et al. (2017) presented an alternative to
null-hypothesis significance testing with a priori power
• Version control: using Git and Github (or Gitlab)
analysis(NHST-PA)byintroducingtheSequentialBayes
totrackchangesinworkingdocuments(foranin-
Factor (SBF)procedure. TheSBFprocedureusesBayes
troduction,seeVuorre&Curley,2018)
factors(BFs)toiterativelyexaminetherelativeeviden-
• Automation: minimising mistakes by automatis- tial support for a hypothesis during data collection.2
ing as many steps of the research process as pos-
sible (e.g., Rouder, 2016; Rouder et al., 2018; 1Where the same could be said for recently proposed so-
lutions like preregistration or radical transparency (e.g., de
Yarkonietal.,2019)
Groot,2014).
Although methods reproducibility is essential to re- 2Technically speaking, the Bayes factor is a ratio of
marginal likelihoods (i.e., what is considered as evidence in
sults reproducibility, it is not sufficient. Despite having
the Bayesian framework). Broadly, a BF can be interpreted
===== PAGE 3/15 =====
3
The first step of the SBF procedure is to pick thresh- terior distribution of the group difference.3 This dis-
olds (one for each of the two hypotheses being com- tribution can be summarised via its mean and highest
pared)thatdeterminetheendofdatacollection. These density interval (HDI), an interval that contains the X%
thresholds should be selected to reflect the level of evi- mostcrediblevaluesfortheparameter(Kruschke&Lid-
dence that the experimenter consider sufficient to stop dell, 2018).4 The hypothesis according to which the
data collection, but should also be defined in consider- group difference is equal to zero can then be assessed
ation of specific goals and costs-benefits analyses. In- bycheckingwhethertheHDIincludeszeroasacredible
deed, more stringent thresholds require larger sample value. Alternatively,andmoreinterestingly,theHDIcan
sizes, but are associated with lower risks of misleading becomparedtoaregionofpracticalequivalence(ROPE,
inferences (false positive and false negative), all other Kruschke, 2018), defining the range of effect sizes that
things being equal. Then, after picking the appropriate we consider as negligible (i.e., equivalent to zero) for
prior distribution for the alternative hypothesis, a first practicalpurposes.
batchofobservationsiscollected,duringwhichnoBFis ThecomparisonofHDIandROPEcanbesummarised
computed (to avoid misleading inferences due to early bycomputingtheproportionoftheHDIthatisincluded
terminations). Starting at n observations (the a pri- in the ROPE, giving an idea of the extent to which the
min
oridefinedminimumsamplesize),aBFiscomputedat hypothesis of no effect is supported. Alternatively, the
each stage (or each observation). The sampling proce- comparison of the HDI to the ROPE can result in three
duregoesonuntilthecurrentBFreachestheaprioride- categorical outcomes: i) the null hypothesis is rejected
finedthresholdoruntil reachingn observations(the (when the HDI falls completely outside the ROPE), ii)
max
aprioridefinedmaximumsamplesize). thenullhypothesisisaccepted(whentheHDIfallscom-
Schönbrodt et al. (2017) provided detailed simu- pletely inside the ROPE), or iii) the data is said to be
lation results of this procedure when comparing the inconclusive(whenneitheroftheaboveapplies).
means of two independent groups (the equivalent of a When the goal of the analysis is to accept or reject
two-samplest-test). Theyshowthattheerrorratesand areferencevalue,itisthenpossibletostopdatacollec-
the average length of the procedure (i.e., how many tionwhentheHDIdoesnotincludethisreferencevalue.
observations are needed to reach the threshold) are a Thus, this procedure is similar to the SBF procedure,
function of both the population effect size, the thresh- except that the sampling procedure is terminated by a
old, and the prior for the alternative hypothesis. For (conclusive)comparisonofaHDItoaROPE,insteadof
instance, when chasing a medium effect size (d = 0.5) beingterminatedbyacomparisonofaBFvaluetosome
andwhenusinga"mediumscaled"priorforthealterna- threshold (for a detailed study of the characteristics of
tive (r = 1), stopping data collection at BF = 6 instead thisprocedure,seeKruschke,2015).
ofBF =3resultsinapercentageofwronginferencesof
4.6% instead of 40% (see Table 1 in Schönbrodt et al., Aimingforprecision
2017,p. 10).
Because data collection stops when the accumulated
Basedontheseresults,itispossibletocombineprior
evidence reaches a certain threshold, sequential hy-
guesses or expectations with the known properties of
pothesis testing procedures (e.g., SBF or HDI+ROPE)
theSBFproceduretodesignexperiments. Thisstrategy
are known to be biased by extreme observations. In
is known as design analysis and includes the classical
other words, the data collection stops when the col-
power analyses of the NHST framework as a particu-
lected data supports the hypothesis, preventing the op-
lar case. In this vein, Schönbrodt and Wagenmakers
portunity of collecting contradictory data afterwards
(2018)introducedtheBayesFactorDesignAnalysistool
and demonstrated how this strategy can help to design as an updating factor, indicating how credibility should be
more informative empirical studies (see also Stefan et re-allocated from prior knowledge (what was known before
al.,2019). seeingthedata)toposteriorknowledge(whatisknownafter
seeingthedata).
ThesequentialHDI+ROPEprocedure 3The posterior distribution is the result of any Bayesian
analysis. It is a probability distribution that allocates prob-
Bayesfactorsarenottheonlyavailableoptiontoper-
ability to parameter values, given the model (including the
form sequential testing. Whereas BFs quantify the ev- priors)andtheobserveddata.
idence in favour of an hypothesis (relative to another 4The HDI is a particular type of credible interval, the
hypothesis), each individual hypothesis can also be ex- Bayesian equivalent of the frequentist confidence interval. It
aminedonitsown. Forinstance,thehypothesisthatthe should be noted however that the interpretation of Bayesian
group difference of some measured variable is equal to andfrequentistintervalsdifferconsiderably(e.g.,Moreyetal.,
zero might be assessed by looking directly at the pos- 2016;Nalborczyketal.,2019).
===== PAGE 4/15 =====
4
(Kruschke, 2015). Performing sequential analysis un- Somedifficulties
til a certain estimation precision is reached overcomes
The procedures previously described and discussed
this bias (Kruschke, 2015). In this procedure, the goal
inSchönbrodtetal.(2017)andKruschke(2015,2018)
is not to stop data analysis based on the rejection of
offeranattractiveperspectiveondatacollection. How-
an hypothesis but rather to sample observations until a
ever, some precautions need to be undertaken in order
predefined level of precision in a parameter (including
topreserveagoodprecisionorthelong-termerrorrates
effect size) estimation is reached. The estimation pre-
they provide. More precisely, we discuss two main cat-
cision can be quantified by the width of the HDI and
egories of biases that need to be controlled. We call
Kruschke (2015) proposes to stop data analysis when
the first category of biases intrapersonal biases, as bi-
the HDI width is less than 80% of the ROPE’s width.
asesthatareexpressedwithinindividuals. Thesebiases
Forinstance,ifthesmallesteffectsizeofinterest(SESOI,
mainlyemergeduringdataanalysisanddatareporting.
Lakens et al., 2018) is δ = 0.2, we can define a ROPE
We call the second category of biases interpersonal bi-
around 0 from δ = −0.1 to δ = 0.1. This means that
ases, as biases that are expressed between individuals.
we will consider an effect as approximately null when
Thesebiasesmainlyemergeduringdatacollection(e.g.,
it is less than half our SESOI. Planing for precision, we
whentheresearcherinteractswithparticipants).
wouldthereforestopdatacollectionwhenthewidthof
These biases can arise in any study but sequential
ourHDI(ontheestimateoftheeffectsize)isinferiorto
procedures present specific risks on both the intra and
0.8×0.2=0.16(Kruschke,2018).
interpersonal dimensions. We explain why in the next
Of course, there are other methods to determine the
section.
desiredlevelofprecision. Forinstance,researcherscan
base their SESOI on an effect of minimal clinical rele-
Whatcouldpossiblygowrong?
vance. In this context, the SESOI varies depending on
the costs and benefits of the treatment (Lakens et al., Intrapersonalbiasesduringsequentialanalyses
2018). Wecanalsoimagineothercriteriatodetermine
Most intrapersonal biases occur because of what
precision on the basis of the ROPE. In any case, even
some would call the "researcher degrees of freedom"
if one wants to check whether the HDI falls inside the
(Simmonsetal.,2011;Wichertsetal.,2016). Following
ROPEattheendofdatacollection,planingforprecision
Wicherts et al. (2016)’ nomenclature, we identified the
enables us to focus on parameter or effect size estima-
followingintrapersonalbiasesashavingincreasedrisks
tion instead of hypothesis testing. If we decide to plan
insequentialprocedures:
formoderateprecision,wewillnotneedalargeamount
ofobservations,butitislikelythattheHDIwilloverlap
• C3: Correcting,coding,ordiscardingdataduring
the ROPE. As a consequence, it will not be possible to
datacollectioninanon-blindedmanner.
reachacategoricalconclusion. Ifweplanforhighpreci-
sion,moreobservationswillbeneededtostopdatacol- • A1: Choosing between different options of deal-
lection, but hypothesis testing will be improved as well ing with incomplete or missing data on ad hoc
as precision. In most situations, planing for precision grounds.
willrequiremoreobservationsthanhypothesistesting.
• A2: Specifyingpre-processingofdata(e.g.,clean-
Whatevertheprocedure,thestoppingruleshouldbe
ing, normalization, smoothing, motion correc-
thoughtcarefullybyconsideringandbalancingthecosts
tion)inanadhocmanner.
and benefits of collecting more observations. A small
number of observations is affordable but likely to lead
• A3: Decidinghowtodealwithviolationsofstatis-
to biased conclusions. A large number of observations
ticalassumptionsinanadhocmanner.
can be expensive but likely to lead to more robust con-
clusions. Both frequentist and Bayesian methods have • A4: Deciding on how to deal with outliers in an
their ways to deal with risks and errors in sequential adhocmanner.
hypothesis testing. Criteria are modified for sequential
hypothesis testing so that "significant" p-values (e.g., Thesedegreesoffreedomallowflexibilitywhenpro-
.0294 instead of .05 for one interim analysis, Lakens, cessing data before statistical inference. This flexibility
2014) or Bayes factors (e.g., BF = 6 instead of BF = can be dangerous when incentives, cultural norms, or
3 depending on acceptable error rates, Schönbrodt et previous practices influence data analysis, and where
al.,2017)arenotthesameasclassical(nonsequential) there are few safeguards. Thus, the intrapersonal na-
hypothesis testing. This should also be considered in ture of these biases does not refer to an absence of so-
sequentialtheHDI+ROPEprocedure. cialinfluence,butrathertobiasesoccurringatthepoint
where the researcher makes choices on her own. This
===== PAGE 5/15 =====
5
can be the case when someone discards an outlier to changing the criterion and methods for data prepara-
reach a significant result because it is easier to pub- tion based on the state of the sequential procedure is
lish with significant results. This can also be the case not acceptable. The result of an experiment cannot de-
when one tries different data transformations to best termine the way it is itself defined. Real-time result-
match their preferred hypothesis. Here the problem- hacking would jeopardise the confidence one can have
aticnatureofthedegreesoffreedomistheresearcher’s inthisresult.
subjectivity. Discarding an outlier or transforming data Therefore, we propose that all the steps of the se-
is not necessarily the result of being an outlier or be- quentialprocedure(i.e.,datapreparationandcleaning,
ing skewed data, but can also be the result of what outliers detection, data transformation, model assump-
the researcher wants to see because of economic, so- tions checks, and data analysis) should be automated
cial(e.g.,reputationpressure),culturalcontexts. These and performed in an incremental manner. The entire
biasesarenotspecifictosequentialproceduresbuttheir datasetcanbecontinuallyreanalysed,includingformer
consequencesmightbeamplifiedduringsequentialpro- outliers, so that the process follows the progressive in-
cedures because of the possible impact of each look at corporation of new observations. Put more formally,
the data. Indeed, the degrees of freedom can impact such a procedure should be able to take into account
data analysis at time t which can in turn impact data that an extreme observation at time t might not be ex-
1
collection in a self-perpetuating cycle. Data analysis at treme anymore at time t , and should therefore be re-
n
timet isthereforelikelytobebiasedbythedegreesof includedinsubsequentanalyses.
2
freedom at time t but also at time t . Thus, errors ac- The fact that this iterative procedure is automated
2 1
cumulate becausethe effects ofthe degrees offreedom should prevent the data analyst from the hazards that
aremultiplied. are commonly encountered during data manipulation
When a data analyst has expectations about what (see previous section). These hazards have particu-
should be observed, the data analysis is likely to larly important consequences in sequential procedures
be biased by these expectations through confirma- in comparison to traditional (i.e. fixed-n) procedures
tion (favouring an hypothesis) or disconfirmation becauseoftheincrementalnatureofevidenceaccumu-
(strongerscepticismtowarddataagainstthehypothesis lation. A specific preprocessing choice at time t can
than toward data corroborating the hypothesis) biases influence inference criteria computation at time t+n
(MacCoun & Perlmutter, 2017). While continuously which can subsequently influence another preprocess-
analysing data, the data analyst is faced with many ingchoicesandsoon. Withaccumulatedmodifications
choicesaboutthebestwaytodealwithincomingdata. inpreprocessingdecisions,theinferencecriteriaarenot
Basedonpreviousstudies,theymighthaveexpectations onlycomputedbasedondatabutalsoonsequentialand
abouttherangeofplausiblevalues,ortheymightneed incrementalchoicesfromthescientist. Weproposethat
to use particular methods to process physiological sig- thesestepscouldinsteadbeprogrammedandcodedon
nals, to recode or to transform data in a specific way, thebasisofpreregisteredchoices,beforestartingtocol-
andsoon. Weurgeresearcherstomakethesedecisions lectdata. Preregisteredautomateddataanalysiswould
explicitbeforedatacollection. therefore ensure conclusions based on empirical proce-
The properties of sequential procedures have been dures to be similar to the results (e.g., long-term er-
studied extensively via simulation (Kruschke, 2015; ror rates) provided by Schönbrodt et al. (2017) or Kr-
Schönbrodt et al., 2017; Wagenmakers et al., 2017). uschke(2015)usingsimulation,andexplicitlyfulfilthe
However,noiseandirregularitiesinsimulateddataonly requirementsoftransparencyandreproducibility.
come from sampling variability, and not from practi- However, being able to define in advance the goal
cal problems that can be encountered during empirical and the criteria for success of these sequential proce-
data collection (e.g., technical issues or experimenter dures requires i) to be well aware of the literature of
biases). When collecting data, researchers would like interest, ii) to know how data behave by manipulat-
to get as close as possible to the shape of simulated ingdatafromverysimilarpreviousexperimentsorpre-
data (i.e., we would like to minimise other sources of tests, iii) to be able to implement a procedure of data
errors than sampling variability). In order for the BF, preparation for model computation before seeing new
the HDI or the precision to be reliable stopping crite- data. Thesethreepointsmightseemtrivialbutareeven
ria, they have to be computed on reliable data. We ac- more important for sequential analyses than classical
knowledgethatwhatcanbeconsideredasreliabledata proceduresinordertoavoidintermediateinfluencesin
heavilydependsonthetypeofstudy. Assuch,decisions datapreparationbasedonknowninterimresults.
concerningtheanalysisworkflowshouldbejustifiedby In addition to these intermediate influences (i.e., in-
the existing literature as much as possible. However, fluencesbetweenthecollectionofthefirstbatchofdata
===== PAGE 6/15 =====
6
and the final data analysis) in data preparation, inter- resentations. In other words, a bias toward a particu-
mediateinfluencescanalsobeproblematicduringdata larresultmaystemfrompreviousliteratureorpersonal
collection. These influences are what we call "interper- beliefs. In the sequential analysis context, a bias to-
sonalbiases". ward a particular result may also stem from observing
theaccumulatingdataacrossthesequentialprocedure.
Interpersonalbiasesduringsequentialanalyses This could be particularly strong, because one can di-
rectly see the accumulated data as the sample size in-
By interpersonal biases we refer to biases that might
creases in real time. Knowing about intermediate re-
occur when a researcher interacts with participants
sults can therefore increase the risk of falling into an
during data collection. According to Wicherts et al.
"evidence confirmation loop". In the previous section,
(2016)’s nomenclature, the interpersonal bias with po-
we proposed that this risk applies to confirmation and
tentiallyincreasedrisksinsequentialproceduresis:
disconfirmationbiases(dataanalysis)wheretheintrap-
• C2: Insufficient blinding of participants and/or ersonalbiasofdataevaluationcaninflatewithaccumu-
experimenters. latedevidence. Inthissection,weproposethatthisloop
canalsoworsenexperimenterexpectancyeffectsduring
When an experimenter has expectations about what datacollection. Theinterpersonalbiasofexperimenter-
should be observed, data collection is likely to be bi- participant interactions can be seen as a self-fulfilling
ased by these expectations (Gilder & Heerey, 2018; prophecyamplifiedbyfeedbackfrompreviousdata.
Kleinetal.,2012;Orne,1962;Rosenthal,1963;Rosen- Clearly, it is very difficult to obtain robust results
thal,1964;Rosenthal&Rubin,1978; Zoble&Lehman, concerning the effect size of analyst and observer ex-
1969). Onesolutiontopreventthisbiasistomakesure pectancy effects. Indeed, one would have to carry out
thatexperimentersareblindtotheexperimentalcondi- experiments on experiments in order to study these bi-
tions. ases. This "meta-science" problem is arduous because
Double blind5 designs are expected to minimise ex- these biases can apply at all levels of manipulation as
pectancy effects (Gilder & Heerey, 2018; Klein et al., one experiment is included in another. For instance,
2012). However, when the experimenter cannot be Barber(1978)suggestedthatexpectancybiasescanalso
blind, expectancy effects are to be expected. This bias occurintheexpectancybiasresearch. Itcanalsobedif-
hasbeenclearlyidentifiedbyLakens(2014)asapartic- ficulttocollectlargeobservationsamplesbyexperimen-
ularly strong risk (i.e. observer effects are likely to be tal conditions (e.g., Zoble & Lehman, 1969), although
strongerinthecontextofsequentialtesting)insequen- recent work has shown that it was possible (Gilder &
tial analysis: "Experimenter bias is important to con- Heerey, 2018). Thus, we can only draw attention to
sider when performing a study under normal circum- these effects as a potential risk to consider rather than
stances [...] but becomes even more important to con- asapreciselyquantifieddangertoavoid.
sider when the experimenter has performed an interim When double blind designs are not practicable, in-
analysis." terpersonal biases seem obvious. However, when a
What is the specific status of sequential testing con- double blind design is set up, the existence of an in-
cerning analyst and observer expectancy effects? Ex- terpersonal bias is probably more questionable. How
pectancyeffectsarisewhenonehaspriorbeliefsand/or couldknowledgeaboutpreviousdatainfluencetheout-
motivations about the outcome of an experiment and come of the experiment? It is possible that the exper-
involuntarily (we assume scientific honesty) influences imenter’s verbal and non-verbal motor cues impact on
theresultsonthebasisofthesepriorbeliefsandmotiva- the participant’s behaviour (Zoble & Lehman, 1969).
tions. Theconfidenceinahypothesiscanbeinfluenced However, it is unlikely that only non-verbal cues un-
bypreviousresultsfromtheliterature,naiverepresenta- derlie the experimenter expectancy effect, at least in
tionsaboutthestudiedphenomenon,andothersources simple or familiar tasks (Hazelrigg et al., 1991). What
ofinformation. Thesesourcesmaydealwiththestudied we know today is that the experimenter expectancy ef-
phenomenon but rarely with the ongoing study specif- fect can be inadvertent and can depend on the inter-
ically, and, as a consequence, the potential hypothesis action between the experimenter and the participant
canbesubjecttouncertainty. Whenperformingsequen- (Gilder & Heerey, 2018; Hazelrigg et al., 1991). Per-
tialtesting,onehasadirectaccesstotheaccumulation sonality variables such as the need of social influence
of evidence concerning the ongoing study. Hence, the (on the experimenter’s side) and the susceptibility to
prior information accumulated from sequential analy-
sis specifically reduces uncertainty about the potential 5We use the "double blind" terminology according to the
results of the ongoing experiment as compared to in- classicaldefinition,whereboththeparticipantandtheexper-
formation gathered from previous studies or naive rep- imenterareblindtotheexperimentalcondition.
===== PAGE 7/15 =====
7
social influence (on the participant’s side) can also in- illustrated the predicted consequences of these biases
crease the expectancy bias (Hazelrigg et al., 1991). In on the evolution of sequentially computed BFs. In the
a double-blind design however, the experimenter can- next section, we focus on how to prevent these biases
notinfluencetheparticipant’sresponsesonthebasisof fromhappening. Wesuggesttwowaysofimplementing
knowledgeoftheexperimentalcondition. However,the analysis blinding as a precaution against experimenter
(de)motivation and the disappointment/satisfaction of biases during sequential testing, and present a proof of
seeingthepreferredhypothesiscontradicted/confirmed conceptforanautomatedprocedurethatwouldensure
by the sequential testing procedure can possibly influ- objectivity.
ence the participant.6 We cannot rule out the possi-
bility that the confidence in a hypothesis interacts with Afullyautomated,transparent,reproducibleand
experimental conditions and impacts the results of the triple-blindprotocolforsequentialtesting
experiment in one way or another. Because the exper-
Blinding is the procedure which hides the assigned
imenter is not aware of the experimental condition of
condition from people involved in the experiment. It
theparticipants,theywillprobablyinfluencethemmore
can notably be applied to participants, experimenters,
uniformly than in a simple blind design. This means
ordataanalysts(Schulz&Grimes,2002). Ifpossible,it
that the behaviour of the experimenter can potentially
ispreferabletoapplyblindingtoanyoneinvolvedinthe
change the baseline value of a parameter in all partici-
experimenttoavoidexpectancyeffects. Whereaspartic-
pants. Also, we cannot exclude the possibility that the
ipant and experimenter blinding is often considered in
effectoftheexperimentalmanipulationisbiasedbythis
Psychology,muchlessattentionhasbeengiventoanal-
baseline value shift. More generally, "contextual vari-
ysis blinding, probably due to materials and time con-
ables,suchasexperimenters’expectations,areasource
straints. However, the use of analysis blinding would
of error that obscures the process of interest" (Klein et
helpeliminatesomeofthebiasesidentifiedinWicherts
al.,2012).
et al. (2016). Again, this has been well described by
Lakens (2014): "In large medical trials, tasks such as
Whatcouldbeexpected?
datacollectionandstatisticalanalysisareoftenassigned
Tothebestofourknowledge,thereisnoexperiment to different individuals, and it is considered good prac-
reporting expectancy biases when the experimenter is tice to have a data and safety monitoring board that is
blindtotheexperimentalcondition. However,blinding involvedinplanningtheexperimentandoverseeingany
the experimenter from interim analysis is certainly rec- interimanalyses. Inpsychology,suchadivisionoflabor
ommended(Lakens,2014)whenblindingexperimental is rare, and it is much more common that researchers
conditionsisnotpossible. Wesuggestthatblindingthe workinisolation".
analysisshouldalsobeconsideredasaprecaution,even Analysisblindingcantaketwodifferentformsinthe
whentheexperimenterisblind. context of sequential analyses procedures. First, analy-
In Table 1, we describe hypothetical observable con- sis blinding can refer to a procedure ensuring that the
sequences of such biases on the SBF and HDI+ROPE person analysing the data is blind to the hypotheses
procedures. Importantly,expectationbiasescanemerge (Miller&Stewart,2011). Thisconfigurationminimises
in all combinations of a priori expectations and pop- intrapersonal biases because the analyst does not have
ulation effect sizes. Congruent observations are ex- the information necessary to influence data analysis in
pected to increase the speed with which the threshold a specific direction (congruent or incongruent with the
is reached (H0+ and H1+), whereas incongruent ob- hypothesis). Second (and more specifically to sequen-
servationsareexpectedtoslowdownthisprocess(H0- tial testing procedures), analysis blinding can refer to
andH1-)andtoincreasethenumberoffalsealarms. a procedure ensuring that the experimenter is blinded
tothedataanalysis. Thisconfigurationminimisesinter-
Evidence is insufficient to conclude on the practical personalbiasesbecausetheexperimenterdoesnothave
significance of analyst and observer expectancy effects, theinformationnecessarytoinfluencedatacollectionin
especially in double blind designs. If the necessary a specific direction (congruent or incongruent with the
methods to reduce bias were costly and the potential hypothesis).
benefits uncertain, then it would be reasonable to be If the experimenter is not the data analyst, they can
scepticalofourproposal. However,wewillshowinthe beblindtotheevolutionoftheintermediateresultsun-
next section that the methods required to reduce bias til data collection stops. As a consequence, the specific
areeasytoimplement,andthereforecostlesstoadopt.
6Ideally, scientists should be interested in all possible re-
We have presented how the knowledge of previous
sults,whatevertheyare.
data can bias the data collection process and have also
===== PAGE 8/15 =====
8
Table1
Possible interactions between the population value of the effect size and the a priori expectations of the experimenter
duringa(non-blind)sequentialtestingprocedure.
Thereisnodifferenceinthepopulation Thereisadifferenceinthepopulation
(H0: δ=0) (H1: δ(cid:44)0)
Researcher1,believesinH0 H0+(congruent) H1-(incongruent)
Researcher2,believesinH1 H0-(incongruent) H1+(congruent)
experimenter expectancy bias in the sequential proce- ment. We will directly focus on the preparation of ma-
dure is avoided. Another solution is to automate anal- terialsneededtocollectdata.
ysis blinding so that the data analyst and the experi- This tutorial mainly deals with computerised exper-
menter (who can be the same person) are blind to in- iments.8 In this situation, users need to program an
termediate results computed on previous sets of obser- experiment to collect data. The logic proposed here
vations. To illustrate this idea, we describe below how is compatible with experiments programmed with Psy-
to perform transparent blind sequential analysis. We choPy (Peirce, 2007, 2008; Peirce et al., 2019) or
propose an example for two independent-groups com- OpenSesame(Mathôtetal.,2012). Thesesoftwarepro-
parisons (as in Schönbrodt et al., 2017). This tutorial gramshavetheadvantageofbeingfreeandabletocom-
coversallexperimentalstepsfrompreregistrationtore- municate with the OSF. These two qualities are crucial
sults reporting. When several options are available for fortransparentproceduresandeasysharing.
a specific step, we detail one in the manuscript and We will use the possibility to link the software
other possibilities in the supplementary materials. program with the OSF in order to propose an intuitive
We provide a functional example of the procedure on "born-open" data procedure (Rouder, 2016). Although
the OSF (Open Science Framework) based on an emo- OSF synchronisation tools are generally easy to install
tional Stroop experiment. In order to describe the pro- on Windows and Mac OS, it can be slightly more
cedure,weusetheideaofRouder(2016)whotookthe "complicated" on other operating systems (OS) such
perspective of his dog Kirby to explain Git and Github. as Linux OS. Most users probably work on Windows
Here we take the perspective of Lisa Loud,7 who loves and Mac OS. However, because Linux OSs are free
carrying out experiments but has probably never used and open we believe that they fit well with the open
automatedsequentialanalysisbefore. science philosophy. Consequently, we will provide
minimal examples on how to use this tutorial on
Prerequisites Ubuntuasapopularandeasy-to-useLinuxdistribution.
• Lisa needs to have an Open Science Framework
(OSF,https://osf.io/register/)account.
We propose a procedure using OpenSesame be-
• Lisa needs to have at least some basic knowledge low. Procedures with PsychoPy can be found in the
about how to use the OSF. See Soderberg (2018) supplementary materials. OpenSesame probably
and https://help.osf.io/ for a practical introduc- allowsthesimplestsynchronisationwiththeOSF.How-
tion. ever, it is less flexible than PsychoPy for programming
experimentsbecause,unlikePsychoPy,itdoesnotallow
• Lisa needs to have R (R Core Team, 2019) and toaccesstoacoderview. DirectOSFsynchronisationis
RStudio (https://www.rstudio.com/) installed on availablewithPsychoPy2butnotwithPsychoPy3. The
hercomputer. example available on the OSF is based on PsychoPy 2
buthasalsobeensuccessfullytestedwithOpenSesame.
• Lisa needs to have a recent version of OpenS-
Table 2 proposes a summary of the main strengths and
esame (https://osdoc.cogsci.nl/) or PsychoPy
weaknessesofeachmethod.
(https://www.PsychoPy.org/) installed on her
computer.
Programming the experiment for "born-open"
data. We present how to program an experiment al-
"Born-open"data
The aim of this this tutorial is not to discuss the the- 7https://theloudhouse.fandom.com/wiki/Lisa_Loud
oretical work necessary before carrying out an experi- 8However, some parts of the proposed protocol can be
adaptedtootherkindsofexperiments.
===== PAGE 9/15 =====
9
Table2
Globaloverviewofopenexperimentprogrammingsoftware’scharacteristicsandsynchronisationhandling.
OpenSesame PsychoPy 2 PsychoPy 3
Synchronisation OSF OSF Pavlovia and Gitlab*
Automatic synchronisation ease + - - - -
Graphical interface for synchronisation ++ - ++
Synchronisation quality ++ + +++
Software flexibility - ++ ++
*Indirectsynchronisation ispossiblewithOSF becausesynchronisationispossible betweenOSFandGitlab. Direct synchronisation
withOSFcouldalsobepossiblebutprobablynotstraightforward.
lowing automatic "born-open" data with OpenSesame, Figure 1. OSF log-in button in the main toolbar in
currently the easiest way to program automatic "born- OpenSesame
open" data. For more flexibility in experiment pro-
gramming, PsychoPy options are described in the
supplementary materials. OpenSesame is "a graphi-
calexperimentbuilderforthesocialsciences". Itisfree,
open-source,andcross-platform. Itfeatures"acompre-
hensive and intuitive graphical user interface and sup-
portsPythonscriptingforcomplextasks."(Mathôtetal.,
2012). OSFintegrationisnormallyincludedbydefault
for Windows and Mac OS. If not (or for other OS like
Ubuntu for instance), the installation procedure is de-
scribed in the supplementary materials. If OSF in-
tegration is installed, the user should see the OSF icon
in OpenSesame (Figure 1). Click the OSF log-in but-
ton and sign in with your OSF account. More details
on OSF integration in OpenSesame can be found at
https://osdoc.cogsci.nl/3.1/manual/osf/. If Lisa reads
this part of the manual, she will know exactly what to cause data is continuously analysed during data collec-
doinordertolinkdatatotheOSF.9 Ifshelinksdatato tion, everything must be ready before collecting data.
the OSF, each time that data has been collected (nor- This can be seen as a disadvantage because there is a
mallyaftereveryexperimentalsession),thisdataisalso lot of work to be done before data collection. Indeed,
uploaded to the OSF. Lisa should follow the following analysing data after data collection allows us to delay
stepsinordertodoso: several choices thus allowing to launch data collection
morequickly.10 However,thiscanalsobeconsideredas
• Lisahastosavetheexperimentonhercomputer.
ahugeadvantagebecausetherearenounexpectedsur-
prisesafterdatacollection. Itisnotpossibletodiscover
• ShethenhastoopentheOSFexplorer,right-click
that something has not been recorded or that data is
on the folder that she wants the data to be up-
not in the appropriate format, or that data is more dif-
loaded to, and select "Sync data to this folder".
ficult to analyse than expected. Everything is thought
The OSF node that the data is linked to will be
aboutupstreambecauseeverythingmustworkfordata
shownatthetopoftheexplorer.
analysis which is performed during data collection. We
• She finally needs to check "Always upload col- proposethis6-stepproceduretopreparetheanalysis:
lected data" and data files will be automatically
• Clearly define the variables involved in the study
savedtoOSFaftertheyhavebeencollected.
9The following part is a reformulation of the manual for
Scriptpreparationandpiloting thepurposeofourtutorial.
10Herewedonotsaythatpreparationisspecifictosequen-
Performing sequential analyses requires strict exper- tialtesting. Preparationcanberecommendedforalldesigns,
iment programming and data analysis preparation. Be- butisnotavoidableinsequentialanalysis.
===== PAGE 10/15 =====
10
inordertoprogramtheexperiment thisperspective,bornopendata(Rouder,2016)canbe
evenmoreefficient,especiallyinthecontextofsequen-
• Carefully consider how to analyse the data to be
tial analysis. "Born-open" data is the procedure which
collected
makesdataautomaticallyopenassoonasitiscollected.
This procedure has at least two huge interests for se-
• Program the experiment in keeping with the
quential analysis. First, the time course of data collec-
planneddataanalysis
tion is transparent because data is necessarily sent on-
• Test the experiment to check that everything is lineandtime-stampedjustafterbeingcollected. Thisis
workingasexpected very important because in doing so, each choice made
by Lisa will be clear and justified. Second, "born-open"
• Prepare the scripts that will be used to analyse
data will facilitate real time online data analysis which
data
is very useful for sequential designs. automatic "born-
• Runsomepilotstotesttheprocedure open"dataispossiblewithOpenSesameorPsychoPyby
automaticpublishingdataontheOSF(oronGithubor
These steps are necessary in order to launch the ac- Gitlabforinstance).
tual experiment. Otherwise, sequential analyses are
likelytofailatsomepoint. Automateddatacleaning
Aftercollectingherfirstbatchofdata,Lisamightnot
Preregistration
be able to directly fit the statistical model she is inter-
Let’s assume Lisa has successfully achieved script estedin. Sheprobablyneedsaprocedureofdataclean-
preparation and piloting. When everything is ready, ing in order to get her data ready for statistical infer-
she has everything she needs to preregister her study. ence. Data cleaning can include physiological signal
Preregistration is very important in sequential testing processing, artefacts removal, errors removal, dealing
because it forces Lisa to explicitly state her statistical with potential outliers, and everything needed to get
criteria of interest and therefore announce when data meaningful data from raw data. Lisa has to perform
collection will end. This is very useful in order to limit datacleaningbeforestatisticalmodelling. BecauseLisa
biases due to Lisa’s degrees of freedom (Lakens, 2014; isanalysingdatasequentially,shealsohastocleandata
Wichertsetal.,2016). sequentially.
Inadditiontogenericpreregistration,thefirstimpor- For instance, in our example (the emotional Stroop
tant thing to preregister is the sequential data clean- task),wedecidedtoremovemissingdataandresponse
ing procedure. In this part, Lisa should describe how times (RT) below 100 ms. This is done each time
data will be handled before inferential statistical mod- new data is incorporated (see lines 101 to 110 of the
elling. This can include, physiological signal process- sequential_analyses.R script). We could also have
ing, potential observation or participant removal crite- chosen to analyse RT only for correct responses and/or
ria or any other data manipulation happening between to remove observations based on a specific descriptive
data collection and modelling. After that, Lisa should statistic.
indicate the appropriate stopping statistics depending
on the procedure (e.g., SBF, HDI+ROPE, precision). Automatedblinddataanalysis
The stopping statistic should be described along with
BecauseLisahaspreparedeverythingneededforher
a clear and detailed description of the model which is
procedure, she is able to automate data analysis and
computed to get this statistic. Finally, Lisa should also
thereforetobeblindtothedetailsoftheanalysiswhile
specifyaminimumsamplesizerequiredtocomputethe
sheiscollectingdata. Hereishowshecanproceedand
models, and a maximal sample size affordable for her,
howweproceededinourexample.
which would determine the end of data collection, in-
We describe how Lisa can handle tasks-scheduling
dependentlyofthestoppingstatistic.
on a UNIX system (macOS and Linux) in this para-
graph. Lisa can use the cronR package (Wijffels,
Transparentdatacollection
2018a) to schedule tasks in R. This package will be
Whenpossible,makingdataopenlyavailablecanim- useful in order to retrieve data from the OSF and to
prove the quality of science (Klein et al., 2018). In the analyse it. Lisa will have to create a task by run-
contextofsequentialdataanalysis,itcanbeevenmore ning the appropriate script (main_script.R in our ex-
important. As we explained above, sequential analyses ample) once before collecting the first observation.
offerstrongadvantagesbutalsoincreaseLisa’sdegrees She will be able to decide how often she wants the
of freedom. Making data open can reduce this bias. In script to run automatically. Lisa could also apply
===== PAGE 11/15 =====
11
the same procedure on a Windows system thanks would just have to specify all the important details of
to the taskscheduleR package (Wijffels, 2018b). A her analysis in boxes, from which the application gen-
short description on how to use this package can erates the corresponding R script almost ready for se-
be found at: https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/ quentialanalysis. Thisapplicationismeanttofacilitate
taskscheduleR/vignettes/taskscheduleR.html. thecreationofRscripts. Itautomaticallywritesaround
If Lisa chooses that the script should auto-run each 90% of the code Lisa would have to write to use such
hour,themainscriptwillcheckdatafromtheOSFeach a sequential analysis procedure. However, it is almost
hour. This will be done with the osfr package (Wolen certainthattheproducedRcodewouldnotworkimme-
& Hartgerink, 2019). In our example (Line 106 to 143 diately. Itwouldrequiresomeminortweakingfromher,
in main_script.R), we check if new data is available such as checking the local path, making sure that the
ontheOSFanddownloaditifitisthecase. Aftersome scriptsandthedataareinthesamerepository,adapting
data formatting (lines 145 to 197), the script will run the data import step to specific properties of the data
the sequential analysis (line 199 to 243). The main underconsideration,andsoon.
script calls the sequential_analyses.R script which Theprocedureproposedhereonlyrequiresonecom-
contains the sequential analyses function. Lisa will puter. Hence, the implementation cost is rather low.
alsohavetospecifysomeparametersdependingonthe This procedure is also well suited for multi-lab studies.
modelsheisinterestedin. Indeed, an experiment can be run at different places
At the end of the analysis, Lisa will receive an email but data is automatically centralised on one platform
telling her whether to stop or to continue data collec- and can be analyse automatically and sequentially by
tion. Thisemailwillneitherreporttheeffectnoritsdi- onesinglecomputer. Theexperimentwedesignedwith
rection, butonlytheinformationtostoportocontinue PsychoPy 2 (see the supplementary material for more
the data collection. This means that Lisa will be able information)isspecificallythoughtformulti-labstudies
to follow a sequential design without any information by automatically recording information about the com-
abouttheresultsofdataanalysis,exceptedthefactthat puterwhichrunstheexperiment. Thisenablestheiden-
she has (not) reached her criterion. The mail will be tificationofthesiteassociatedwitheachparticipant.
sent automatically in R thanks to the gmailR package Weconcedethatautomationofdataanalysisprevents
(Hester,2016). oneinterestingadvantageofsequentialtesting. Namely,
the fact that data collection can be stopped whenever
Reproduciblereporting the behaviour of data is unexpected, allowing the ex-
perimenter to rethink the experimental design or aim
Lisa will stop data collection when she reaches her
beforecollectingmoredata(Lakens,2014). Depending
statistical criterion or her maximum affordable sample
ontheconfidenceandexpectedfamiliaritywiththedata
size. She will then be able to write a report describing
tobecollected,theresearchershavetochoosebetween
her results. She can do it using RMarkdown (Allaire
automated or "two-person" analysis blinding. The first
etal.,2019;Xieetal.,2018)inordertoincorporateher
optionhaslowcostsofimplementationwhereasthesec-
results automatically from her R scripts into her report
ondoneismoreflexible. Inanycase,afterperforminga
(e.g., see Bauer, 2018). Lisa could for instance use the
sequentialanalysis,nothingpreventsLisafromperform-
R package papaja (Aust & Barth, 2018) which would
ingadditionalanalysesbasedonunexpecteddataspeci-
allow her to write a reproducible APA manuscript with
ficity, taking care to record and state the exploratory
RMarkdown. Scientific writing with Rmarkdown has
natureofanysuchanalyses.
important benefits for any type of research design but
wouldbeevenmorevaluableforsequentialanalyses.
Awordonblindanalysisbymultiplepeople
Feasibilityoftheproposedprotocolandlimitations If Lisa can afford working with a colleague on her
study and if she prefers to do so, we advise her to ap-
Agraphicalsummaryof theprocedureisdepictedin
Figure2.11 Allthetoolsneededtosetitupareavailable ply the logic of the automated procedure described in
this tutorial. The only difference will be that her col-
for free to everyone. Using OpenSesame or PsychoPy
league will analyse data while Lisa collects it (or con-
is relatively straightforward and does not necessarily
versely). If her colleague analyses data, they will have
require coding skills. We proposed standard R scripts
to retrieve data online (e.g., on OSF) and to perform
in order to automate sequential analysis. However, we
the planned preregistered analysis (unless data behave
concedethatusingthisscriptsrequiresminimalknowl-
edge of R. Hence, we also propose a Shiny applica-
11ThisfigurehasbeeninspiredbytheFigure1inQuintana
tion available at https://barelysignificant.shinyapps.io/
etal.(2016).
blind_sequential_analyses/. With this application, Lisa
===== PAGE 12/15 =====
12
Figure 2. Schematic procedure of a transparent and ses. For instance, the reliance on the user’s R program-
blindsequentialdataanalysis. mingskillsmightbealleviatedwiththedevelopmentof
an online platform that would automate the procedure
Define variables
online,withouttheneedforcoding.
Plan analysis
More work is also needed to precisely quantify in-
Scripts Program
preparation tra and interpersonal biases during data collection and
and piloting Test analysis. For instance, one could set up experimental
Prepare scripts
procedures to pinpoint these biases in realistic lab sit-
Run pilots
uations (e.g., see Gilder & Heerey, 2018). In addition
to experimental procedures, computational modelling
Data cleaning
couldalsobeusedtoestimatethepresenceofbiasinex-
Preregistration Stopping statistic tant(publishedornot)sequentialanalyses. Byformalis-
Model specification
ingthesequentialanalysisprocedure(e.g.,usinganevi-
N min N max
denceaccumulationmodel)andbyexplicitlymodelling
Born open the biases that we describe in the present article, we
data collection might be able to assess the likelihood that an observed
set of collected statistics (e.g., BFs) has been obtained
Signal processing
Automated undertheassumptionofbias(ornobias).
Artefacts removal
data cleaning
Errors removal
Supplementarymaterials
Outliers management
Reproducible code and supplementary materials are
availableonOSF:https://osf.io/mwtvk/.
Automated Schedule
blind data Download data
analysis AuthorContact
Analyse
Email decision Correspondence concerning this article should be
addressed to Brice Beffara Bret, Université de Nantes,
Reproducible Nantes,France. E-mail: brice.beffara@univ-nantes.fr.
reporting ORCID: Brice Beffara Bret https://orcid.org/
0000-0002-0586-6650 - Amélie Beffara Bret
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-9129-0415 - Ladislas
Nalborczykhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-7419-9855
We thank Hans IJzerman for helpful comments and
very unexpectedly in which case they will have the re-
Edward Collett for his help with manuscript English
sponsibilitytoadapttheanalysisorstopdatacollection
proof reading on a previous version of this manuscript.
prematurely). The only contact Lisa and her colleague
ManythankstoChristopherMoulinforhisfeedbackand
will have concerning the experiment will be the email
for his help with manuscript English proof reading on
they will send to inform Lisa whether to stop or con-
the updated version of this manuscript. We also thank
tinuedatacollection,nothingmore.
Rickard Carlsson, Félix Schönbrodt, Angelika Stefan,
Conclusions Stephen Martin, and Charlotte Brand for insightful
comments and suggestions during the peer-review
We began by presenting the intra and interpersonal
process.
biases that might emerge during sequential testing and
sequential analysis procedures. To tackle these issues, ConflictofInterestandFunding
we proposed a novel automated, transparent, repro-
The authors report no conflict of interest. We thank
ducible and blind protocol for sequential analysis. The
theUniversitédeNantes,theUniversitéGrenobleAlpes,
main interest of this procedure is to reduce possible
andtheUniversitédeFranche-Comtéforsupportingour
biases that could be encountered during intermediate
research. The author(s) received no specific financial
dataanalysisandtopreventtheinflationofsocialinflu-
supportfortheresearch,authorship,and/orpublication
encesduringdatacollection.
ofthisarticle.
This protocol should be considered as a proof-of-
concept for sequential analysis automation. However,
futureworkwillbeabletoproposemorecomprehensive
and more user-friendly solutions for sequential analy-
===== PAGE 13/15 =====
13
AuthorContributions Barber, T. X. (1978). Expecting expectancy effects: Bi-
ased data analyses and failure to exclude al-
Following the CRediT – Contributor Roles Taxonomy
ternative interpretations in experimenter ex-
(https://casrai.org/credit/):
pectancy research. Behavioral and Brain Sci-
ences, 1(03), 388. https://doi.org/10.1017/
Conceptualisation: BBB(lead),ABB,LN
S0140525X00075531
Datacuration: BBB,LN
Bauer, P. C. (2018). Writing a Reproducible Paper in R
Formalanalysis: LN
Markdown. SSRN Electronic Journal. https://
Investigation: BBB,ABB
doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3175518
Methodology: BBB,ABB,LN
de Groot, A. (2014). The meaning of “significance” for
Projectadministration: BBB,ABB,LN
different types of research [translated and an-
Resources: BBB,ABB,LN
notatedbyEric-JanWagenmakers,DennyBors-
Software: BBB(OpenSesame,PsychoPy,Python),LN(R)
boom, Josine Verhagen, Rogier Kievit, Marjan
Validation: BBB,ABB,LN
Bakker, Angelique Cramer, Dora Matzke, Don
Visualisation: BBB,ABB,LN
Mellenbergh,andHanL.J.vanderMaas].Acta
Writing: BBB,ABB,LN
Psychologica, 148, 188–194. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.actpsy.2014.02.001
Authorshiporderwasdeterminedasfollow(byorder
Fidler, F., & Wilcox, J. (2018). Reproducibility of Sci-
ofsignificance):
entific Results. In E. N. Zalta (Ed.), The Stan-
- First author: original idea and major contribution to
ford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2018).
the"software"role(interalia)
MetaphysicsResearchLab,StanfordUniversity.
- Last author: major contribution to the "software" role
Gelman,A.,&Carlin,J.(2014).Beyondpowercalcula-
(interalia)
tions:Assessingtypes(sign)andtypem(mag-
- Second author: major contribution to the "investiga-
nitude)errors.PerspectivesonPsychologicalSci-
tion"role(interalia)
ence,9(6),641–651.https://doi.org/10.1177/
1745691614551642
OpenSciencePractices
Gilder, T. S. E., & Heerey, E. A. (2018). The Roleof Ex-
perimenter Belief in Social Priming. Psycholog-
ical Science, 29(3), 403–417. https://doi.org/
10.1177/0956797617737128
Goodman,S.N.,Fanelli,D.,&Ioannidis,J.P.A.(2016).
ThisarticleearnedtheOpenDataandtheOpenMa-
What does research reproducibility mean? Sci-
terials badge for for making the data and materials
ence Translational Medicine, 8(341), 341ps12.
openly available. It has been verified that the analy-
https://doi.org/10.1126/scitranslmed.aaf5027
sis reproduced the results presented in the article. The
Hansen, W. B., & Collins, L. M. (1994). Seven Ways
entireeditorialprocess,includingtheopenreviews,are
To Increase Power Without Increasing N [type:
publishedintheonlinesupplement.
dataset]. NIDA research monograph, 142, 184–
195. https://doi.org/10.1037/e495862006-
References
008
Allaire,J.,Xie,Y.,McPherson,J.,Luraschi,J.,Ushey,K., Hazelrigg, P. J., Cooper, H., & Strathman, A. J. (1991).
Atkins, A., Wickham, H., Cheng, J., Chang, W., Personalitymoderatorsoftheexperimenterex-
& Iannone, R. (2019). Rmarkdown: Dynamic pectancy effect: A reexamination of five hy-
documentsforr[Rpackageversion1.12].https: potheses.PersonalityandSocialPsychologyBul-
//rmarkdown.rstudio.com letin, 17(5), 569–579. https://doi.org/10.
Aust, F., & Barth, M. (2018). papaja: Create APA 1177/0146167291175012
manuscripts with R Markdown [R package ver- Hester, J. (2016). Gmailr: Access the gmail restful api
sion 0.1.0.9842]. https://github.com/crsh/ [R package version 0.7.1]. https://CRAN.R-
papaja project.org/package=gmailr
Babbage, C. (1830). Reflections on the decline of science Klein, O., Doyen, S., Leys, C., Magalhães de Saldanha
in England, and on some of its causes. B. Fel- da Gama, P. A., Miller, S., Questienne, L., &
lowes[etc.] Cleeremans, A. (2012). Low Hopes, High Ex-
pectations:ExpectancyEffectsandtheReplica-
bilityofBehavioralExperiments.Perspectiveson
===== PAGE 14/15 =====
14
Psychological Science, 7(6), 572–584. https:// calTrials,32(2),240–243.https://doi.org/10.
doi.org/10.1177/1745691612463704 1016/j.cct.2010.11.004
Klein,O.,Hardwicke,T.E.,Aust,F.,Breuer,J.,Daniels- Morey, R. D., Hoekstra, R., Rouder, J. N., Lee, M. D., &
son, H., Hofelich Mohr, A., Ijzerman, H., Nil- Wagenmakers,E.-J.(2016).Thefallacyofplac-
sonne, G., Vanpaemel, W., & Frank, M. C. ing confidence in confidence intervals. Psycho-
(2018). A Practical Guide for Transparency nomicbulletin&review,23(1),103–123.https:
in Psychological Science. Collabra: Psychology, //doi.org/10.3758/s13423-015-0947-8
4(1), 20. https://doi.org/10.1525/collabra. Nalborczyk,L.,Bürkner,P.-C.,&Williams,D.R.(2019).
158 Pragmatism should not be a substitute for sta-
Kruschke, J. K. (2015). Doing Bayesian data analysis: tistical literacy, a commentary on albers, kiers,
A tutorial with R, JAGS, and Stan (Edition 2). andvanravenzwaaij(2018).Collabra:Psychol-
AcademicPress. ogy, 5(1). https://doi.org/10.1525/collabra.
Kruschke, J. K. (2018). Rejecting or Accepting Parame- 197
ter Values in Bayesian Estimation. Advances in Nelson, L. D., Simmons, J., & Simonsohn, U. (2018).
Methods and Practices in Psychological Science, Psychology’sRenaissance.AnnualReviewofPsy-
1(2), 270–280. https://doi.org/10.1177/ chology, 69(1), 511–534. https://doi.org/10.
2515245918771304 1146/annurev-psych-122216-011836
Kruschke, J. K., & Liddell, T. M. (2018). The Bayesian Orne, M. T. (1962). On the social psychology of the
New Statistics: Hypothesis testing, estimation, psychological experiment: With particular ref-
meta-analysis, and power analysis from a erence to demand characteristics and their im-
Bayesian perspective. Psychonomic Bulletin & plications. American psychologist, 17(11), 776–
Review, 25(1), 178–206. https://doi.org/10. 783.https://doi.org/10.1037/h0043424
3758/s13423-016-1221-4 Peirce, J. W. (2007). PsychoPy—Psychophysics soft-
Lakens,D.(2014).Performinghigh-poweredstudiesef- ware in Python. Journal of Neuroscience Meth-
ficiently with sequential analyses: Sequential ods,162(1-2),8–13.https://doi.org/10.1016/
analyses.EuropeanJournalofSocialPsychology, j.jneumeth.2006.11.017
44(7),701–710.https://doi.org/10.1002/ejsp. Peirce, J. W. (2008). Generating stimuli for neuro-
2023 scienceusingPsychoPy.FrontiersinNeuroinfor-
Lakens,D.,Scheel,A.M.,&Isager,P.M.(2018).Equiv- matics, 2. https://doi.org/10.3389/neuro.11.
alenceTestingforPsychologicalResearch:ATu- 010.2008
torial.AdvancesinMethodsandPracticesinPsy- Peirce, J. W., Gray, J. R., Simpson, S., MacAskill, M.,
chological Science, 1(2), 259–269. https://doi. Höchenberger,R.,Sogo,H.,Kastman,E.,&Lin-
org/10.1177/2515245918770963 deløv, J. K. (2019). PsychoPy2: Experiments in
MacCoun, R. J., & Perlmutter, S. (2017). Blind Anal- behavior made easy. Behavior Research Meth-
ysis as a Correction for Confirmatory Bias in ods,51(1),195–203.https://doi.org/10.3758/
Physics and in Psychology. In S. O. Lilienfeld & s13428-018-01193-y
I. D. Waldman (Eds.), Psychological Science Un- Quintana, D., Alvares, G., & Heathers, J. (2016).
derScrutiny(pp.295–322).JohnWiley&Sons, Guidelines for reporting articles on psychiatry
Inc.https://doi.org/10.1002/9781119095910. and heart rate variability (graph): Recommen-
ch15 dations to advance research communication.
Mathôt, S., Schreij, D., & Theeuwes, J. (2012). OpenS- Translational psychiatry, 6(5), e803. https://
esame: An open-source, graphical experiment doi.org/10.1038/tp.2016.73
builder for the social sciences. Behavior Re- RCoreTeam.(2019).R:Alanguageandenvironmentfor
search Methods, 44(2), 314–324. https://doi. statistical computing. R Foundation for Statisti-
org/10.3758/s13428-011-0168-7 cal Computing. Vienna, Austria. https://www.
Meehl, P. E. (1990). Appraising and Amending Theo- R-project.org/
ries: The Strategy of Lakatosian Defense and Rosenthal, R. (1963). On the social psychology of the
TwoPrinciplesthatWarrantIt.PsychologicalIn- psychological experiment: The experimenter’s
quiry, 1(2), 108–141. https://doi.org/10. hypothesis as unintended determinant of ex-
1207/s15327965pli0102\_1 perimentalresults.AmericanScientist,51,268–
Miller,L.E.,&Stewart,M.E.(2011).Theblindleading 283.
the blind: Use and misuse of blinding in ran- Rosenthal, R. (1964). Experimenter outcome-
domized controlled trials. Contemporary Clini- orientationandtheresultsofthepsychological
===== PAGE 15/15 =====
15
experiment. Psychological Bulletin, 61(6), Vuorre,M.,&Curley,J.P.(2018).CuratingResearchAs-
405–412.https://doi.org/10.1037/h0045850 sets: A Tutorial on the Git Version Control Sys-
Rosenthal, R., & Rubin, D. B. (1978). Interpersonal ex- tem. Advances in Methods and Practices in Psy-
pectancy effects: The first 345 studies. Behav- chological Science, 1(2), 219–236. https://doi.
ioral and Brain Sciences, 1(03), 377. https:// org/10.1177/2515245918754826
doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00075506 Wagenmakers,E.-J.,Marsman,M.,Jamil,T.,Ly,A.,Ver-
Rouder,J.N.(2016).Thewhat,why,andhowofborn- hagen, J., Love, J., Selker, R., Gronau, Q. F.,
open data. Behavior Research Methods, 48(3), Šmíra, M., Epskamp, S., Matzke, D., Rouder,
1062–1069. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13428- J. N., & Morey, R. D. (2017). Bayesian infer-
015-0630-z ence for psychology. Part I: Theoretical advan-
Rouder, J. N., Haaf, J. M., & Snyder, H. K. (2018). tages and practical ramifications. Psychonomic
Minimizing Mistakes In Psychological Science. Bulletin & Review, 25(1), 35–57. https://doi.
PsyArXiv. https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/ org/10.3758/s13423-017-1343-3
gxcy5 Wicherts,J.M.,Veldkamp,C.L.S.,Augusteijn,H.E.M.,
Schönbrodt,F.D.,&Wagenmakers,E.-J.(2018).Bayes Bakker, M., van Aert, R. C. M., & van Assen,
factor design analysis: Planning for compelling M. A. L. M. (2016). Degrees of Freedom in
evidence.PsychonomicBulletin&Review.https: Planning, Running, Analyzing, and Reporting
//doi.org/10.3758/s13423-017-1230-y Psychological Studies: A Checklist to Avoid p-
Schönbrodt, F. D., Wagenmakers, E.-J., Zehetleitner, Hacking.FrontiersinPsychology,7.https://doi.
M.,&Perugini,M.(2017).Sequentialhypothe- org/10.3389/fpsyg.2016.01832
sis testing with Bayes factors: Efficiently test- Wijffels, J. (2018a). Cronr: Schedule r scripts and pro-
ing mean differences. Psychological Methods, cesses with the ’cron’ job scheduler [R package
22(2), 322–339. https://doi.org/10.1037/ version 0.4.0]. https://CRAN.R-project.org/
met0000061 package=cronR
Schulz, K. F., & Grimes, D. A. (2002). Blinding in Wijffels, J. (2018b). Taskscheduler: Schedule r scripts
randomised trials: Hiding who got what. The and processes with the windows task scheduler
Lancet, 359(9307), 696–700. https://doi.org/ [R package version 1.4.0]. https://CRAN.R-
10.1016/s0140-6736(02)07816-9 project.org/package=taskscheduleR
Simmons,J.P.,Nelson,L.D.,&Simonsohn,U.(2011). Wolen, A., & Hartgerink, C. (2019).
False-PositivePsychology:UndisclosedFlexibil- Osfr: R interface to osf
ity in Data Collection and Analysis Allows Pre- [http://centerforopenscience.github.io/osfr,
senting Anything as Significant. Psychological https://github.com/centerforopenscience/osfr].
Science, 22(11), 1359–1366. https://doi.org/ Xie, Y., Allaire, J., & Grolemund, G. (2018). R
10.1177/0956797611417632 markdown: The definitive guide [ISBN
Smaldino, P., Turner, M. A., & Contreras Kallens, P. A. 9781138359338]. Chapman; Hall/CRC. https:
(2019).Openscienceandmodifiedfundinglot- //bookdown.org/yihui/rmarkdown
teries can impede the natural selection of bad Yarkoni, T., Eckles, D., Heathers, J., Levenstein, M.,
science. https://doi.org/10.31219/osf.io/ Smaldino, P., & Lane, J. I. (2019). Enhancing
zvkwq andacceleratingsocialscienceviaautomation:
Soderberg, C. K. (2018). Using OSF to Share Data: Challengesandopportunities.https://doi.org/
A Step-by-Step Guide. Advances in Methods 10.31235/osf.io/vncwe
and Practices in Psychological Science, 1(1), Zoble,E.J.,&Lehman,R.S.(1969).Interactionofsub-
115–120. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / ject and experimenter expectancy effects in a
2515245918757689 tonelengthdiscriminationtask.BehavioralSci-
Stefan, A. M., Gronau, Q. F., Schönbrodt, F. D., & Wa- ence, 14(5), 357–363. https://doi.org/10.
genmakers, E.-J. (2019). A tutorial on Bayes 1002/bs.3830140503
FactorDesignAnalysisusinganinformedprior.
Behavior Research Methods, 51(3), 1042–1058.
https://doi.org/10.3758/s13428-018-01189-8