Articles
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-019-0548-z
Spectrotemporal modulation provides a unifying
framework for auditory cortical asymmetries
Adeen Flinker 1,2*, Werner K. Doyle3, Ashesh D. Mehta4, Orrin Devinsky2 and David Poeppel1,5
The principles underlying functional asymmetries in cortex remain debated. For example, it is accepted that speech is pro-
cessed bilaterally in auditory cortex, but a left hemisphere dominance emerges when the input is interpreted linguistically. The
mechanisms, however, are contested, such as what sound features or processing principles underlie laterality. Recent findings
across species (humans, canines and bats) provide converging evidence that spectrotemporal sound features drive asym-
metrical responses. Typically, accounts invoke models wherein the hemispheres differ in time–frequency resolution or inte-
gration window size. We develop a framework that builds on and unifies prevailing models, using spectrotemporal modulation
space. Using signal processing techniques motivated by neural responses, we test this approach, employing behavioural and
neurophysiological measures. We show how psychophysical judgements align with spectrotemporal modulations and then
characterize the neural sensitivities to temporal and spectral modulations. We demonstrate differential contributions from
both hemispheres, with a left lateralization for temporal modulations and a weaker right lateralization for spectral modula-
tions. We argue that representations in the modulation domain provide a more mechanistic basis to account for lateralization
in auditory cortex.
Ah allmark of speech perception and language comprehen- Based on these findings as well as on foundational neuroim-
sion is that these perceptual and cognitive processes are sub- aging studies21,22, a framework emerged whereby left hemisphere
served by an asymmetric distribution of cortical circuitry. structures—specifically language-related regions, principally the
The original observations of Broca1 and Wernicke2 provided strik- temporal lobe but also the inferior frontal gyrus—are more sen-
ing evidence that damage to cortical regions in the left (dominant) sitive to temporal cues, whereas right hemisphere structures are
but not the right hemisphere caused impairments in comprehension more sensitive to spectral cues23. A related, complementary frame-
and production. A great deal of research has focused on elucidat- work explained the differences in auditory sensitivity as a function
ing the functional neuroanatomy of these (and other, subsequently of temporal integration windows of neural ensembles in auditory
identified) regions as well as their underlying computational prin- cortex, proposing that the left auditory cortex integrates incoming
ciples3–7. In contrast to the historically established one-size-fits-all auditory information over shorter timescales (~20–80 ms) and right
view on lateralization of speech and language—a perspective that regions over longer timescales (~150–300 ms), asymmetric sam-
still prevails in the clinical literature8,9—there is now emerging pling in time24. A third view associates lateralization with function:
consensus that both left and right temporal cortices are heavily if representations are linguistic, they are processed by the dominant,
involved in speech perception proper (as well as some aspects of typically left hemisphere13,25. Notwithstanding the existing neural
linguistic processing10), that is the mapping from acoustic input to and behavioural evidence, the mechanisms underlying functional
the internal representations (informally speaking, words) that form lateralization in hearing remain underspecified and are the source
the basis for language processing (and there is recent fMRI data of significant disagreements. Focusing here solely on competing
supporting this hypothesis11). However, the functional and compu- auditory theories, we advance these theories by building on their
tational differences between the two hemispheres with respect to approaches and providing a unifying framework, motivated by a
auditory processing remain incompletely understood and vigor- different analytic view on signals that is closely aligned with neural
ously contested12,13. response properties.
A series of influential behavioural studies provided suggestive Recent reports from different mammalian species including
evidence that the left hemisphere is sensitive to rapidly changing humans26–29, dogs30 and mustached bats31,32 provide converging
auditory cues14–16. This sensitivity manifested when temporal inter- evidence that spectrotemporal sound features are processed in an
vals between stimuli were reduced below 100–150 ms in aphasic asymmetrical manner, presumably reflecting shared neurocompu-
patients (temporal order judgement)14, children with developmen- tational principles across species. Nevertheless, conceptual gaps
tal delays (discrimination)16, as well as a sensitivity to the length have held back a cross-species model and interpretation. First, the
of formant transition in healthy listeners (dichotic listening)15. stimuli as well as the type of stimulus manipulation employed are
In parallel, clinical reports argued that focal damage to the right inconsistent across studies (both within human research and across
hemisphere produces impairments in processing slower chang- species). Second, the models used to interpret the results23,24 dif-
ing prosodic cues in speech17,18, as well the ability to discriminate fer in their implementational specificity regarding the underlying
spectral information19,20. cortical tissue.
1Department of Psychology, New York University, New York, NY, USA. 2Department of Neurology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY,
USA. 3Department of Neurosurgery, New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA. 4Department of Neurosurgery, Donald and Barbara
Zucker School of Medicine at Hofstra/Northwell, Manhasset, NY, USA. 5Max Planck Institute for Empirical Aesthetics, Frankfurt, Germany.
*e-mail: adeen.f@gmail.com
NAture HuMAN BeHAviOur | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTURe HUmaN BeHavioUR
5,400
3,310
2,030 1,240
760
470
290
To address these gaps, we reframe and test the asymmetry the time–frequency representation of speech. We argue that the left
hypothesis24 in the modulation domain, an acoustic ‘space’ that hemisphere integrates over a wider range of temporal modulations
has been developed to mirror successful analysis approaches in the (slow to fast temporal modulations) but over a limited range of spec-
visual domain33,34. The modulation domain reflects energy fluctua- tral modulations (low spectral modulations); in contrast, the right
tions that vary across the temporal and spectral axes of a spectro- hemisphere integrates over a wide range of spectral modulations
graphic representation (that is, temporal and spectral modulations (low to high) but a limited range of temporal modulations (slow)
of power in the time–frequency representation), similarly to hori- (Fig. 2). It is noteworthy that both hemispheres have a range of tem-
zontal and vertical spatial gratings that comprise an image (Fig. 1a). poral and spectral modulations that overlap—both low temporal
The modulation domain quantifies temporal and spectral acoustic and low spectral modulations are processed by both hemispheres.
features (Fig. 1b) and has been used to investigate communication This hypothesis provides a computationally specific stimulus space
vocalizations (and link them to neural mechanisms) in the ferret35, (modulation domain) that is linked to an implementational com-
zebra finch36 and in humans37–40. Recently, spectral and temporal putation in cortex (that is, integration of neuronal inputs from
modulations have provided novel topographic maps of the human subpopulations). To test this hypothesis, we provide a filtering tech-
auditory cortex41,42, and auditory models capitalizing on this domain nique in the modulation domain that is applied to speech stimuli,
have proved to be more accurate at reconstructing neural activ- and we test this hypothesis in human listeners using psychophysical
ity both in electrophysiology43 and neuroimaging42. We take these measures (diotic and dichotic listening), neuronal measures (mag-
recent successes using the modulation domain in neural representa- netoencephalography; MEG) and direct recordings from cortex in
tion as providing a new opportunity to investigate auditory cortical neurosurgical patients (electrocorticography; ECoG).
asymmetries, building on the prevailing auditory theories, namely
the temporal versus spectral view23, and the asymmetric sampling results
in time hypothesis24,44. We developed an analytic technique that filters stimuli in the mod-
We hypothesize that left and right auditory cortical fields dif- ulation domain based on a cochlear time-frequency representation
fer in how they integrate temporal and spectral modulations across and permits resynthesis of a new waveform that corresponds to
)zH(
ycneuqerF
3
2
Normalized
power (dB) Max 1
0 0
1 2 Temporal modulations
Time (s)
snoitaludom
lartcepS
Modulation
power (dB)
Max
0
–30–20–10 0 10 20 30
Temporal modulation
Time domain Time–frequency
5,400
3,310 Normalized Modulation
Amplitude 2,030 power (dB) power (dB)
modulated 1,240 Max
tone (20Hz) 760
470
290
0
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
5,400
3,310 Normalized Modulation
2,030 power (dB) power (dB)
1,240 Max
760
470
290
0
Time (s) 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
Time (s)
)zH(
ycneuqerF
Modulation domain
3
2
Max
1
0 0
–20 0 20
3
2
Superimposed Max
tone
1
0 0
–20 0 20
Temporal (Hz)
)evatco
rep
selcyc(
lartcepS
a
b
Fig. 1 | time, time–frequency and modulation domain representations for sound waveforms. a, Sound waveform of a spoken sentence (left panel, top)
is shown along with its corresponding spectrogram representation (left panel, bottom). The spectrogram can be represented as a decomposition in the
modulation domain (middle panel) of horizontal (temporal, typically as cycles per second) and vertical (spectral, typically as cycles per octave) modulations.
The degree (power intensity) of temporal and spectral modulations in the spectrogram is depicted in the right panel (showing the average modulation
spectra of all our speech material, n = 84). Superimposed grey squares correspond to the approximate temporal and spectral ranges shown in the middle
panel. b, To provide better intuitive insight into these representations, two artificially created audio signals are shown with a temporal modulation peak
(left panel, top waveform) and a spectral modulation peak (left panel, bottom waveform). For both audio signals, representations are shown in the time
domain (left), the time–frequency domain (middle) and the modulation domain (right).
NAture HuMAN BeHAviOur | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTURe HUmaN BeHavioUR Articles
Left auditory system Right auditory system each participant using a logistic function51. The mean and standard
error distribution of curve fits across participants are plotted as a
continuous shaded line in Fig. 4. To quantify the temporal modu-
lation ranges where the psychometric curves showed a significant
difference between the first and second block, a paired Wilcoxon
signed-rank test was performed for each value and a continuous
block between 2.8 and 7.1 Hz was found significant (non-paramet-
ric Wilcoxon signed-rank test P < 0.05). Spectral modulations abol-
ished the ability to correctly identify the speaker’s voice pitch, with
a sharp increase in the performance when stimuli contained above
0.74 cycles per octave spectral modulations (Fig. 4a, right panel).
There was no effect of block (within-subject non-parametric facto-
rial permutation test main effect of block P = 0.1195, P = 0.992,
F-value
95% CI of null hypothesis statistic = (0.0795, 2.96)), nor was there a
significant difference between psychometric curves (non-paramet-
ric Wilcoxon signed-rank test P > 0.17 for all paired tests). These
results provide a compelling link between the two axes of the modu-
lation space and our ability to process the content of speech and
speaker identity (speaker identity was maximally different in our
the filtered representation (Fig. 3a and Supplementary Fig. 1; see stimulus at 1 cycle per octave; see Supplementary Fig. 3).
also ‘Modulation domain filtering’ in Methods). We closely fol- We next asked whether differences in cortical processing across
low the framework introduced previously38, but we diverge from the two hemispheres could be detected using psychophysical mea-
that approach in critical ways in how we decompose and resynthe- sures. We designed a dichotic paradigm that leverages an asymme-
size the signal in the frequency domain. While the other study38 try in the auditory pathway when different stimuli are presented
employed a linear frequency scale (short time Fourier transform), to each ear52. While the classic dichotic design elicits a right ear
we employ a logarithmic frequency scale following the frequency advantage when short (usually consonant–vowel) competing stim-
distribution of the cochlea45 using a filter bank decomposition (see uli are presented, we presented identical sentences that varied by
‘Modulation domain filtering’ in Methods). We used this technique the amount of temporal or spectral information in each ear (for
on a wide selection of English sentences and different speakers in example, 3 Hz in the one ear and 4 Hz in the other, and so on). In a
order to control parametrically the degree of temporal modula- separate cohort of participants (n = 60, see ‘Psychophysical experi-
tions (Fig. 3b) or spectral modulations (Fig. 3c) contained by each ments’ in Methods), we found a significant behavioural advantage
sentence. It is noteworthy that our approach can successfully fil- when the right ear was presented with more temporal modulations
ter modulation rates in continuous speech while still complying than the left (main effect of ear within-subject non-parametric fac-
with the envelope projection test46. The envelope projection test is torial permutation test P = 18.963744, P < 0.001, 95% CI of null
F-value
used to verify that a filtering technique claiming to limit temporal hypothesis statistic = (0.05455, 2.689); Fig. 4b, left panel). This right
modulations indeed produces the desired modulation spectra in ear advantage (REA) reveals a specific hemispheric preference for
the final resynthesized waveform, unlike previous approaches that processing high temporal modulations and no preference for low
inadvertently reintroduced undesired modulations in the resyn- temporal modulations, and the psychometric curves showed signif-
thesis process47. Our filtering approach produces spoken sentences icant differences for values between 3.6 and 6 Hz (non-parametric
that sound natural but have a controlled amount of modulation Wilcoxon tailed signed-rank test P < 0.05 for all paired tests). An
rates (in contrast to a majority of studies employing non-speech analysis of the raw data in the voice pitch identification task did not
stimuli or artificial noise carriers). exhibit a significant LEA during the task (main effect of ear within-
Using a resolution that is rather more fine-grained than the subject non-parametric factorial permutation test P = 2.497,
F-value
existing literature (1 Hz temporally and 0.1867 cycles per octave P = 0.079, 95% CI of null hypothesis statistic = (0.03147, 2.916);
spectrally), we first examined behavioural responses in English- Fig. 4b right panel). But, an analysis of the fitted within-subject psy-
speaking participants (n = 20). Listeners were presented the mate- chometric curves showed significant differences for values between
rials diotically, and reported intelligibility and speaker voice pitch 0.373 and 0.541 cycle per octave (non-parametric Wilcoxon tailed
(male or female). This approach has been employed infrequently in signed-rank test P < 0.05 for all paired tests).
the literature38,48, and here we report psychometric curves on voice To further quantify and assess neurally the sensitivity of each
pitch identification as well as intelligibility in the critical modu- hemisphere to temporal and spectral modulations, we next used
lation range for speech (that is, 2–8 Hz). Filtering out temporal the same stimuli and the diotic paradigm while MEG signals were
modulations completely abolished intelligibility at the lowest cutoff being recorded from participants (n = 19). Across recording chan-
(2 Hz) and showed a logistic relationship between the amount of nels, average neuronal power (quantified between 0.1–8 Hz) was
temporal modulation present in the signal and the degree of intel- highest when participants listened to sentences with the highest
ligibility. The most prominent boost in intelligibility was observed temporal modulation (6 Hz) or spectral modulation (0.93 cycle per
when stimuli contained more than 5 Hz temporal modulations octave) content (Fig. 5 top panel and Supplementary Figs. 4 and 5).
and, unsurprisingly, during the second block of the task, when all After the onset of a sentence, the average power elicited by differ-
stimuli were repeated (within-subject non-parametric factorial ent modulation rates diverges with a systematic order in magnitude
permutation test main effect of block P = 88.84, P < 0.001, 95% from lower modulations (blue line) to higher modulations (red line)
F-value
confidence interval (CI) of null hypothesis statistic = (0.029, 2.68); and converges by the time the sentence has ended (Fig. 5, top panel).
Fig. 4a and Supplementary Fig. 2). This effect is especially striking We quantified this effect by correlating neuronal power with the
as each sentence is only presented once within a block, so the per- sentence modulation rate (filter cutoffs) and tested for significance
formance boost represents information from only one additional using a permutation approach for each sensor. Neuronal power
exemplar. As proportion data as well as categorical outcomes can significantly correlated (P < 0.05, permutation test) with stimulus
violate ANOVA assumptions49, we chose to use a non-parametric temporal modulation cutoffs across time, showing an increase in
approach50 and subsequently model psychometric curves within neural power as the participants heard sentences with increased
snoitaludom
lartcepS
)evatco
rep
selcyc(
snoitaludom
lartcepS
)evatco
rep
selcyc(
3 3
2 2
1 1
0 0
–30–20–10 0 10 20 30 –30–20–10 0 10 20 30
Temporal modulations (Hz) Temporal modulations (Hz)
Fig. 2 | the modulation asymmetry hypothesis. A schematic depiction of
the modulation asymmetry hypothesis, whereby the left auditory system
integrates a wide range of temporal modulations but a limited range of
spectral modulations, and the right auditory system integrates a wide range
of spectral modulations but a limited range of temporal modulations.
NAture HuMAN BeHAviOur | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTURe HUmaN BeHavioUR
a b
Temporal modulation filters
2 Hz 4 Hz 6 Hz
Waveform
iFFT (2D)
Time
Convex
projection
Auditory
filter bank
Time– 0.19 cycles per 0.56 cycles per 0.93 cycles per
frequency octave octave octave
domain
Time iFFT (2D)
Convex
Modulation projection
domain
Temporal
modulations
temporal modulation content (Fig. 5 middle panel). These correla- ity with a permutation test and found a significant right laterality
tions were strongest (maximal value of R = 0.0796 at 500 ms post where right sensor power was greater than left (permutation test
stimulus onset) during the onset of the stimulus and dropped by P = −0.00498, P = 0.016, 95% CI of null hypothesis sta-
difference_of_mean_R
the time of stimulus offset (R = 0.0428), with significant correla- tistic = (−0.00330, 0.00293)). We systematically probed neural fre-
tions lasting up to 110 ms post stimulus offset (R = 0.0231) (Fig. 5 quency power in band-limited steps in order to investigate whether
middle panel; black horizontal lines denote significance). Similarly, these sensitivities to temporal and spectral modulations are spread
correlations with spectral modulations were strongest (maximal across the neural frequency spectrum. We found significant correla-
value of R = 0.0489 at 1,060 ms post stimulus onset) during stimu- tions with temporal modulations in both low (<8 Hz) and high fre-
lus presentation and dropped after stimulus offset (R = 0.0413) with quency (12–23 Hz) ranges, but spectral modulations only correlated
significant correlations lasting up to 180 ms post stimulus offset with low frequency neural ranges (Supplementary Fig. 6).
(R = 0.0238). To further substantiate our analysis approach and elucidate the
Next, in order to investigate how these correlations are distrib- cortical sources underlying the effect, we projected our data on the
uted spatially, we averaged correlations across time for the first cortical surface using minimum norm estimate (MNE) and followed
half of the sentence (Fig. 5, middle panel, left topoplot) and sec- the same approach we employed in sensor space, that is, correlated
ond half of the sentence (Fig. 5, middle panel, right topoplot), and neural power with stimulus modulation cutoff for each cortical
statistically assessed correlations for each sensor. The distribution source. The significant correlations (permutation test P < 0.05)
of significant correlations (P < 0.05, permutation test with a clus- shown in Fig. 5 (bottom) replicate the finding in sensor space, with
ter correction for multiple comparisons) showed a left-hemisphere an asymmetric leftward distribution for correlations with temporal
biased topography (Fig. 5, middle insets and lower panels), with modulations (Fig. 5, bottom). Similarly to the sensor data, we sta-
a laterality index of 0.32 (−1 is maximally right hemisphere and tistically assessed this laterality with a permutation test comparing
1 is maximally left hemisphere) for the temporal modulations. We left and right neuronal power. Correlations with temporal modu-
statistically assessed laterality with a permutation test and found a lations showed a significant left laterality where left source power
significant left laterality where left sensor power was greater than was greater than right (permutation test, P = 0.0199,
difference_of_mean_R
right (permutation test, P = 0.01021, P = 0.0020, 95% CI P = 0.003, 95% CI of null hypothesis statistic = (−0.0059, 0.0056))
difference_of_mean_R
of null hypothesis statistic = (−0.00334, 0.00309)). Analogously, but the spectral modulation asymmetry did not pass significance
neuronal power significantly correlated with spectral modulation (permutation test, P = 0.0025, P = 0.163, 95% CI of null
difference_of_mean_R
stimulus cutoffs and showed a right-hemisphere biased topography, hypothesis statistic = (−0.0057, 0.0056)). Nevertheless, the same
with a laterality index of −0.18. We statistically assessed lateral- analysis limited to Heschl’s gyrus was significant for both temporal
larcepS
snoitaludom
0 5,000 10,000 15,000
Frequency
ycneuqerF
c
Spectral modulation filters
Fig. 3 | Overview of the filtering technique used to produce modulation domain filtered stimuli. a, An audio waveform is filtered in the frequency domain
using a cochlear filter bank, and the subsequent spectrogram is Fourier transformed, two dimensionally, to produce a modulation domain representation.
b,c, In the modulation domain, signals are low-pass filtered using a temporal (b) or spectral (c) cutoff and inversed Fourier transformed to produce the
desired modulation-limited spectrogram. Finally, an iterative convex projection technique is employed to produce an audio signal that maximally matches
the desired modulation-limited spectrogram. iFFT, inverse fast Fourier transform.
NAture HuMAN BeHAviOur | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTURe HUmaN BeHavioUR Articles
a Diotic
Intelligibility Voice pitch identification
1
0.8
0.9
0.6 0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4
Temporal cutoff (Hz) Spectral cutoff (cycles per octave)
b
Dichotic
Temporal cutoff (Hz) Spectral cutoff (cycles per octave)
modulations (permutation test, P = 0.0395, P = 0.0180, decreased in higher-order cortical regions (temporal modulation
difference_of_mean_R
95% CI of null hypothesis statistic = (−0.0041, 0.000)) as well as correlation range across high order regions for left and right hemi-
spectral modulations (permutation test, P = −0.05846, spheres = (0.07138–0.1294) and (0.03734–0.05915) respectively;
difference_of_mean_R
P = 0.0170, 95% CI of null hypothesis statistic = (−0.0039, 0.0041)). spectral modulation correlation range across high-order regions for
These correlations were strongest at Heschl’s gyrus (temporal mod- left and right hemispheres = (−0.002693–0.032166) and (0.027008–
ulation mean correlation for left and right hemispheres = 0.1367 0.06067) respectively; Supplementary Fig. 7).
and 0.0972 respectively; spectral modulation mean correlation for In addition to a strong relationship between the stimulus modula-
left and right hemispheres = 0.040366 and 0.0988 respectively) and tion space and neural responses, we tested for significant correlations
tcerroc
noitroporP
tcerroc
noitroporP
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0
tcerroc
noitroporP
0.4
0.2
0
0.8
0.6
tcerroc
noitroporP
Block 2 Block 2
Block 1 Block 1
2 3 4 5 6 7 8
0.4
0.2 Right > Left
Left > Right
Right > Left
Left > Right
0
2 3 4 5 6 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
(2:3) (3:4) (4:5) (5:6) (6:7) (0.2:0.4) (0.4:0.6) (0.6:0.8) (0.8:1) (1:1.2)
Fig. 4 | Psychophysical performance as a function of temporal and spectral modulations in two separate experiments (diotic and dichotic).
a, Intelligibility (proportion of words transcribed correctly; n = 20) at different temporal modulation cutoffs (left) and voice-pitch identification (percent
of correct responses; same participants, n = 20) at different spectral modulation cutoffs (right). Raw data is shown for each modulation value, with mean
and s.e.m. across participants depicted in the error bars. Additionally, the within-subject curve fits are shown, with a solid curve depicting the mean and
s.e.m. across in the shaded area. Stimuli are repeated again in a subsequent block (block 2, in red). b, The same tasks are used in a separate experiment
employing dichotic stimulus presentation (n = 60), with a different level of modulation information in each ear. Each value on the x axis represents two
different modulation values presented to each ear, which are denoted in parentheses below the tick. The colour code denotes in which ear the higher of the
two values was presented (blue, right ear was presented with a higher value; cyan, left ear was presented with a higher value). Higher intelligibility is seen
for sentences with more temporal modulations in the right ear compared to the left (dark blue curve). This right-ear advantage is evident for temporal
modulations but not spectral modulations.
NAture HuMAN BeHAviOur | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTURe HUmaN BeHavioUR
Intelligibility task
Sensor
power
between neural responses and the participants’ behavioural rat- replicate our non-invasive low frequency power correlations within
ings (intelligibility on a scale from 1–4). While correlation values participant and within electrode (Fig. 6 and Supplementary Figs. 12–
were lower overall, they still passed significance (P < 0.05, permu- 14); but these patterns could also be observed when examining cor-
tation test) and exhibited a more left lateralized topography com- relations with neural high gamma activity (Supplementary Fig. 15).
pared with modulation space correlations (Supplementary Fig. 8). An analysis of the correlations across all electrodes and partici-
Correlations with the behavioural responses (male or female) pants showed that temporal modulation correlations were larger
in the voice pitch identification task did not pass significance in the left hemisphere (mean = 0.1350, s.e.m. = 0.0070) than the
(Supplementary Fig. 9), providing evidence that cortical responses right hemisphere (mean = 0.1011, s.e.m. = 0.0084), and the differ-
are sensitive to the spectral content during the task. To verify that ence between left and right hemispheres was statistically significant
the correlations in the intelligibility task were due to the temporal (Wilcoxon rank sum test, Z = 2.969, P = 0.0030). Correlations with
modulations rather than the intelligibility of speech content, we rep- spectral modulations did not show a significant difference between
licated the effect in a separate cohort of participants using ‘reversed hemispheres (Wilcoxon rank sum test, Z = −0.640, P = 0.5223) with
speech’ stimuli (unintelligible, following an identical filtering proce- left hemisphere values (mean = 0.1163, s.e.m. = 0.0063) similar
dure in the modulation domain; see ‘Psychophysical experiments’ in to those in the right hemisphere (mean = 0.1199, s.e.m. = 0.0076).
Methods). The analysis revealed significant correlations with a left- Across patients, significant correlations with temporal modulations
hemisphere biased topography (Supplementary Figs. 10 and 11). were more prominently visible in the left hemisphere, with 8.042%
Taken together, these results demonstrate that the sources of the of total left electrodes and 3.218% of total right electrodes showing
correlations have a specific spatial topography which evolves over significant correlations (permutation test, P < 0.05; Supplementary
time, culminating in a left-hemisphere biased distribution in the Figs. 16 and 17). Correlations with spectral modulations showed a
case of temporal modulations and a right-hemisphere biased distri- more bilateral distribution, with 6.818% of total left electrodes and
bution in the case of spectral modulations. This pattern of results is 6.188% of total right electrodes showing significant correlations
most consistent with the modulation-based asymmetry hypothesis. (permutation test, P < 0.05; Supplementary Figs. 16 and 17).
Lastly, we sought to verify the asymmetry of neural sources with
a technique that is unbiased by the computational assumptions of Discussion
source localization. We recorded intracranial neural signals in a We provide a theoretical and computationally driven account of
cohort of neurosurgical patients undergoing treatment for refrac- hemispheric asymmetries for processing speech and other con-
tory epilepsy who were implanted with stereotactic depth and sur- tinuous acoustic signals. We introduce a well-defined compu-
face electrodes for clinical monitoring. In a patient with rare bilateral tational space to investigate hemispheric asymmetries (Fig. 2),
depth coverage of superior temporal cortices, we found a significant signal processing techniques to manipulate natural stimuli in this
correlation with temporal modulations in a left STG electrode (per- space (Fig. 3), a psychophysical mapping of this space, as well as
mutation test, P = 0.413, P < 0.001, 95% CI of null hypothesis behavioural and multimodal (MEG and ECoG) neural evidence
correlation
statistic = (−0.173279, 0.196382), R2 = 0.1708) and in a right STG supporting a cortical asymmetry in processing temporal-spectral
electrode a significant correlation with spectral modulations (per- modulations in speech.
mutation test, P = 0.241, P = 0.015, 95% CI of null hypoth- The modulation domain is arguably an ideal auditory
correlation
esis statistic = (−0.171243, 0.193584), R2 = 0.05831). These results stimulus space for representing speech intelligibility38 as well
)Bd(
rewoP
0.5
0
–0.5
–500 0 500 1,000 End
Time (ms)
0.15
0.1
0.05
–500 End
Time (ms)
)R(
noitalerroC
Gender identification task
23 456 Hz 0.19 0.37 0.56 0.75 0.93 cycles per octave
0.5
0
–0.5
–500 0 500 1,000 End
Time (ms)
R
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02 0.1
Modulation 0 0.05
filter
correlation 0 0
0 500 1,000 –500 0 500 1,000 End
Time (ms)
R
0.3
0.2
Source 0.1
space 0
correlation –0.1
–0.2
–0.3
Fig. 5 | MeG results showing significant correlations between neural power and degree of stimulus modulation. For each task, the average neural
power for each modulation cutoff is shown (top) locked to the onset of a sentence (leftmost x axis) as well as the offset (rightmost x axis), with mean
across sensors and participants and shaded error bars depicting s.e.m. across participants (n = 19). The correlations are shown in the middle panel as
a function of time (mean across sensors and participants and shaded s.e.m. across participants, n = 19) and spatial sensor locations (mean across time
and participants, n = 19) in the topography plots above. Power estimates are projected to source space using a minimum norm estimate, and significant
correlations in source space are shown in the bottom panels (mean correlations across participant, n = 19).
NAture HuMAN BeHAviOur | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTURe HUmaN BeHavioUR Articles
10 10
2 3 4 5 6Hz 0.19 0.37 0.56 0.75 0.93 cycles per octave
5 5
0
–5 –5
–10
–15
0 1,000 2,000 3,000 4,000 5,000 0 1,000 2,000 3,000 4,000 5,000
Time (ms) Time (ms)
0 0
–5 –5
–10 –10
2 3 4 5 6 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
Temporal modulations (Hz) Spectral modulations (cycles per octave)
as permitting unified computations across different cortical represented in the spectral modulation domain in the range
modalities53. Due to the complexity of manipulating and recon- 0.8–1.3 cycle per octave (Supplementary Fig. 3), which fits
structing acoustic signals in this space, only a few studies have well with our behavioural results showing a clear increase in
employed this approach to investigate speech intelligibility37,38,54. performance at 0.75 cycle per octave, which approaches ceil-
Our approach builds on the pipeline proposed previously38 (that ing above 1 cycle per octave (Fig. 4 and Supplementary Fig. 2).
is, linear time–frequency decomposition, modulation filtering These ranges most likely represent modulation power due
and iterative convex projection) but diverges by employing a to pitch differences in the male and female speakers, and are
cochlear filter bank that represents frequency in a logarithmic driven by the fundamental frequency (which in our case is
scale (similarly to another study48), which more closely reflects smoothed by low spectral cutoffs and masks the voice pitch of
the biological representation of frequency in the cochlea. Unlike the speaker). Our manipulation of spectral cues also provides
previous reports that mapped a wide range of the modulation evidence for an effect of spectral modulation on intelligibility as
space, we focused on a fine-grained mapping of the modulation previously reported48,57. This effect is much smaller in compari-
space that is most relevant to speech intelligibility (below 10 Hz son to degrading temporal modulations and is limited to low
and below 1.5 cycles per octave). The more fine-grained analy- spectral modulation values, which could be processed in both
sis provided a 2–3-fold increase in resolution, revealing a sharp hemispheres according to our model.
inflection point at the transition between 4 and 5 Hz, which is The key conceptual advance of these studies is a link between
most likely due to the inclusion of critical temporal cues that the modulation domain as a representational space and cortical
dominate the temporal modulation spectra of speech47,55,56. hemispheric asymmetries. The most prevalent models for hemi-
The boost in intelligibility is also evident, showing a signifi- spheric asymmetries in speech formulate computational differ-
cant increase in percent words identified above 4 Hz when the ences between right and left (auditory) cortices as a difference in
stimulus is presented for the second time in a new block (the time–frequency resolution23 or as a difference in temporal window
same sentence is never played with a higher modulation cutoff sizes over which information is integrated24. The time–frequency
during the first block). We did not find this priming effect in resolution argument draws a parallel between cortical computation
the voice pitch identification task, but our fine-grained reso- and the uncertainty principle in decomposing an auditory signal.
lution does provide a psychometric curve that has been only The acoustic (that is, Heisenberg–Gabor) uncertainty principle
partially reported in the past38 and reflects the degradation of provides a theoretical limit on the degree to which a signal can be
speaker identity (male or female) as spectral modulation con- resolved in time and frequency simultaneously: a highly resolved
tent is removed. The critical (and statistically significant) differ- signal in the time domain inherently limits the attainable frequency
ences between male and female voices in our materials are well resolution, and vice versa58. Proposals in both humans23 and other
)Bd(
rewoP
)Bd(
rewoP
)Bd(
rewoP
)Bd(
rewoP
0
–10
–15
Fig. 6 | intracranial eCoG recordings in a patient with bilateral stereotactic depth electrodes, sampling superior temporal cortices. Reconstruction of
electrode locations (MNI coordinates = [−60.17, −7.76, 2.82], [52.81, −7.95, 2.64]) are shown (top) for an axial slice Z = 3. Two significant electrodes
with low frequency (0.1–8 Hz) mean (shaded s.e.m. across trials, n = 16) power traces shown for each modulation filter (middle) as well as average power
(bottom) collapsed across time, with mean and s.e.m. across trials (n = 16).
NAture HuMAN BeHAviOur | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTURe HUmaN BeHavioUR
model organisms31 claim that hemispheric asymmetries address this lateralized (more so in the case of high frequencies; Supplementary
uncertainty by optimizing acoustic processing with a higher tempo- Fig. 6). We interpret our current findings as a superposition of two
ral resolution in the left hemisphere and a higher frequency resolu- signals or event types. The first is generated by impulse responses
tion in the right hemisphere. of neural populations to the incoming speech signal, it is indexed
Our approach closely follows this time–frequency dichotomy by low frequency power as well as broadband activity in the ECoG
but is motivated by building on a biologically plausible pathway: recordings, and it reflects integration of neural activity (and popula-
we first represent an auditory signal using a filter bank mimicking tions sensitive to specific temporal modulation ranges). The second
the log-frequency spacing of the cochlea45 and then move to the is generated by ongoing oscillations in the theta and low gamma
modulation space, which provides an explicit definition of temporal ranges that are indexed by corresponding frequency power and by
and spectral resolution as well as a cortically plausible operation of our hypothesis reflect temporal sampling or ‘chunking’ of the audi-
integration (that is, integrating different cortical populations that tory signal. It would make sense for such a sampling mechanism
are organized tonotopically). The modulation space in our model to be mostly associated with temporal cues, such as the temporal
provides a plausible candidate for cortical computation in the realm modulations of the signal. This view is consistent with our findings
of speech processing. First, the auditory pathway exhibits a low- of low and high frequency power correlations with temporal modu-
pass characteristic, whereby ascending from subcortical to cortical lations (Supplementary Fig. 6). In contrast, the spectral correlations
structures elicits lower temporal modulation responses59,60. Second, that are restricted to lower frequencies most likely reflect the first
this low-pass neural characteristic is also evident in the temporal mechanism—neural populations that integrate ranges of spectral
modulation spectra of speech signals55,56 and speech intelligibility47. modulations produce impulse responses that are mostly reflected in
Our finding of asymmetric power correlations fits well with low frequency activity.
previous time–frequency tradeoff accounts that have been based While we provide strong evidence for left hemisphere asym-
on changes in temporal and spectral cues in non-speech stim- metry during processing of temporal modulations in intelligible
uli12,21,23,61, but it also provides neural evidence for specific acoustic speech in our dichotic behavioural task (Fig. 4), neurophysiology
cues in more natural speech stimuli (that is, sentences). Previous results (Figs. 5 and 6) and processing unintelligible reversed speech
reports have provided evidence for hemispheric asymmetries to (Supplementary Fig. 10), the data supporting asymmetrical pro-
specific acoustic cues in non-speech stimuli27,28,61–69, phonemic seg- cessing of spectral modulations is more complex. In the behavioural
ments21,22,70–72 and single words73,74, but reports using sentence stim- dichotic task we only found a significant difference for the within-
uli have been mostly linked to neural signatures rather than specific subject fitted curves, and weaker correlations with spectral modula-
cues in the sentence stimuli75–77. This is partly due to the complexity tions over all experiments compared to the temporal modulations.
of manipulating relevant acoustic cues in sentential stimuli, such as While we found significant right hemisphere laterality in the sen-
the temporal and spectral modulations, which we directly address sor-level MEG analysis, we did not find a significant asymmetry in
with our technique. the ECoG data. One possibility is that the choice of task (voice pitch
The asymmetric sampling in time (AST) model proposes that the identification) is not ideal for investigating spectral modulations
initial neural representation of speech is bilaterally symmetric, say within the context of speech.
at the levels of inferior colliculus to primary/core auditory cortex; Another viewpoint could be raised under the lens of lateraliza-
however, the two hemispheres ‘resample’ information asymmetri- tion driven by domain-specific speech mechanisms13,25. Under this
cally24. The right hemisphere predominantly extracts information view, the right hemisphere is strongly selective for certain acoustic
from longer temporal windows whereas the left hemisphere extracts cues, whereas the left hemisphere specializes in domain-specific
information over shorter temporal windows. This approach focuses (speech) mechanisms and is not selective to an acoustic regime13.
on temporal sampling rather than time–frequency resolution The strong asymmetry of temporal modulation correlations to the
(although frequency resolution is implicitly greater in the case of left hemisphere partly challenges this view by providing an acous-
larger temporal window), but it is broadly consistent with our mod- tic regime (temporal modulations) that describes and represents
ulation domain model. In both models, the speech signal is first rep- speech both for intelligible and non-intelligible (reversed) speech.
resented bilaterally in a symmetric fashion (that is, a high-resolution While temporal modulations could be a good characteristic of
time–frequency representation) and then sampled asymmetrically. speech-like acoustics, thereby activating left hemisphere domain-
In the modulation model, information is extracted by integrating specific circuits, our data does not support a purely bottom-up feed-
ranges of modulation rates, while in the AST model information is forward acoustic effect. The degree of frontal-temporal recruitment
extracted by sampling over windows. The modulation model can both in our MEG and ECoG results suggest, unsurprisingly, that
be viewed as a significant extension and modification of the AST there is a larger network involved that may be sensitive both to the
hypothesis by extracting information over many windows both temporal modulations as well as the task and attentional demands.
temporally and spectrally. In this view, the right hemisphere pre- Indeed, the context and expectations during our tasks can influence
dominantly extracts information from long temporal windows due perception of the modulations and the speech content.
to integration over a limited range of temporal modulations (reflect- Our findings and approach complement a growing number
ing longer temporal cycles) whereas the left integrates a wide range of studies in human neuroimaging reporting a spatial topogra-
of temporal modulations (reflecting both short and long temporal phy of auditory cortex sensitivity to temporal and spectral modu-
cycles). Accepting this new hypothesis demands a reframing of the lations41,42,81–83. These studies have reported bilateral activation
AST model wherein the left hemisphere extracts both short and patterns and modest asymmetries at best, and the modulation
long temporal windows (but the right is still preferentially integrat- topography profiles differ across studies41,42,81. The limited asymme-
ing long windows), which is consistent with reports of informative try and discrepancy across results are most likely due to the varying
theta activity during speech perception76,77. stimuli used to probe cortical responses (modulated noise, ripples,
One important aspect of the AST model is a specific oscillatory environmental sounds and speech). In the case of speech, both
mechanism that performs temporal sampling and integration. There electrophysiology43 and neuroimaging42 have shown that modula-
is evidence supporting left lateralized high frequency oscillations tion domain cues are critical for more accurate modelling of audi-
and right lateralized oscillations in rest as well as during speech pro- tory responses. Our stimuli constrain the amount of modulation
cessing29,75,78–80. We investigated a range of power correlations across information contained in the speech signal that drives asymmetric
the neural spectrum, and found that sensitivity to temporal modu- responses not readily seen in previous reports employing the full
lations existed in both low and high frequency ranges and were left modulation domain.
NAture HuMAN BeHAviOur | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTURe HUmaN BeHavioUR Articles
In summary, our approach offers a unifying framework to stan- were prompted for intelligibility rating first and then voice pitch identification,
dardize stimulus manipulation across the unit of interest (non- and the other half were prompted in the reverse order. Participants heard
84 unique sentences spoken by 28 unique speakers (three sentences per speaker).
speech, phonemic segment, word, and so on) as well as across
For each speaker, three cutoffs were randomly picked (either temporal or spectral)
species of interest. We provide behavioural and neurophysiologi- such that each filter cutoff appeared six different times (6 × 14 filters).
cal evidence that the two hemispheres are differentially sensitive To avoid priming effects of both speaker identity as well as sentence content,
to ranges of temporal and spectral modulations. We view these a sentence was never repeated within a block and a high cutoff filter never appeared
sensitivities as an asymmetry in cortical architecture reflecting a before a lower cutoff filter for that speaker. In the second block the same sentences
selected for the first block were repeated but in a different pseudo-random order;
neuronal integration of acoustic modulations and a unifying frame-
this manipulation ensured that the only priming effects of repeating a sentence or
work for hemispheric models critical to understanding the nature of hearing more modulation content for that speaker were due to the second block.
human speech processing. For each participant a different set of random filter and sentence permutations
were selected.
Methods In experiment 2 (dichotic, n = 60) participants listened to four blocks (two
blocks rating intelligibility and two marking male or female) of 120 pseudo-
Stimulus construction. All sentences were extracted from the Texas Instruments/
randomly ordered sentences per block (40 unique sentences) constructed from
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (TIMIT) database (2–4 s, 16 kHz)84. A set
the same filters as in experiment 1, but aligned in the audio stereo such that right
of 28 unique speakers from the database was selected, 14 female and 14 male. To
ear and left ear received the same sentence but one ear received a filter at a higher
select male and female speakers with similar fundamental frequencies, speakers
cutoff: temporal dichotic pairs of (2, 3), (3, 4), (4, 5), (5, 6) and (6, 7) Hz, and
were selected such that the first peak of their FFT spectra was matched for male
spectral dichotic pairs (0.1867, 0.3733), (0.3733, 0.5600), (0.5600, 0.7564), (0.7564,
and females speakers. We then verified fundamental frequency using a sawtooth
0.9333) and (0.9333, 1.1200) cycle per octave. Each sentence was repeated once
waveform inspired pitch estimator85 showing a mean F with relatively low
0 with a higher cutoff on the left ear (and lower on the right), once with a higher
female pitch values (mean = 161.34 Hz, SD = 27) and relatively high male pitch
cutoff on the right ear (and lower in the left) and once as a diotic pair of the lower
(mean = 118.90 Hz, SD = 32.03). For each speaker, three unique sentences were
cutoff (for example, (2, 2) Hz). Half the sentences were presented first with a higher
processed and filtered in the modulation domain once with a low-pass cutoff of 2,
cutoff on the left (and then right and diotic) and half were presented first with
3, 4, 5, 6, 7 or 8 Hz and once with a low-pass cutoff of 0.1867, 0.3733, 0.56, 0.7467,
a higher cutoff on the right (and then left and diotic). Each filter cutoff dichotic
0.933, 1.12 or 1.3067 cycles per octave (28 speakers × 3 sentences × 14 filters).
pair was heard in eight unique sentences, four of which appeared first with higher
Stimuli length varied between 1.5–4.5 s (mean = 2.396 s, SD = 0.576 s) containing
modulation cutoffs on the left ear and four of which appeared first with higher
3–13 words (mean = 7.40, SD = 2.21).
modulation rates on the right ear. As in experiment 1, in order to avoid priming
effects of both speaker identity as well as sentence content, a dichotic sentence did
Modulation domain filtering. All modulation filtering was performed by a
not repeat within a block and a higher cutoff dichotic pair filter did not appear
toolbox written in Matlab for the purposes of this manuscript and is freely
before a lower cutoff dichotic pair filter for that speaker. For each participant a
available. Sound waveforms were first transformed into a time–frequency
different set of random filter and sentence permutations were selected. Participants
representation (spectrogram) using a filter bank approach. Waveforms were filtered
were asked to rate intelligibility and transcribe the sentence in two consecutive
using 128 different frequency domain Gaussians that were designed to estimate
intelligibility blocks (the second block contained the same sentences as the first but
cochlear critical bands45. Gaussian centre frequencies logarithmically spanned the
in a different pseudo-random order) and in two consecutive voice pitch blocks, the
frequency space and the full width at half maximum (FWHM) corresponded to the
participants were asked to mark the voice pitch of the speaker. Half the participants
equivalent rectangular bandwidth86 (bandwidth = 24.7 × (F × 4.37 + 1), where F is
performed the intelligibility blocks first and then the voice pitch blocks, and the
the centre frequency in kHz). The output of the filter operation was then Hilbert
other half of the participants performed the voice pitch blocks first. 40 of the 60
transformed to extract the analytic amplitude and log-transformed. The output
participants first performed an audiometer task to assess hearing thresholds in
of this filter bank processing is a spectrogram, which provides a time–frequency
the left and right ears, and to ensure differences were not greater than 5 dB between
representation estimating the output of the cochlea. Next, spectrograms were
both ears.
filtered in the modulation domain, which is essentially a multiplication in the
Experiment 3 (MEG, n = 19) was identical to experiment 2 but only diotic
two-dimensional frequency domain of the spectrogram matrix (2D FFT). A given
stimuli were used, that is participants listened to four blocks (two blocks rating
spectrogram was transformed to the modulation domain using a 2D FFT and then
intelligibility and two marking voice pitch) of 120 pseudo-randomly ordered
multiplied with a low-pass filter (cosine ramp) removing all components above
sentences per block (40 unique sentences) using the same temporal and spectral
the cutoff (similarly to modulation filtering in a previous study38). The filtered
cutoffs: 2, 3, 4, 5 or 6 Hz or 0.1867, 0.3733, 0.5600, 0.7467 or 0.9333 cycle per
modulation domain was then inverse transformed back to a spectrogram (inverse
octave. Participants were only required to respond with an intelligibility rating
2D FFT), producing a new smoothed spectrogram with modulation frequencies
(1–4) in the intelligibility blocks (no sentence transcription) and mark male or
only below the cutoff. All the filtering steps producing a smoothed (low-passed
female in the voice pitch blocks. One participant was excluded due to excessive
modulation) spectrogram are linear, invertible and relatively straightforward. The
movement in the MEG, leaving 19 out of the 20 recruited participants.
last operation in our filtering pipeline is transforming the new spectrogram into
Experiment 4 (MEG, n = 10) consisted of speech sentence stimuli as well as
a corresponding time domain waveform. Although such a direct transformation
reversed sentences, identical to the pre-processed sentences in experiments 1–3.
based only on spectrogram power estimates is not feasible, there is a convex
Sentences were first reversed (audio vectors flipped left to right) and then filtered
projection technique that iteratively produces a waveform that is maximally close
with identical procedures and cutoff values as in experiment 3 (2, 3, 4, 5 or 6 Hz
to the desired spectrogram87. And although the original procedure by Griffin and
or 0.1867, 0.3733, 0.5600, 0.7467 or 0.9333 cycles per octave). Participants were
Lim requires iteratively inverting the short time Fourier transform, the same logic
asked to detect a tone that was embedded in 8% of stimuli while they listened to
can be used to invert a filter bank88, and we follow this procedure with our inverted
pseudo-randomly presented sentences. Stimuli with an embedded tone and stimuli
Gaussian filters with 10 iterations to produce a new waveform. In brief, each new
with responses were removed from analysis. To ensure participants were paying
smoothed spectrogram is inverted to a sound waveform by initially using random
attention to the non-reversed intelligible sentence stimuli, questions about the
phase estimates, inverting each filter in the filter bank given the power and phase
content were asked during the end of each block. An identical amount of reversed
estimates of that critical band and summing the output to produce a temporary
speech stimuli were presented per cutoff as in experiment 3. One participant was
waveform. This temporary waveform is then decomposed (forward filter bank)
excluded due to falling asleep repeatedly during the experiment, leaving a total of
into a spectrogram that does not fully match the smoothed spectrogram but
10 out of 11 recruited participants.
contains more accurate phase information than the previous iteration (that
Across experiments 1–4, participants were counter-balanced in the hand
is, the spectrogram more closely matches the desired spectrogram). The new
they were instructed to respond with, where half responded with the left
phase information and the smoothed spectrogram power estimates are used to
hand and half with the right hand (transcriptions in experiments 1 and 2 were
produce a new temporary waveform, and this procedure is repeated with updated
performed freely with both hands). Experiments 1 and 2 were performed in a
phase estimates until there is a sufficiently small difference between the desired
sound-proof psychophysical booth and experiments 2–4 were performed
spectrogram and the spectrogram matching the sound waveform. in the MEG scanner. Across all experiments, participants first performed a
practice block consisting of four unique exemplars that did not appear in the
Psychophysical experiments. In experiment 1 (diotic, n = 20) participants listened main experiment.
to two blocks of 84 unique pseudo-randomly ordered sentences filtered either Experiment 5 (ECoG, n = 8) was identical to experiment 3 (MEG) but consisted
at 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 or 8 Hz low-pass temporal modulation cutoff (and 11 cycles per of 80 pseudo-randomly ordered sentences per block (40 unique sentences), and
octave spectral cutoff) or 0.1867, 0.3733, 0.5600, 0.7467, 0.9333, 1.1200 or 1.3067 only one block of intelligibility and one block of voice pitch identification were
cycles per octave spectral cutoff (and 32 Hz temporal cutoff). After each sentence administered per patient. Patients heard stimuli through a speaker presented in
the participant was asked to rate the intelligibility from 1–4, then type out the front of them in the hospital bedside environment.
sentence on the keyboard and finally select whether the speaker was male or female No statistical methods were used to pre-determine sample sizes but our sample
(keyboard response, two alternative forced choices). Each trial was self paced and sizes are similar to (and in experiments 2 and 3, larger than) those reported in
continued after the participant responded to all the prompts; half the participants previous publications38,63,75–77,89.
NAture HuMAN BeHAviOur | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTURe HUmaN BeHavioUR
Psychophysical analysis. Intelligibility transcriptions were processed by an The position of the coils with respect to three anatomical landmarks (the naison,
algorithm to assess how many words were correct in each sentence, allowing up and left and right tragus) were determined using 3D digitizer software (Source
to two spelling mistakes (Levenshtein distance of 2) and was verified by a human Signal Imaging) and digitizing hardware (Polhemus). This measurement allowed
rater providing minor corrections where appropriate. The proportion of words a coregistration of the MEG data with a MRI template brain (MNI). An online
correct as well as correct voice pitch (male or female) responses are plotted in raw hardware band-pass filter between 1 and 200 Hz and a notch filter at 60 Hz was
form across participants as mean and s.e.m. in Fig. 4. In order to assess statistically applied during data acquisition. Participants were asked to perform a practice
significant effects of filter and block (or ear in the dichotic case), we first applied a block with their eyes open but performed the main experiment (experiment 3)
within-subject (‘repeated measures’) analysis of variance (ANOVA) and used the with their eyes closed in order to minimize eye blinks. They heard each filtered
raw scores, due to the fact that proportion (percent correct) data are susceptible to sentence and responded with one of four button presses in order to continue
violation of ANOVA assumptions. Although the block and ear conditions did not to the next trial.
violate sphericity assumptions, we did find a significant violation of sphericity for Data processing and analysis was conducted using custom MATLAB scripts
filter as reported by Mauchly’s test for spehricity (diotic intelligibility W = 0.0401, and functions from the FieldTrip toolbox90. For each participant’s dataset, noisy
P = 7.343 × 10−5; diotic voice pitch identification W = 0.0212, P = 1.88 × 10−6; channels were visually identified and rejected. Two denoising algorithms were
dichotic intelligibility W = 0.528, P = 3.09 × 10−5; dichotic voice pitch identification run in sequence to regress out environmental noise measured with three reference
W = 0.724, P = 0.0296). Instead of reporting the corrected ANOVA statistics with sensors located away from the participant’s head. First, a least squares estimate
sphericity corrections, we opted to use a non-parametric approach of analysis between data sensors and reference sensors was estimated with 5 minutes of data
of variance using a factorial permutation test. We used 1,000 permutations as recorded with no participants (empty room) and these weights were then used to
recommended by the default value of the ez-package50 but also verified that all remove environmental noise in the recording session (experiment 3) similarly to a
effects held with 10,000 permutations. ANOVA analysis, sphericity tests and final previous study91. Any remaining environmental noise components were removed
non-parametric factorial tests were implemented in R using the ez-package50, using a time-shifted PCA procedure92. MEG signals were then zero-meaned and
which is designed for within-subject analysis of factorial experiments (we used artefact components (eye blinks, heartbeat and stationary noise) were identified
ezANOVA for the ANOVA and sphericity tests, and ezPerm for the permutation and removed using an independent component analysis (ICA) of the PCA space.
test, as well as ezBoot for validating data). When permutation test P values equalled 0, Signals were then downsampled to 100 Hz for time efficiency, and marked with
we reported the more conservative estimate of 1/(m + 1), where m is the number onsets and offsets of each sentence.
of permutations. It is noteworthy that all effects reported in the manuscript using Power estimates were extracted for the full length of the data using a frequency
the non-parametric approach mirrored the results of the ANOVA after correction domain FWHM Gaussian filter, a Hilbert transform and log transforming the
for sphericity (that is, significant effects and non-significant effects). In addition power. This procedure was conducted for every frequency range of interest
to testing the effects across participants using a repeated measure factorial design (for example, 0.1–8 Hz in Fig. 5), and for all frequencies spanning 0.1–50 Hz
for statistical assessment, we also performed a within-subject analysis by fitting a (Supplementary Fig. 6) when examining the entire spectra (centre frequencies were
logistic function for each participant’s data using a maximum likelihood criterion logarithmically spaced and fractional bandwidth was used).
with fixed gamma and lambda parameters implemented by the Palamedes Matlab Correlation analysis was performed between the filter type (ordinal 1–5)
toolbox51. The mean fitted curve across participants and s.e.m. are depicted in and the neural power estimate across the 240 sentences. Correlations were then
Fig. 4. These curves were then used to assess the exact range of modulations that averaged across participants, and significance was estimated by comparing the
showed a significant effect by performing a paired non-parametric Wilcoxon correlation with a null distribution of permutations. Each permutation was
signed-rank test (implemented in Matlab). This test was performed on each constructed by randomly reordering the filter type labels and repeating the
data point of the curve and values with an alpha criterion of 0.05 (P < 0.05), and same correlation and averaging as previously described. This procedure was
to reduce type I errors (multiple comparisons) only a range of values showing repeated 1,000 times, providing a null distribution for assessing significance.
continuous statistical significance was used—that is, if any intermediate values When evaluating correlations on the level of sensor (topographic plots in
did not pass significance, the range of values reported was decreased to the largest Fig. 5 and Supplementary Figs. 4–6 and 9–11), power estimates were first
block of continuous significant modulations. averaged across time and then correlated with the filter type. When evaluating
No statistical methods were used to pre-determine sample sizes but our sample correlations over time (Fig. 5 middle panel and Supplementary Figs. 8–11), a
sizes are similar to (and in experiments 2 and 3, larger than) those reported in sliding window approach was employed, averaging power across a window of
previous publications38,63,75–77,89. 250 ms for each correlation. In order to correct for multiple comparisons, only
In all experiments each participant listened to a different random order of significant clusters were included. For the temporal correlations, a minimum
speech stimuli (a combination of filter, speaker and sentence). This randomization of two consecutive correlations in time were used as a threshold. For the
process ensured a random order of stimuli for each participant while reducing spatial topographies (sensor and source), a cluster correction was used based
priming effects within block (for example, for both speaker identity as well as on random permutations (1,000) in order to include only clusters that had an
sentence content, a high cutoff filter never appeared before a lower cutoff filter average significant correlation.
for that stimulus). In experiments 1–4, the order of tasks and response hand were In this approach no sensors were pre-selected, but rather all correlations were
counter-balanced across participants (within experiment). Data collection and computed within sensor. For spatial topography plots, only significant data that
analysis were not performed blind to the conditions of the experiments. survived the permutation test and correction for multiple comparisons are shown.
To clarify the process for each sensor, power estimates were averaged across
Participants. Twenty participants participated in experiment 1 (9 males; mean time, producing one estimate per sentence. These estimates were then correlated
age 19.8 years, range 18–24); all participants were native speakers of American with their corresponding filter cutoff, producing one correlation per sensor. This
English and were right-handed. Sixty participants participated in experiment 2 process was repeated with randomly shuffled labels (cutoff values) for each sensor
(27 males; mean age 24.67 years, range 18–46); all participants were native in order to estimate the permuted null distribution. Final topographies contain
speakers of American English and all but three were right-handed. Twenty the average correlations across participants that were significant compared to the
participants participated in experiment 3 (10 males; mean age 25.1 years, range permuted null distribution (which was verified to hold a normal distribution) and
19–46); all participants were native speakers of American English and all were survived a cluster size correction for multiple comparisons (based on permuted
right-handed. Ten participants participated in experiment 4 (5 males; mean age data). A laterality index (varying form −1 to 1) for topographies was computed as
25 years, range 22–46); all participants were native speakers of American English (L − R)/(L + R) where L corresponds to the significant correlations for left sensors
and all but one participant were right-handed. One participant in experiment 3 and R corresponds to right sensors. In order to test for statistical significance,
was rejected due to consistent artefact and noise during the MEG recording. we followed the same permutation approach of randomly shuffling labels and
Participants in all experiments self-reported normal hearing and no neurological producing a null distribution of laterality indices. This distribution was found to
deficits. Six additional participants performed tasks but were removed from violate normality so we opted to test significance on the un-normalized indices,
analysis due to a hearing threshold greater than 20 dB (in experiments 1 and 2) that is (L − R) instead of (L − R)/(L + R). The distribution was verified to be normal
and one participant that fell asleep during the MEG task. Participants were and the actual (L − R) laterality index was compared to the null distribution to
either paid for taking part in the study or received course credit and provided report P values. The same correlation procedure was followed in a separate pipeline
written informed consent. The protocol was approved by the local Institutional for each vertex in source space after data was projected to estimate cortical sources.
Review Board (New York University’s Committee on Activities Involving Human Source reconstruction was employed using a cortically constrained minimum
Subjects) for all of these studies. norm estimate (MNE)93. This method approximates the cortical surface as a large
number of current dipoles, and estimates the dipole’s amplitude configuration
MEG data acquisition and analysis. Neuromagnetic responses were recorded with minimum overall energy that generates the measured magnetic field. Power
using a 157-channel whole-head axial gradiometer system (KIT, Kanazawa estimates in source space were then computed similarly to sensor space (0.1–8 Hz
Institute of Technology, Japan) in a magnetically shielded room using a 1,000 Hz filter, Hilbert transform, log transform) and correlations were performed in
sampling rate. Five electromagnetic coils were attached to the participant’s head to sensor space with the same permutation and cluster procedures. In order to assess
monitor the head position during the MEG recording. The coils were localized to correlations in anatomical regions of interest (Supplementary Fig. 7), uncorrected
the MEG sensors at three different time points: at the beginning of the experiment, correlations were averaged per anatomical ROI (base on a fieldtrip-provided atlas)
between the intelligibility and voice pitch tasks, and at the end of the experiment. to avoid statistical double dipping.
NAture HuMAN BeHAviOur | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTURe HUmaN BeHavioUR Articles
Intracranial data acquisition. Three (two patients with bilateral sterotactic Data availability
implants and one patient with a left grid implant) patients were recruited from The data that support the findings of this study are available from the
North Shore University Hospital, and five patients (one left grid implant, corresponding author upon reasonable request.
one right grid implant and three implants with bilateral surface strips) from
New York University Langone Medical Center. Patients were undergoing Received: 3 May 2018; Accepted: 28 January 2019;
neurosurgical treatment for refractory epilepsy and consented to participate
Published: xx xx xxxx
in cognitive tasks during lulls in clinical treatment. Electrode placement and
treatment were dictated solely by the clinical needs of each patient. All participants
gave written consent to participate in the study as well as an additional oral consent references
immediately before recording the task. The study protocol was approved by the 1. Broca, P. Remarques sur le siege de la faculté du langage articulé, suivies
NYU, NYU Langone Medical Center, North Shore University Hospital Committees d’une observation d’aphémie (perte de la parole). Bull. et mémoires de la
on Human Research. Synchronized electrophysiology and trigger onsets for Société Anatomique de Paris 36, 330–356 (1861).
sentence stimuli were acquired to ensure time-locked analysis. At NYU Langone 2. Wernicke, C. Der aphasische Symptomencomplex; eine psychologische Studie
Medical Center all signals were acquired clinically with Nicolet ONE clinical auf anatomischer Basis (Cohn & Weigert, Breslau, 1874).
amplifier (Natus) and sampled with a rate of 512 Hz. At North Shore University 3. Hickok, G. & Poeppel, D. The cortical organization of speech processing. Nat.
Hospital, signals were acquired with a Xltek EMU 128 clinical recording system Rev. Neurosci. 8, 393–402 (2007).
(two stereotactic patients) with a sampling rate of 500 Hz and Xltek 512 channel 4. Hagoort, P. & Indefrey, P. The neurobiology of language beyond single words.
clinical recording system (grid patient) with a sampling rate of 512 Hz. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 37, 347–362 (2014).
5. Friederici, A. D. The brain basis of language processing: from structure to
Intracranial electrode localization. Electrode localization at NYULMC in function. Physiol. Rev. 91, 1357–1392 (2011).
participant space as well as MNI space was based on co-registering a preoperative 6. Rauschecker, J. P. & Scott, S. K. Maps and streams in the auditory cortex:
(no electrodes) and postoperative (with electrodes) structural MRI using a nonhuman primates illuminate human speech processing. Nat. Neurosci. 12,
rigid-body transformation and then projecting electrodes to the surface of 718–724 (2009).
cortex (preoperative segmented surface) to correct for oedema induced shifts 7. Price, C. J. A review and synthesis of the first 20 years of PET and fMRI
following previous procedures94(registration to MNI space was based on a non- studies of heard speech, spoken language and reading. NeuroImage 62,
linear DARTEL algorithm95). Electrode localization at North Shore University 816–847 (2012).
Hospital was based on a rigid-body transformation between a preoperative MR 8. Goetz, C. G. Textbook of Clinical Neurology 3rd edn, 355 (2007).
and a postoperative CT with electrodes projected to the pial surface to correct for 9. Kandel, E. R., Schwartz, J. H., Jessell, T. M. Principles of Neural Science
oedema-induced shift and registered to MNI coordinates based on a spherical 4th edn, 457–469 (McGraw-Hill, New York, 2000).
warping transformation as implemented by freesurfer96. In both cases, depth 10. Bozic, M., Tyler, L. K., Ives, D. T., Randall, B. & Marslen-Wilson, W. D.
electrodes were not corrected for the oedema-induced shift. Bihemispheric foundations for human speech comprehension.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 107, 17439–17444 (2010).
Intracranial data analysis. Preprocessing of the data followed previous reported 11. Overath, T., McDermott, J. H., Zarate, J. M. & Poeppel, D. The cortical
procedures89 and included visual inspection and rejection of noisy electrodes analysis of speech-specific temporal structure revealed by responses to sound
(60 Hz line noise, poor contact with abnormal voltage readings). A common quilts. Nat. Neurosci. 18, 903–911 (2015).
average referencing (CAR) approach was used by zero-meaning each channel and 12. Zatorre, R. J. & Gandour, J. T. Neural specializations for speech
then removing the mean of all channels (the CAR) from each electrode (the CAR and pitch: moving beyond the dichotomies. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. 363,
was also removed from noisy electrodes to ensure no residual signal was left). 1087–1104 (2008).
Electrodes over epileptiform regions were excluded as well as electrodes that were 13. McGettigan, C. & Scott, S. K. Cortical asymmetries in speech perception:
outside of cortical tissue. Ictal and epileptiform activity that spread across to other what’s wrong, what’s right and what’s left? Trends Cognit. Sci. 16,
electrodes was manually identified and any trials overlapping with the activity were 269–276 (2012).
excluded from analysis. Low frequency (0.1–8 Hz) or high frequency (70–150 Hz) 14. Efron, R. Temporal perception, aphasia and déjà vu. Brain 86,
activity was extracted with the same band-pass filtering approach as in MEG 403–424 (1963).
(that is, frequency domain FWHM Gaussian filter, a Hilbert transform and log 15. Schwartz, J. & Tallal, P. Rate of acoustic change may underlie hemispheric
transformation for low power and percent change from baseline for high gamma). specialization for speech perception. Science 207, 1380–1381 (1980).
For low power correlations, we followed a similar approach to MEG data analysis 16. Tallal, P. & Piercy, M. Defects of non-verbal auditory perception in children
by correlating low frequency power with filter type (ordinal 1–5) and assessing with developmental aphasia. Nature 241, 468–469 (1973).
significance by a permutation where all labels were randomly assigned and then 17. Ross, E. D. & Mesulam, M.-M. Dominant language functions of the
correlated (1,000 times) to create a null distribution (Fig. 6 and Supplementary right hemisphere? Prosody and emotional gesturing. Arch. Neurol. 36,
Figs. 12–17). All electrodes were also tested for significant power change from 144–148 (1979).
baseline (paired t-test, P < 0.05) as a measure of signal response in the electrode. 18. Tucker, D. M., Watson, R. T. & Heilman, K. M. Discrimination and evocation
For analysis of correlations across patients and their asymmetry, we focused on all of affectively intoned speech in patients with right parietal disease. Neurol.
electrodes that showed a significant increase of power from baseline and calculated 27, 947–947 (1977).
their correlations, focusing on positive correlations and aggregating correlations 19. Robin, D. A., Tranel, D. & Damasio, H. Auditory perception of temporal and
(reported mean, s.e.m. and asymmetry significance in Results), regardless of spectral events in patients with focal left and right cerebral lesions. Brain
whether the correlations themselves were significant (to provide an unbiased Lang. 39, 539–555 (1990).
estimate of signal and effect size). When reporting the percent of significant 20. Zatorre, R. J. Pitch perception of complex tones and human temporal-lobe
electrodes (Results), their location value and the asymmetry index (Supplementary function. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 84, 566–572 (1988).
Figs. 16 and 17) we only report electrodes with a significant correlation via a 21. Zatorre, R. J., Evans, A. C., Meyer, E. & Gjedde, A. Lateralization of phonetic
permutation test (P < 0.05). and pitch discrimination in speech processing. Science 256, 846–849 (1992).
22. Belin, P. et al. Lateralization of speech and auditory temporal processing. J.
Statistical reporting of permutation tests. While there is no consistent format Cogn. Neurosci. 10, 536–540 (1998).
for reporting statistical permutation tests, we chose to follow a previously 23. Zatorre, R. J., Belin, P. & Penhune, V. B. Structure and function of auditory
ppu erb mlis uh te ad ti oa np p tero sta (c Ph )9 7 o b fy a e sm pep cl io fy icin teg s t th se t an tio sm tice n (sc ula bt su cr re i p‘P t)te wst-s it tat hist i tc h = e X re’ ato l od be sn eo rt ve e t dh te e st 24. Pco or et pe px: e lm , Dus . i Thc a en d an s ap lyee sic sh o. fT sr pen ed ecs hC io ng n di it ff. eS rc ei n. t6 , t e3 m7– p4 o6 r a( l2 i0 n0 t2 eg). ration windows:
statistic reported as X. Given that confidence intervals (CI) are not well-defined cerebral lateralization as ‘asymmetric sampling in time’. Speech Commun. 41,
nor meaningful for a permutation test (and can vary in meaning depending on the 245–255 (2003).
reported parametric statistic), we chose to report the 5% and 95% percentiles of 25. Scott, S. K. & McGettigan, C. Do temporal processes underlie left hemisphere
the null hypothesis distribution (permutation results) which reflect the confidence dominance in speech perception? Brain Lang. 127, 36–45 (2013).
intervals of the test statistic under random labels and if X falls outside the CI range 26. Gervain, J. Near-infrared spectroscopy: recent advances in infant speech
we can reject the null hypothesis of the permutation test. perception and language acquisition research. Front. Psychol. 5, 481 (2014).
27. Luo, H. & Poeppel, D. Cortical oscillations in auditory perception and
Reporting Summary. Further information on research design is available in the speech: evidence for two temporal windows in human auditory cortex. Front.
Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article. Psychol. 3, 170 (2012).
28. Okamoto, H. & Kakigi, R. Hemispheric asymmetry of auditory mismatch
negativity elicited by spectral and temporal deviants: a
Code availability magnetoencephalographic study. Brain Topogr. 28, 471–478 (2015).
All stimuli construction code is available on a public repository https://github.com/ 29. Thompson, E. C. et al. Hemispheric asymmetry of endogenous neural
flinkerlab/SpectroTemporalModulationFilter. Experiment and analysis code is oscillations in young children: implications for hearing speech in noise. Sci.
available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. Rep. 6, 19737 (2016).
NAture HuMAN BeHAviOur | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTURe HUmaN BeHavioUR
30. Ratcliffe, V. F. & Reby, D. Orienting asymmetries in dogs’ responses to 62. Liégeois-Chauvel, C., Lorenzi, C., Trébuchon, A., Régis, J. & Chauvel, P.
different communicatory components of human speech. Curr. Biol. 24, Temporal envelope processing in the human left and right auditory cortices.
2908–2912 (2014). Cereb. Cortex 14, 731–740 (2004).
31. Washington, S. D. & Tillinghast, J. S. Conjugating time and frequency: 63. Okamoto, H., Stracke, H., Draganova, R. & Pantev, C. Hemispheric
hemispheric specialization, acoustic uncertainty, and the mustached bat. asymmetry of auditory evoked fields elicited by spectral versus temporal
Front. Neurosci. 9, 143 (2015). stimulus change. Cereb. Cortex 19, 245–2297 (2009).
32. Washington, S. D. & Kanwal, J. S. Sex-dependent hemispheric asymmetries 64. Wang, Y. et al. Sensitivity to temporal modulation rate and spectral
for processing frequency-modulated sounds in the primary auditory cortex of bandwidth in the human auditory system: MEG evidence. J. Neurophysiol.
the mustached bat. J. Neurophysiol. 108, 1548–1566 (2012). 107, 2033–2041 (2012).
33. De Valois R. L. & De Valois K. K. Spatial Vision (Oxford Univ. Press, 1990). 65. Schönwiesner, M., Rübsamen, R. & Cramon, Von,D. Y. Hemispheric
34. Shapley, R. & Lennie, P. Spatial frequency analysis in the visual system. Annu. asymmetry for spectral and temporal processing in the human antero‐lateral
Rev. Neurosci. 8, 547–581 (1985). auditory belt cortex. Eur. J. Neurosci. 22, 1521–1528 (2005).
35. Kowalski, N., Depireux, D. A. & Shamma, S. A. Analysis of dynamic spectra 66. Jamison, H. L., Watkins, K. E., Bishop, D. V. M. & Matthews, P. M.
in ferret primary auditory cortex. I. Characteristics of single-unit responses to Hemispheric specialization for processing auditory nonspeech stimuli. Cereb.
moving ripple spectra. J. Neurophysiol. 76, 3503–3523 (1996). Cortex 16, 1266–1275 (2006).
36. Woolley, S. M. N., Fremouw, T. E., Hsu, A. & Theunissen, F. E. Tuning for 67. Boemio, A., Fromm, S., Braun, A. & Poeppel, D. Hierarchical and
spectro-temporal modulations as a mechanism for auditory discrimination of asymmetric temporal sensitivity in human auditory cortices. Nat. Neurosci. 8,
natural sounds. Nat. Neurosci. 8, 1371–1379 (2005). 389–395 (2005).
37. Elhilali, M., Chi, T. & Shamma, S. A. A spectro-temporal modulation 68. Overath, T., Kumar, S., Kriegstein, von, K. & Griffiths, T. D. Encoding
index (STMI) for assessment of speech intelligibility. Speech Commun. 41, of spectral correlation over time in auditory cortex. J. Neurosci. 28,
331–348 (2003). 13268–13273 (2008).
38. Elliott, T. M. & Theunissen, F. E. The modulation transfer function for speech 69. Hyde, K. L., Peretz, I. & Zatorre, R. J. Evidence for the role of
intelligibility. PLoS Comput. Biol 5, e1000302 (2009). the right auditory cortex in fine pitch resolution. Neuropsychologia 46,
39. Arnal, L. H., Flinker, A., Kleinschmidt, A., Giraud, A.-L. & Poeppel, D. 632–639 (2008).
Human screams occupy a privileged niche in the communication soundscape. 70. Liégeois-Chauvel, C., de Graaf, J. B., Laguitton, V. & Chauvel, P. Specialization
Curr. Biol. 25, 2051–2056 (2015). of left auditory cortex for speech perception in man depends on temporal
40. Gross, J. et al. Speech rhythms and multiplexed oscillatory sensory coding in coding. Cereb. Cortex 9, 484–496 (1999).
the human brain. Plos Biol. 11, e1001752 (2013). 71. Kriegstein, von et al. How the human brain recognizes speech in the context
41. Schönwiesner, M. & Zatorre, R. J. Spectro-temporal modulation transfer of changing speakers. J. Neurosci. 30, 629–638 (2010).
function of single voxels in the human auditory cortex measured with 72. Arsenault, J. S. & Buchsbaum, B. R. Distributed neural representations
high-resolution fMRI. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 106, 14611–14616 (2009). of phonological features during speech perception. J. Neurosci. 35,
42. Santoro, R. et al. Encoding of natural sounds at multiple spectral and 634–642 (2015).
temporal resolutions in the human auditory cortex. PLoS Comput. Biol. 10, 73. Millman, R. E., Woods, W. P. & Quinlan, P. T. Functional asymmetries in the
e1003412 (2014). representation of noise-vocoded speech. NeuroImage 54, 2364–2373 (2011).
43. Pasley, B. N. et al. Reconstructing speech from human auditory cortex. PLoS 74. Obleser, J., Eisner, F. & Kotz, S. A. Bilateral speech comprehension reflects
Biol. 10, e1001251 (2012). differential sensitivity to spectral and temporal features. J. Neurosci. 28,
44. Poeppel, D. Pure word deafness and the bilateral processing of the speech 8116–8123 (2008).
code. Cognit. Sci. 25, 679–693 (2001). 75. Morillon, B. et al. Neurophysiological origin of human brain asymmetry
45. Moore, B. C. J. Auditory filter shapes derived in simultaneous and forward for speech and language. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 107, 18688–18693 (2010).
masking. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 70, 1003 (1981). 76. Peelle, J. E., Gross, J. & Davis, M. H. Phase-locked responses to speech in
46. Ghitza, O. On the upper cutoff frequency of the auditory critical-band human auditory cortex are enhanced during comprehension. Cereb. Cortex
envelope detectors in the context of speech perception. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 23, 1378–1387 (2013).
110, 1628–1640 (2001). 77. Luo, H. & Poeppel, D. Phase patterns of neuronal responses reliably
47. Drullman, R., Festen, J. M. & Plomp, R. Effect of reducing slow discriminate speech in human auditory cortex. Neuron 54, 1001–1010 (2007).
temporal modulations on speech reception. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 95, 78. Morillon, B., Liégeois-Chauvel, C., Arnal, L. H., Bénar, C.-G. & Giraud, A.-L.
2670–2680 (1994). Asymmetric function of theta and gamma activity in syllable processing: an
48. Chi, T., Gao, Y., Guyton, M. C., Ru, P. & Shamma, S. Spectro-temporal intra-cortical study. Front. Psychol. 3, 248 (2012).
modulation transfer functions and speech intelligibility. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 79. Giraud, A.-L. et al. Endogenous cortical rhythms determine cerebral
106, 2719 (1999). specialization for speech perception and production. Neuron 56, 1127–1134
49. Jaeger, T. F. Categorical data analysis: away from ANOVAs (transformation (2007).
or not) and towards logit mixed models. J. Mem. Lang. 59, 434–446 (2008). 80. Giraud, A.-L. & Poeppel, D. Cortical oscillations and speech processing:
50. Lawrence, M. A. Package ‘ez’. http://github.com/mike-lawrence/ez emerging computational principles and operations. Nat. Neurosci. 15,
(R package, 2016). 511–517 (2012).
51. Prins, N. & Kingdom, F. A. A. Applying the model-comparison approach 81. Herdener, M. et al. Spatial representations of temporal and spectral sound
to test specific research hypotheses in psychophysical research using the cues in human auditory cortex. Cortex 49, 2822–2833 (2013).
Palamedes Toolbox. Front. Psychol. 9, 1250 (2018). 82. Barton, B., Venezia, J. H., Saberi, K., Hickok, G. & Brewer, A. A. Orthogonal
52. Kimura, D. Functional asymmetry of the brain in dichotic listening. Cortex 3, acoustic dimensions define auditory field maps in human cortex. Proc. Natl
163–178 (1967). Acad. Sci. USA 109, 20738–20743 (2012).
53. Shamma, S. On the role of space and time in auditory processing. Trends 83. Joanisse, M. F. Sensitivity of human auditory cortex to rapid frequency
Cognit. Sci. 5, 340–348 (2001). modulation revealed by multivariate representational similarity analysis.
54. Venezia, J. H., Hickok, G. & Richards, V. M. Auditory ‘bubbles’: efficient Front. Neurosci. 8, 306 (2014).
classification of the spectrotemporal modulations essential for speech 84. Garofolo, J. S. et al. TIMIT acoustic-phonetic continuous speech corpus.
intelligibility. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 140, 1072–1088 (2016). (Linguistic Data Consortium, 1993).
55. Houtgast, T. & Steeneken, H. J. M. A review of the MTF concept in room 85. Camacho, A. & Harris, J. G. A sawtooth waveform inspired pitch estimator
acoustics and its use for estimating speech intelligibility in auditoria. J. for speech and music. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 124, 1638–1652 (2008).
Acoust. Soc. Am. 77, 1069–1077 (1985). 86. Moore, B. C. J. Hearing (Academic, 1995).
56. Ding, N. et al. Temporal modulations in speech and music. Neurosci. 87. Griffin, D. & Jae, Lim. Signal estimation from modified short-time Fourier
Biobehav. Rev. 81, 181–187 (2017). transform. IEEE Trans. Acoust. Speech Signal Process. 32, 236–243 (1984).
57. Shannon, R. V., Zeng, F. G., Kamath, V., Wygonski, J. & Ekelid, M. Speech 88. Chi, T. & Shamma, S. NSL Matlab Toolbox (Neural Systems Lab,
recognition with primarily temporal cues. Science 270, 303–304 (1995). Maryland, 2005).
58. Gabor, D. Theory of communication. Part 1: the analysis of information. J. 89. Flinker, A. et al. Redefining the role of Broca’s area in speech. Proc. Natl
Inst. Electr. Eng. 93, 429–441 (1946). Acad. Sci. USA 112, 2871–2875 (2015).
59. Joris, P. X., Schreiner, C. E. & Ress, A. Neural processing of amplitude- 90. Oostenveld, R., Fries, P., Maris, E. & Schoffelen, J.-M. Fieldtrip: open source
modulated sounds. Physiol. Rev. 84, 541–577 (2004). software for advanced analysis of meg, eeg, and invasive electrophysiological
60. Overath, T., Zhang, Y., Sanes, D. H. & Poeppel, D. Sensitivity to temporal data. Computational Intell. Neurosci. 2011, 1–9 (2010).
modulation rate and spectral bandwidth in the human auditory system: fMRI 91. Adachi, Y., Shimogawara, M., Higuchi, M., Haruta, Y. & Ochiai, M.
evidence. J. Neurophysiol. 107, 2042–2056 (2012). Reduction of nonperiodical environmental magnetic noise in MEG
61. Zatorre, R. J. & Belin, P. Spectral and temporal processing in human auditory measurement by continuously adjusted least squares method. IEEE Trans.
cortex. Cereb. Cortex 11, 946–953 (2001). Appl. Superconductivity 11, 669–672 (2001).
NAture HuMAN BeHAviOur | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTURe HUmaN BeHavioUR Articles
92. de Cheveigné, A. & Simon, J. Z. Denoising based on time-shift PCA. J. ECoG data acquisition and setup, D. Groppe, who assisted in North Shore ECoG
Neurosci. Method 165, 297–305 (2007). data acquisition and electrode reconstruction, and H. Wang, who provided electrode
93. Dale, A. M. et al. Dynamic statistical parametric mapping: combining reconstruction at NYU.
fMRI and MEG for high-resolution imaging of cortical activity. Neuron 26,
55–67 (2000). Author contributions
94. Yang, A. I. et al. Localization of dense intracranial electrode arrays using
A.F. and D.P. designed the study and hypotheses, and wrote the manuscript. A.F.
magnetic resonance imaging. NeuroImage 63, 157–165 (2012).
constructed the stimuli and filtering techniques and collected and analysed the data.
95. Ashburner, J. A fast diffeomorphic image registration algorithm. NeuroImage
A.D.M., O.D. and W.K.D. recruited clinical patients and performed clinical care.
38, 95–113 (2007).
96. Groppe, D. M. et al. iELVis: An open source MATLAB toolbox for localizing
Competing interests
and visualizing human intracranial electrode data. J. Neurosci. Method 281,
40–48 (2017). The authors declare no competing interests.
97. Collingridge, D. S. A primer on quantitized data analysis and permutation
testing. J. Mix. Methods Res. 7, 81–97 (2012).
Additional information
Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/
Acknowledgements s41562-019-0548-z.
This work was supported by NIH F32 DC011985 and Charles H. Revson Senior Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Fellowships in Biomedical Science 15–28 to A.F., by NIH 2R01DC05660 to D.P. and
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to A.F.
by NIMH R21 MH114166-01 to A.D.M. The funders had no role in study design,
data collection and analysis, decision to publish or preparation of the manuscript. We Publisher’s note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
would like to thank I. T. Kim and N. Mei, who assisted in the setup and acquisition of published maps and institutional affiliations.
psychophysical dichotic data, B. Mahmood and M. Hofstradter, who assisted in NYU © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2019
NAture HuMAN BeHAviOur | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
1
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Corresponding author(s): Adeen Flinker
Last updated by author(s): Dec 31, 2018
Reporting Summary
Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency
in reporting. For further information on Nature Research policies, see Authors & Referees and the Editorial Policy Checklist.
Statistics
For all statistical analyses, confirm that the following items are present in the figure legend, table legend, main text, or Methods section.
n/a Confirmed
The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
A statement on whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided
Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.
A description of all covariates tested
A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
A full description of the statistical parameters including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient)
AND variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)
For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted
Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.
For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated
Our web collection on statistics for biologists contains articles on many of the points above.
Software and code
Policy information about availability of computer code
Data collection Behavioral data was collected using custom Matlab scripts based on Psychtoolbox. Concurrent neural data was collected using a
commercial Yokogawa MEG system or commercial clinical EEG systems used by the Epilepsy centers (Natus Medical Incoporated).
Data analysis All stimuli was constructed and data analyzed using custom Matlab and R scripts written by the first author. Source reconstruction of
MEG data was based on scripts from the Fieldtrip toolbox.
For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors/reviewers.
We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Research guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.
Data
Policy information about availability of data
All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable:
- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets
- A list of figures that have associated raw data
- A description of any restrictions on data availability
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.
Field-specific reporting
Please select the one below that is the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.
Life sciences Behavioural & social sciences Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences
2
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/documents/nr-reporting-summary-flat.pdf
Life sciences study design
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
Sample size Sample sizes were taken in accordance to the standard published and acceptable size in the field of research.
Data exclusions Data exclusions occurred only if the participant did not perform the task or data quality was so low it could not be analyzed (due to artifacts),
such cases are detailed in the Methods.
Replication Our findings replicated across three modalities (psychophysics, MEG, ECoG). In the case of MEG we provide two datasets replicating the main
effect of temporal correlations but not spectral correlations due to task differences. We have also replicated the main MEG experiment in a
sub-population (6 participants) with a separate MEG system providing the same results (unpublished).
Randomization There was no randomization according to group or control groups. All statistics are within subjects or across subjects but not comparing one
group to another. In all experiments each participant listened to a different random order of speech stimuli (combination of filter, speaker and
sentence). This randomization process ensured a random order of stimuli for each participant while reducing priming effects within block (e.g.
for both speaker identity as well as sentence content, a high cutoff filter never appeared before a lower cutoff filter for that stimulus). In
experiments 1-4, the order of tasks and response hand were counter balanced across participants (within experiment).
Blinding Data collection and analysis were not performed blind to the conditions of the experiments. Blinding was not relevant to the study as there
was no comparison of treatment vs. control group.
Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods
We require information from authors about some types of materials, experimental systems and methods used in many studies. Here, indicate whether each material,
system or method listed is relevant to your study. If you are not sure if a list item applies to your research, read the appropriate section before selecting a response.
Materials & experimental systems Methods
n/a Involved in the study n/a Involved in the study
Antibodies ChIP-seq
Eukaryotic cell lines Flow cytometry
Palaeontology MRI-based neuroimaging
Animals and other organisms
Human research participants
Clinical data
Human research participants
Policy information about studies involving human research participants
Population characteristics For MEG and behavioral paradigms subjects were recruited from the NYU community and characteristics represent the overall
population in the New York metropolitan area as well as New York University. Subjects with a history of neurological conditions
or any metal implants were not included in the study. For the ECoG experiment, patient characteristics represent the overall
patient cohort at NYU Langone Medical Center and North Shore University Hospital with refractory Epilepsy.
Recruitment For MEG and behavioral paradigms subjects were recruited using fliers in the University, students in the Psychology department
and previous subjects in MEG experiments at NYU. For the ECoG experiment, patients were recruited if they were undergoing
neurosurgery for refractory epilepsy for clinical purposes and volunteered to participant in research during their planned
hospital stay. In both cases there can be a self-selection bias to the healthy population at NYU and the epileptic population that
would undergo neurosurgical treatment.
Ethics oversight The study protocol was approved by the NYU Committee on Human Research for all MEG and behavioral data collection and
analysis. In a separate protocol, NYU approved the analysis of anonymized ECoG data acquired at the hospital. ECoG data
collection was approved by the NYU Langone Medical Center Committee on Human Research for NYU Langone ECoG patients.
Stereotactic and ECoG data collection was approved by the North Shore University Hospital Committee on Human Research for
North Shore University Hospital patients.
Note that full information on the approval of the study protocol must also be provided in the manuscript.