Shared striatal activity in decisions to
satisfy curiosity and hunger at the risk of
electric shocks
Article
Accepted Version
Lau, J. K. L., Ozono, H., Kuratomi, K., Komiya, A. and
Murayama, K. (2020) Shared striatal activity in decisions to
satisfy curiosity and hunger at the risk of electric shocks.
Nature Human Behaviour, 4 (5). pp. 531-543. ISSN 2397-3374
doi: 10.1038/s41562-020-0848-3 Available at
https://centaur.reading.ac.uk/89356/
It is advisable to refer to the publisher’s version if you intend to cite from the
work. See Guidance on citing .
To link to this article DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41562-020-0848-3
Publisher: Nature
All outputs in CentAUR are protected by Intellectual Property Rights law,
including copyright law. Copyright and IPR is retained by the creators or other
copyright holders. Terms and conditions for use of this material are defined in
the End User Agreement .
www.reading.ac.uk/centaur
CentAUR
Central Archive at the University of Reading
Reading’s research outputs online
Title: Shared striatal activity in decisions to satisfy curiosity and hunger at the
risk of electric shocks
Authors: Johnny King L Lau1,2*, Hiroki Ozono3, Kei Kuratomi4, Asuka Komiya5, Kou
Murayama1,2,6*
Affiliations:
1School of Psychology and Clinical Language Sciences, University of Reading, Reading, UK.
2Centre for Integrative Neuroscience and Neurodynamics, University of Reading, Reading, UK.
3Faculty of Law, Economics and Humanities, Kagoshima University, Kagoshima, Japan.
4Faculty of Psychology, Aichi Shukutoku University, Nagakute-city, Japan.
5Graduate School of Integrated Arts and Sciences, Hiroshima University, Higashi-Hiroshima
city, Japan.
6Research Institute, Kochi University of Technology, Kochi, Japan.
*Correspondence to: johnny@kinglau.info (Johnny Lau), k.murayama@reading.ac.uk (Kou
Murayama)
1
Abstract
Curiosity is often portrayed as a desirable feature of human faculty. However, curiosity
may come at a cost that sometimes puts people in a harmful situation. Here, with a set of
behavioural and neuroimaging experiments using stimuli that strongly trigger curiosity (e.g.,
magic tricks), we examined the psychological and neural mechanisms underlying the
motivational effect of curiosity. We consistently demonstrated that across different samples,
people were indeed willing to gamble, subjecting themselves to physical risks (i.e. electric
shocks) in order to satisfy their curiosity for trivial knowledge that carries no apparent
instrumental value. Also, this influence of curiosity shares common neural mechanisms with that
of extrinsic incentives (i.e. hunger for food). In particular, we showed that acceptance (compared
to rejection) of curiosity/incentive-driven gambles was accompanied by enhanced activity in the
ventral striatum (when curiosity was elicited), which extended into the dorsal striatum (when
participants made a decision).
2
Introduction
Curiosity is a fundamental part of human motivation that supports an enormous variety of
human intellectual behaviours, ranging from early learning in children to scientific discovery 1–3.
A meta-analysis indicates that intellectual curiosity predicts academic performance over and
above intelligence 4, and corroborating findings show the benefits of curiosity in enhancing long-
term consolidation of learning and memory 5,6. The critical importance of curiosity in human
intellectual behaviour is succinctly expressed in Albert Einstein’s famous quote “I have no
special talent. I am only passionately curious.” Moreover, empirical literature has suggested a
number of positive outcomes associated with curiosity over the life span 4,7–9. However, in both
historic and modern literature, the positive portrayal of curiosity is often compromised by its
inherent negative aspect: strong seductive nature 10. In Greek mythology, for example, after
losing his beloved Eurydice to the underworld, Orpheus convinced the gods to let him take her
back to the world of the living on the condition that he would not look back until they had
returned. Orpheus could not help but look back; he succumbed to curiosity and lost Eurydice.
This theme, which appears repeatedly in classic ancient anecdotes (e.g., Pandora, Psyche, Eve),
illustrates the motivational power of curiosity, which biases our decision making despite the
knowledge of consequential negative outcomes.
How does curiosity for inconsequential knowledge motivate people to make risky
decisions? Although there have been various theories on the construct and origin of curiosity in
the literature 10–12, a recent body of research has seen an emerging consensus that, like food and
other extrinsic rewards, curiosity can be understood as a reward-learning process of knowledge
acquisition or information seeking 8,13–16. According to this account, individuals are motivated to
actively seek knowledge because knowledge acquisition serves as an inherent ‘reward’ (possibly
3
due to uncertainty reduction and potential anticipatory utility17), reinforcing further information
seeking or behaviours that promote information gain. In fact, studies have repeatedly
demonstrated that both animals 18–20 and humans 6,21–23 are willing to pay small amounts to
satisfy their curiosity for knowledge about a future reward that cannot be changed. For example,
people are willing to sacrifice parts of future monetary reward in exchange for immediate
information just to learn about the outcome of a monetary lottery, even though that information
cannot be used to alter prospective lottery outcomes21.
Past work on how extrinsic incentives shape behaviour and decisions highlight the
involvement of a strong, visceral motivational feeling, known as incentive salience (‘wanting’)
24,25. Incentive salience can readily be triggered by encountering reward cues and by vivid
imagery of reward. Also, it is hypothesised to integrate the current physiological neurobiological
state and previously learned associations about the reward. For example, when you arrive hungry
to a restaurant, you may start salivating and find every item on the menu to be more appealing
than they usually are to you. The motivational urge of incentive salience may even prompt
people towards irrational, impulsive and even obsessive behaviours26,27. Previous animal
research suggested that incentive salience is mediated by the mesolimbic dopamine system as
well as the surrounding relatively large brain network including both cortical and subcortical
areas 28,29, whereas neuroimaging studies in human have identified the particular involvement of
the ventral striatum (i.e. the nucleus accumbens) and the dorsal striatum (i.e. the caudate) in the
processing of different extrinsic rewards 30–32. For example, Lawrence et al. showed that the
activation in the nucleus accumbens in response to food cues predicts participants’ consumption
of crisps when they are left alone in a room after the experiment 33.
4
Integrating these ideas and findings, we suggest that, like extrinsic incentives such as
food, the rewarding property of knowledge may evoke incentive salience, energising people
toward knowledge acquisition behaviour even if it entails significant risks 15,34. In fact, although
the neurobiological mechanisms underpinning curiosity-based decisions have been under-
examined in the literature, the investigations using brain imaging collectively suggest that the
states of curiosity about information that does not signal any future rewards modulate neural
regions in dopamine systems, including caudate nucleus, nucleus accumbens and midbrain
structures (i.e. ventral tegmental area/substantia nigra [VTA/SN])5,6,35. As discussed previously,
these areas, with the caudate nucleus and nucleus accumbens in particular, have been implicated
in incentive salience in neuroimaging studies of cognitive processing related to food stimuli30. A
recent study, using a neurocomputational approach and a monetary gamble paradigm,
demonstrated that the same patterns of activations in the striatum responding to the values of
potential rewards (i.e. the varying amount of monetary gain) can also predict subjective value of
the information (i.e. how much a person would be willing to pay for extra information), which
may be partially driven by non-instrumental, curiosity-based motives36. Taking these together, it
is possible that decisions driven by a strong urge of knowledge acquisition rely on similar
mechanisms that support motivated behaviours triggered by incentive salience of extrinsic
incentives37,38.
The current study examines whether and how people are willing to subject themselves to
physical risks to satisfy their curiosity for trivial, inconsequential knowledge, by using a
‘curiosity-based risky decision-making’ paradigm in a series of behavioural and fMRI
experiments. In the ‘curiosity condition’, participants first saw a curiosity-stimulating stimulus
(i.e. video clips of magic tricks, or text-based trivia questions), followed by a wheel of fortune
5
which visually depicted the probability of winning (versus losing) a lottery in each trial.
Participants then had to make a decision regarding whether or not they would gamble on the
lottery (risking electric shock) to have a chance of learning the solution to the trick. The
experiment also included food trials, in which participants were presented with food pictures and
decided whether to gamble (risking electric shock) to have a chance of obtaining the food. The
inclusion of the food condition allows us to directly compare the influence of curiosity and
extrinsic incentives on risk-based decisions and to examine the common and differentiated
mechanisms supporting them. We postulated that i) people are willing to subject themselves to
physical risks (i.e. electric shocks) to satisfy their curiosity for trivial, inconsequential knowledge
(i.e. magic tricks, trivia) or their hunger for food, and ii) the motivational lure of curiosity and
hunger share common neural correlates implicated in the incentive salience of food, namely the
ventral and dorsal striatum 30.
6
Results
In the decision-making task, participants viewed short video clips of magic tricks
(curiosity condition) performed by professional magicians (filmed specifically for this study; see
Supplementary Videos 1-2), followed by a wheel of fortune visually depicting the outcome
probability of winning (versus losing) a lottery (with a certain probability; between 16.7% -
83.3%; see Methods) in each trial (Fig. 1). Participants were then asked to make a decision
regarding whether they would gamble on the lottery or not. They were told that, if they accepted
to gamble and won, they might see the secret behind the magic trick after the experiment as a
reward. The experiment also included a food condition, in which participants were presented
with food pictures and were told that they might have the food as a reward after the experiment if
they accepted to gamble and won. Critically, for both types of trials, if participants gambled and
lost, they would expect to receive electric shock after the experiment. The magnitude of electric
shock was calibrated and demonstrated to participants before the experimental task. Stimulating
electrodes were attached to the participants throughout the task and the shock was expected to be
delivered at the very end. For each stimulus, participants gave a rating of how curious they were
to see the solution to the trick (curiosity rating) or how much they would like to eat the food item
(desirability rating). To maximise participants’ desire for food during the experiment, they were
required to refrain from food consumption shortly before attending the testing session.
Additional details on the task are reported in the Methods section: see ‘Procedure’.
[INSERT FIG 1]
Behavioural experiments
7
Curiosity and food desirability bias decision-making. In the initial behavioural
experiment (N = 32), generalised linear mixed-effects modelling (GLME) on all trials showed
that participants were more likely to reject the gamble as the presented outcome probability of
receiving electric shock increased [GLME: Z = -19.045, P < 0.001, Exp(β) = 0.455, β = -0.787,
95% C.I. = -0.868 – -0.706]. This indicates that electric shock worked effectively as an aversive
stimulus. Importantly, above and beyond the shock probability, stimulus rating (i.e. curiosity or
food desirability rating) positively predicted the ‘accept’ decision [GLME: Z = 20.253, P < 0.001,
Exp (β) = 2.110, β =0.747, 95% C.I. = 0.674 – 0.819]. The main effect of ‘Incentive Category’
(curiosity vs. food) on the decision did not attain the set threshold of statistical significance
[GLME: Z = 1.25, P = 0.211, Exp(β) = 1.067, β = 0.065, 95% C.I. = -0.037 – 0.167]. Also, none
of the interaction effects between the stimulus rating, presented probability, and incentive
category (including a three-way interaction) reached the set threshold of statistical significance
(all Ps > 0.05). Thus, there is no evidence the observed association between rating and
acceptance rate differ between different categories and levels of shock probability. In fact, when
we analysed curiosity trials and food trials separately, in addition to outcome probability, ratings
of curiosity and food desirability were similarly associated with higher tendency to accept the
gamble [GLME - curiosity: Z=7.236, Exp(β) = 3.185, β = 1.159, 95% C.I. = 0.845 – 1.472;
food: Z=7.493, Exp(β) = 3.145, β = 1.146, 95% C.I. = 0.846 – 1.446; Ps < 0.001 in both
conditions] (Fig. 2; also see Supplementary Table 1).
[INSERT FIG 2]
Did curiosity distort the perception of the probability of outcome? As shown in the
initial experiment, people are willing to subject themselves to potential risks to satisfy their
8
curiosity for trivial, inconsequential knowledge, corroborating our hypothesis. However, an
alternative explanation may be that curiosity simply distorts one’s perception of the probability
of risks. People tend to report higher probabilities for positive events and lower probabilities for
negative events when they are in a pleasant mood 39. It could be that when people are curious,
feel more motivated and experience positive feelings, they overestimate the probability of
winning in the lottery (or underestimate the risk). To evaluate this possibility, we carried out a
follow-up behavioural experiment. In this experiment, after seeing a curiosity-/hunger-evoking
stimulus, participants (N = 29) estimated their subjective chance of winning(/losing) in the
lottery when presented with a wheel of fortune in each trial, before also making their actual
decision to gamble or not (see Supplementary Methods for the procedures of this modified task).
First, we applied the same GLME to predict participants’ decision as an attempt to check
whether the results from the initial experiment could be replicated. In this follow-up experiment,
in addition to the presented shock probability [GLME: Z = -17.334, P < 0.001, Exp(β) = 0.251, β
= -1.381, 95% C.I. = -1.537 – -1.225], stimulus rating [GLME: Z = 19.568, P < 0.001, Exp (β) =
3.947, β = 1.373, 95% C.I. = 1.236 – 1.511] again positively predicted the decision to gamble.
There was no statistically significant main effect of ‘Incentive Category’ (curiosity vs. food) on
the decision [GLME: Z = -0.505, P = 0.613, Exp (β) = 0.958, β = -0.043, 95% C.I. = -0.208 –
0.123]. Also, none of the interaction effects between the presented probability, stimulus rating,
and incentive category (including a three-way interaction) reached the set threshold of statistical
significance (all Ps > 0.05). These results are consistent with those from the initial experiment
(see Supplementary Table 1, for separate analysis of curiosity and food conditions).
As the main objective of the follow-up experiment, we analysed the predictors of
participants' subjective estimation of the chance to win/lose with a linear mixed-effects model
9
(LME). Participant’s own estimation of win/loss probability was predicted by the presented
shock (outcome) probability that they actually viewed in each trial [LME - with all trials: t = -
27.522, β = -1.762, 95% C.I. = -1.887 – -1.637; with curiosity trials only: t = -25.519, β = -1.798,
95% C.I. = -1.936 – -1.660; with food trials only: t = -26.27, β = -1.728, 95% C.I. = -1.857 – -
1.599; Ps < 0.001 in all cases], which perhaps is not too surprising. In contrast, there was no
evidence that stimulus rating [LME - with all trials: t = 1.565, P = 0.128, β = 0.045, 95% C.I. = -
0.011 – 0.102] was a significant predictor of the participant’s subjective outcome estimation.
There was also no statistically significant interaction effect of ‘Rating’ x ‘Incentive Category’
[LME: t = -0.311, P = 0.756, β = -0.004, 95% C.I. = -0.028 – 0.021]. In fact, when investigating
each category separately, the associations of both curiosity rating for magic tricks [LME: t =
1.618, P = 0.118, β = 0.033, 95% C.I. = -0.007 – 0.072] and desirability rating for food items
[LME: t = 1.406, P = 0.17, β = 0.045, 95% C.I. = -0.018 – 0.108] with the subjective estimation
of the outcome were not statistically significant at the set threshold of statistical significance.
Comparing the fits of two linear mixed-effects models, one with a ‘stimulus rating’ term and one
without, the one without the rating term had a better fit [with all trials, Bayes Factor (BF10) =
0.00559; for magic condition only, BF10 = 0.00572; for food condition only, BF10 = 0.00661; a
BF10 value40 that is much smaller than 1 indicates very strong support for the null hypothesis
compared with the alternative hypothesis including the extra ‘rating’ term, in all cases here]. This
means one’s subjective estimation of the chance to win/lose is not likely modulated by the
curiosity for information or how desirable the food is.
Neuroimaging experiments
10
To examine the neural mechanisms underlying motivational biases on decision-making,
we conducted a pair of neuroimaging experiments using fMRI, in which separate groups of
participants performed a similar experimental task as in the initial behavioural investigation. The
two versions of the fMRI experiment were constructed to be very comparable but differed in the
materials used to induce curiosity; an attempt to optimise the generalisability of the findings. The
first version (N=31), used magic tricks as curiosity-evoking stimuli (ver1: ‘magic version’)
whereas the second version (N=30), used trivia questions (ver2: ‘trivia version’). While magic
video clips trigger strong curiosity 41, a potential weakness is that they may exert extra demands
on visual/perceptual attention and processing for participants, which could be a confound. Trivia
questions, on the other hand, have often been used in past experiments of curiosity 5,6,42,43, and
the visual input is relatively minimal. By running this pair of experiments using different stimuli,
we are in a better position to ensure our investigation reflects the impact of curiosity other than
some stimulus-specific effect, which has recently been noted as a critical issue in fMRI research
44. In addition to the curiosity condition, both versions of the experiment included food trials. We
analysed the two versions altogether in order to statistically evaluate the commonalities and
differences in neural activation patterns across different types of experimental materials.
Behaviourally, participants from the fMRI experiments (N = 61) accepted the gamble
more often when the presented shock probability decreased [GLME: Z = -30.357, P < 0.001,
Exp(β) = 0.337, β = -1.087, 95% C.I. = -1.157 – -1.017]. Also, on top of the shock probability,
participants decided to take the gamble more often when they gave a higher rating to a stimulus
in the trial (i.e. higher curiosity/food desirability) [GLME: Z = 28.572, P < 0.001, Exp (β) =
2.121, β = 0.752, 95% C.I. = 0.700 – 0.804]. Unexpectedly, the fMRI experiments showed a
statistically significant interaction between ‘Rating’ and ‘Incentive Category’ [GLME: Z = -
11
8.937, P < 0.001, Exp (β) = 0.816, β = -0.203, 95% C.I. = -0.248 – -0.159], indicating stronger
association of food desirability than curiosity with the acceptance rate in the gambles. Yet it is
worth noting that when each category was investigated separately, the link between stimulus
rating and acceptance rate in each category was still statistically significant (See Supplementary
Table 1). There was also a statistically significant ‘Rating’ x ‘Probability’ interaction effect
[GLME: Z = -2.786, P = 0.0053, Exp (β) = 0.942, β = -0.061, 95% C.I. = -0.103 – -0.018].
Separate analyses for curiosity and food conditions indicated that this interaction effect appeared
to be driven mainly by the food condition, which also exhibited an interaction effect between
‘Rating’ and ‘Probability’. Specifically, the impact of food desirability tended to be stronger at
lower rates of shock probability [GLME: Z = -3.39, P <0.001, Exp (β) = 0.905, β = -0.100, 95%
C.I. = -0.158 – -0.042]. In contrast, we found no evidence for a statistically significant
interaction in the curiosity condition (P = 0.397). Since these interaction effects are only specific
to these fMRI participants and not consistent with the previous experiments, we will not pursue
them further in the current investigation (also see Discussion for a potential interpretation). No
other interaction effects reached the set threshold of statistical significance (Ps > 0.05).
Moreover, an ‘Experiment Version’ effect was also taken into account in this GLME with data
from the fMRI participants and we found no evidence that the experiment version has a
significant effect on decisions (P = 0.662).
Our first fMRI analyses identified brain areas that are recruited at different stages of
motivated decision-making and focused on contrasting the trials in which participants accepted
the gamble with those that they chose not to (Fig 3a). Based on past studies of extrinsic reward
anticipation 32,45 and curiosity-guided behavioural change 5,6, we hypothesised that activity in the
caudate nucleus, NAcc, and VTA/SN would be modulated during the course of
12
curiosity/incentive-driven decision-making. As a number of separate region-of-interest (ROI)
masks (one for each of the 3 regions) were tested, we corrected for multiple comparisons across
them using a Bonferroni-adjusted alpha level of 0.0167 (familywise error corrected, FWE) per
ROI analysis. We focused on the brain activation during the elicitation phase (i.e. when stimuli
were presented) and decision phase (i.e. when participants made the decision) in a trial.
[INSERT FIG 3]
Enhanced activity in nucleus accumbens during elicitation of curiosity and food
desirability. Comparing all accepted trials with the rejected ones (‘Decision’ contrast) at the
elicitation phase revealed enhanced activations specifically in bilateral NAcc (P < 0.0167, for
FWE
ROI analysis) among all ROIs (Fig 3b; Supplementary Table 2). There was no statistically
significant variation in activation due to the interaction of ‘Decision’ (accept vs. reject) x
‘Experimental Version’ (magic version vs. trivia version), indicating that the type of curiosity-
triggering stimuli used tended to have comparable influences on neural responses. On the other
hand, a ‘Decision’ x ‘Incentive Category’ (curiosity vs. food) interaction effect was shown, with
greater neuronal responses for the ‘accept > reject’ contrast for food compared with the same
contrast for curiosity, in a very small cluster of voxels (k=5) in the left NAcc. (Supplementary
Table 3).
It is also interesting to observe that while rejected gambles (when compared with
accepted ones; i.e., reject > accept ‘Decision’ contrast) did not yield any enhanced responses in
the ROIs, an exploratory whole-brain analysis revealed greater activations in the insula and
dorsomedial prefrontal cortex encompassing anterior cingulate cortex (P < 0.05, for whole-
FWE
13
brain analysis) (Extended Data Fig 1; Supplementary Table 4), an area previously implicated in
value computation46,47 and decision conflict48,49.
Decision to gamble is associated with activity in the brain’s reward network (neural
activations at the decision phase). At the decision phase, a main ‘Decision’ contrast (i.e. accept
vs. reject) on our anatomical ROIs revealed that bilateral caudate nucleus, NAcc, and VTA/SN
all showed greater activities for the accepted trials in comparison with the rejected trials (P <
FWE
0.0167 for each ROI analysis; see Fig 3b). An exploratory whole-brain analysis of the same
contrast also indicated that these striatal and midbrain structures had extensive activations along
with other medial brain areas including the cingulate gyrus and medial frontal cortex, as well as
the right anterior insula, inferior frontal gyrus and lateral prefrontal cortex (although the peaks
were still located in the caudate nucleus) (Extended Data Fig 2; Supplementary Table 5). On the
other hand, no statistically significant activation was observed for the reversed contrast (i.e.
reject > accept ‘Decision’) at decision phase (Supplementary Table 6). There were also no
significant variations in brain activation within the ROIs for the interaction effect of ‘Decision’ x
‘Experimental Version’ (magic version vs. trivia version) or ‘Decision’ x ‘Incentive Category’
(curiosity vs. food) at the decision phase, at the set FWE-corrected statistical threshold. Thus,
there is no evidence that the neural responses in the reward system were subject to differential
effects due to the type of the curiosity-inducing stimulus and the category of the incentive (see
Supplementary Tables 7 & 8).
Next, we examined whether the association between the motivated decision and the
striatal activity would still exist after considering the potential effect of the shock (outcome)
probability that was shown with the lottery during the decision phase. To this aim, we performed
a parametric modulation analysis with another general linear model (GLM), in which the
14
decision to gamble and the presented probability were included as simultaneous parametric
modulators for each regressor (i.e. one regressor for curiosity condition; one for food condition)
at the decision phase (see Experimental Procedures for details). Indeed, with the presented
probability of winning/losing the lottery taken into consideration, the association was still
robustly observed in the parametric modulation analysis (despite that the cluster size of
activations in each ROI tested has shrunk). Specifically, the activations in bilateral caudate
nucleus, NAcc and VTA/SN were shown to be parametrically modulated by the decision of
accepting (versus rejecting) to gamble with the ROI approach (P < 0.0167 in all ROIs;
FWE
Extended Data Fig. 3), regardless of the incentive category. Moreover, a follow-up whole-brain
analysis again revealed extensive neural responses in striatal and midbrain structures, along with
the thalamus and right frontal cortex (Supplementary Table 9).
Striatal activities mediated the relationship between curiosity/food desirability and the
gamble decision. Our behavioural data indicated that the decision to accept/reject a gamble was
predicted by the rating of curiosity and food desirability. fMRI results also showed that the
decision to accept/reject a gamble was associated with the changes in neural responses in the
striatum. Given the literature that the ventral and the dorsal parts of the striatum have been
related to different stages of decision-making (the ventral striatum for value computation and the
dorsal striatum for action selection 50–52; also elucidated in Discussion in more detail), we
evaluated whether the link between rating and the decision was mediated by the activities of the
ventral striatum (NAcc) at the elicitation phase and dorsal striatum (caudate nucleus) during
decision-making on a trial-by-trial basis. The mediation model was tested using a multilevel
structural equation model (with trials being nested within participants), and took into account the
incentive category and presented shock probability in each trial as well as the experiment version.
15
This multilevel mediation analysis confirmed that stimulus rating predicted choice through the
phase-specific activities of nucleus accumbens (at elicitation; Rating  NAcc: Z = 3.38, P =
0.001, β = 0.08, 95% C.I. = 0.03 – 0.12) and caudate nucleus (at decision-making) (NAcc at
elicitation  Caudate at decision: Z = 4, P < 0.001, β = 0.03, 95% C.I. = 0.02 – 0.05; Caudate at
decision  accept/reject response: Z = 3.5, P < 0.001, β = 0.03, 95% C.I. = 0.01 – 0.04) (see
also Fig 4; Supplementary Table 10). The three-path indirect effect (Rating  NAcc at
elicitation  Caudate at decision  accept/reject decision response) was statistically significant
(P = 0.044). These results support the idea that curiosity and food desirability induced by the
stimuli prompted participants to make risky decisions through modulating phase-specific striatal
activities.
[INSERT FIG 4]
Exploratory functional connectivity analysis
To further explore the modulation of functional interaction between brain regions during
decision-making, we conducted a functional connectivity analysis based on a beta-series
correlation approach using the caudate nucleus as the seed. This approach compared correlations
of trial-by-trial beta series variability (i.e. variability of series of parameter estimates) between
the seed and the rest of the brain in different conditions. We corrected for multiple comparisons
across the results using separate left and right caudate as the seed with a Bonferroni-adjusted
alpha level of 0.025 per analysis. Using the left caudate nucleus as a seed, this exploratory
analysis found weaker connectivity with the left sensorimotor area near precentral gyrus and
central sulcus during the decision phase, suggesting a decoupling effect (i.e. weaker functional
correlation), when accepting the gamble in comparison with rejecting it. Taking the right caudate
16
nucleus as a seed, we again found weaker connectivity with the left sensorimotor area (a cluster
near central sulcus and postcentral gyrus) in accepted (relative to rejected) trials (P < 0.025 in
FWE
both analyses; Fig. 5, Supplementary Table 11). The sensorimotor cortex has been associated
with virtual feeling and anticipation of pain in action observation 53–55. Although speculative, our
results might suggest that, when a participant accepted the risk of receiving electric shock, there
could be a reduced association between the motivation of satisfying their desire and expected
fear of physical shock in the brain. There was no significant variation in brain connectivity
shown with the reversed contrast (reject < accept ‘Decision’) and also no significant interaction
effects (‘Decision’ x ‘Experiment Version’ or ‘Decision’ x ‘Incentive Category’) at the set FWE-
corrected statistical threshold.
[INSERT FIG 5]
17
Discussion
Using a curiosity-based decision-making paradigm, the current study aimed to examine
whether and how the motivational influence of curiosity overcomes the potential fear of
significant risks. Consistent with our speculations, the results showed that i) both curiosity for
inconsequential knowledge (magic tricks, trivia questions) and hunger for food indeed prompted
participants to subject themselves to physical risks (i.e. electric shocks), and ii) this motivated
decision-making was supported by the striatal reward areas. Specifically, the activation in the
ventral striatum in response to curiosity-evoking stimuli predicted the decision to accept the
risky option through the activation in the dorsal striatum during the decision phase. These results
are consistent with the notion that incentive salience plays a role in impulsive behaviours caused
by curiosity in a similar manner as it does with extrinsic incentives (e.g., food).
This study extends on the existing neuroscientific literature of curiosity56, which
primarily focuses on its influence on learning and memory enhancement 5,6,42, and our findings
provide evidence that corresponds with the idea of a potential role for incentive salience in
curiosity-driven risky decision. The influence of curiosity for seemingly useless information in
the decision-making process has been recognised in the literature 57. Several studies have shown
how humans and nonhuman primates have a strong preference for advance information-seeking
17,18,22,58,59. That is, if provided with the possibility of receiving advance information about an
upcoming reward (e.g. the reward value), individuals have a strong bias to opt to reveal the
advance information even if the option incurs a cost (e.g. they have to sacrifice parts of the
reward) and also revealing the information in advance itself would not alter the outcome of the
reward. Moreover, the motivational lure of curiosity has been demonstrated in recent studies on
‘morbid-curiosity’, where people actively seek negative stimuli (e.g., negative pictures, sounds)
18
in order to satisfy their curiosity for experiencing these uncertain but negative stimuli themselves
35,60,61 (although this particular phenomenon may be explained by other motives such as boredom
avoidance). The mechanisms underlying curiosity-driven risky decision have been a matter of
debate. One of the predominant (but controversial) explanations is that curiosity arouses an
aversive state, and it is this aversive state that urges people to acquire information to satisfy their
curiosity 10,11. However, there has been little empirical evidence that directly supports the
assumption that curiosity involves a negative aversive state 12 (bar a few exceptions 62). Although
we did not assess the emotional valence of participants’ feelings of curiosity and therefore cannot
directly refute this hypothesis, our findings lend greater support to the incentive salience
hypothesis of curiosity, which addresses the strong motivational power of curiosity without
making such a restrictive assumption of the aversive nature of curiosity. According to this view,
expected acquisition of knowledge, like expected acquisition of food, not only involves the
computation of potential expected value of the information, but (irrespective of the expected
value of the information ) also triggers a strong motivational urge (‘wanting’) that can even
overcome the prospective risk of negative consequences to initiate information-seeking
behaviour. In other words, underlying the impulsive information seeking behaviour is an active
‘approach’ form of motivation. Another merit of incentive salience hypothesis is that it can be
reasonably incorporated into reinforcement learning models of decision-making 26,63, providing a
more parsimonious and integrative view of the function of curiosity.
Previous fMRI studies of epistemic curiosity using curiosity-inducing materials like trivia
questions have reported that the activity of the striatum5,6, as well as other areas of the
dopaminergic reward network5, is enhanced during high states of curiosity when an outcome (i.e.
the answer to a trivia question) is anticipated. In addition to the striatal activity during the
19
anticipatory period, one study also found increased activations in the striatum during the “relief
of perceptual curiosity” – that is, when a previously blurred image was uncovered and satisfied
participants’ curiosity56. Our study goes beyond these findings by demonstrating that the striatal
responses during anticipatory periods predict actual, motivated choice behaviour (i.e. accepting
vs rejecting gambles that entail prospective physical risk). In our study, curiosity for solutions (to
magic tricks or trivia questions) is not yet ‘relieved’ in either elicitation or decision phases, and it
is reasonable to assume that participants anticipate more to see the solutions in the gambles they
accepted than those they rejected, in which they would not anticipate to see the solutions.
Consistent with our results, a recent study showed that active choice to reveal uncertain, negative
pictures (potentially out of curiosity) is associated with stronger neuronal responses in the striatal
areas compared to passive choice of the same pictures35. Altogether, the research on the
relationship between dopaminergic activity and curiosity states or curiosity-driven behaviours
corresponds with prominent curiosity theories that describe curiosity as a motivational state that
stimulates active exploration and information seeking10,14,64.
Another important finding from our experiments is that curiosity-based decision-making
was supported by the different patterns of striatal activation during the elicitation phase (i.e. the
ventral striatum) and the decision phase (i.e. broader parts of the striatum peaked at the dorsal
striatum); our mediation analysis suggested that the ventral striatum and the dorsal striatum
sequentially mediate the relationship between participants’ subjective motivation (i.e. curiosity
and hunger for foods) and risky decision-making. These findings dovetail with the notion that the
ventral striatum computes the value of the stimulus (‘critic’) while the dorsal striatum plays a
role in selecting an action/response (‘actor’) 50. Several empirical studies provided supportive
evidence for the idea but were all limited to extrinsic incentives 51,52,65. Our findings suggest that
20
the neural computation of curiosity-based decision-making can possibly be understood within the
actor-critic model of reinforcement learning. In our experiment, the value computation process
was potentially initiated when the curiosity-evoking materials were presented (in the elicitation
phase) and persevered through the decision phase, during which additional information provided
(i.e. outcome probability presented with the wheel of fortune that might affect overall
anticipatory value) was incorporated in the overall valuation process; corresponding to this,
ventral striatum continued to be recruited throughout these processes. In the meantime, response
selection process (whether to approach or avoid information-seeking), potentially supported by
the dorsal striatal structures, began in the decision phase. Like many other functional
connectivity studies, however, our mediation model is correlational (although there is a temporal
separation between the elicitation phase and the decision phase). In addition to this, even within
the actor-critic framework, there may be further functional subdivisions of the heterogenous
structures of caudate and ventral striatum66. Further research with more fine-grained experiments
are needed to allow for examination of the potentially dissociable causal roles of various parts of
the striatum in curiosity-based decision-making.
In our exploratory analyses, there are some interesting observations that have not been
thoroughly discussed in the literature. For example, despite being speculatively only, the
decoupling of the dorsal striatum and sensorimotor areas might suggest a neural pathway through
which the motivational force of curiosity modulates actual behaviour. The whole-brain fMRI
analyses suggested several brain areas related to curiosity-based decision-making that are outside
of the dopaminergic system, including the anterior cingulate cortex, lateral prefrontal cortex, and
anterior insula. These brain areas have also been reported in previous literature on curiosity
5,6,35,42,56,67 (as well as the studies of intrinsically-motivated behaviour in general 68). For example,
21
modulated activation in the anterior cingulate cortex and lateral prefrontal cortices has been
observed in other whole-brain analyses, elicited by high- compared with low-curiosity trivia
questions 5,42. Enhanced anterior cingulate and anterior insula activity has also been shown by
comparing high with low perceptual uncertainty about an upcoming scene image 56, as well as
when participants actively choose to reveal negatively valenced information compared with
having the information passively assigned to them 35. The observed association of curiosity with
anterior cingulate cortex and anterior insula, regions sensitive to aversive conditions, may imply
an aversive state in curiosity in hindsight. But these regions respond to many other things too,
such as surprise (prediction errors 69,70) and information update 67. These activations may be
better understood in terms of a recently proposed framework “Prediction-Appraisal-Curiosity-
Exploration” (PACE)16 by Gruber and colleagues. This framework suggests that, in the context
of curiosity processing, the anterior cingulate cortex serves a role in supporting information-
based prediction errors (i.e. information gaps). An information gap is triggered when an event
challenges one’s expectations about his/her knowledge on a particular topic. According to PACE
framework, when an information gap is recognised, it triggers an appraisal process that is
potentially supported by the lateral prefrontal cortex, which then determines one’s actions (e.g.
exploration) along with the agent’s subjective experience and the underlying neural mechanism
(e.g. curiosity-related dopaminergic processes). In fact, some behavioural studies have
highlighted the importance of appraisal processes suggesting that curiosity relies on the appraisal
of one’s ability and resources to resolve the challenges raised by the recognition of an
information gap 71–73. It is worth adding that theories of cognitive control also postulate that
anterior cingulate cortex-mediated conflict signals stimulate the lateral prefrontal cortex to direct
actions to resolve the conflict 74,75. In a dilemma like the one in our experiments that involves
22
prospective physical risk, the appraisal process may also evaluate whether the reward
(knowledge acquisition) is worth the cost (risk of shock). If the appraisal determines the
information is worth the pursuit, it likely stimulates the exploratory behaviour and information
seeking by coupling with the signals from the dopaminergic systems. In keeping with this view,
curiosity can be considered as a part of broader autonomous self-regulatory functioning 15, which
involves the coordination of wide range of brain areas beyond the reward network. For future
studies, it would be important to explicitly test and confirm how the different proposed
components functionally interact with each other in support of curiosity-based decision.
So far, the existing body of neuroscientific research on curiosity, when interpreting the
mechanism of curiosity-driven influence, often attempts to relate to the evidence accumulated on
extrinsic incentives, but none of these studies actually compare them directly. In our study, an
interesting observation is that we found very few differences overall in brain activation between
different types of motivation incentives (i.e. food and curiosity), as far as the decision-making
process is concerned (i.e. when comparing accepted with rejected gambles). Consistently, despite
the use of different types of materials (i.e. magic trick and trivia questions) to evoke curiosity
(with an aim to minimise any stimulus-specific effects), we observed more similarities than
differences across the two fMRI experiments. These findings provide strong evidence for the
notion that, regardless of the types of incentives, the decision-making process can be portrayed
with a common reward-learning framework13,16,76. Note that we in fact observed a few
differences between the conditions. Food stimuli seemed to have stronger behavioural impacts
than curiosity-evoking stimuli in the fMRI experiments (but not in the two behavioural
experiments), and this was also reflected in the enhanced activation in a small cluster of voxels
in the ventral striatum (NAcc) during the elicitation phase in the food condition than in the
23
curiosity condition. Also, when participants accepted a gamble (vs. rejected it), the magic trick
version of the experiment seemed to induce stronger activation in a few voxels in the VTA and
SN during the decision phase than the trivia question version; this result suggests a potentially
stronger curiosity effect of magic tricks in comparison to trivia questions. However, such
differences are all concerned with the magnitude of the motivational effect which is likely to
reflect diverse factors irrelevant to how the decision has been made. For example, participants in
the fMRI experiments had a prolonged session before the main task actually took place in
comparison to those in the two behavioural experiments, due to extra time taken for preparation
and mandatory paperwork to undergo an fMRI scan. It is possible that this delay bolstered the
hunger of participants (who already had a fasting period before coming to the study), causing
stronger effects of hunger both at the behavioural and neural levels. Importantly, however, the
incentive salience hypothesis can easily explain the difference in the magnitude of the effects (i.e.
food induced stronger incentive salience due to increased hunger) without supposing
qualitatively different mechanisms.
Our current findings provide some new insights into the neurocognitive mechanism of
how curiosity motivates risky behaviour; however, they should be interpreted with caution. For
example, striatal activation has also been implicated in functions other than simple reward
processing and incentive salience 77,78, thus it is still possible that the observed activation may
reflect other decision-making mechanisms than incentive salience. Future studies are needed to
examine the neurobiological mechanisms more comprehensively, for example through the use of
different methodologies and experimental paradigms such as computational modelling and
pharmacological intervention.
24
Methods
Participants
The study was approved by the research ethics committees of the University of Reading,
UK (ethics approval number: UREC16/03 & UREC 16/36). Participants were recruited via
mailing lists and a research participation pool (managed through SONA Systems) at the
University. Participants provided informed consent, completed and passed a health and safety
screening on the eligibility of receiving electric stimulation to confirm that i) they did not have a
cardiac pacemaker (or any other devices that can be affected by electric stimulation); ii) they
were free from neurophysiological symptoms or conditions including peripheral vascular
disease, vasculitis cryoglobulinemia, lupus, tingling or numbness in hands and/or feet. To
maximise participants’ desire for food during the experiment, they were required not to eat or
drink anything (apart from water) within 2 hours prior to the testing session.
Depending on personal preference, participants were compensated either with course
credits at a fixed rate of 1 unit per hour or cash payments for their participation. For behavioural
experiments, a fixed rate of £7 per hour was given, while for fMRI experiments the
compensation for participation was fixed at £10 per hour. In addition, participants were informed
that they may receive extra rewards (i.e. food and solutions to magic tricks or trivia questions)
according to their task performance in the experiment. Each participant took part in only one
version of the experiment.
Initial behavioural experiment: Initially, seventeen healthy individuals were recruited; an
additional fifteen participants were included later in order to achieve more reliable estimates in
data modelling. A final sample of 32 participants (8 males) were 21.90 years old (sd= ±2.66) on
average. When analysing these data, we recognise the need to control for the potential inflation
25
of Type-1 error rate resulting from the additional interim analysis performed (see Methods:
Behavioural analyses below).
Follow-up behavioural experiment (on subjective outcome estimation): Twenty-nine
healthy individuals (7 males) with a mean age of 20.17 years (sd=±3.96) participated in this
experiment.
fMRI experiments: The first version (magic version) of the experiment included thirty-
two individuals. One of them accepted every single gamble (100% acceptance on all trials) in
the decision-making task and was thus excluded prior to data analysis. In the second version
(trivia version), thirty-two participants were also recruited. One of them accepted every single
gamble (100% acceptance on all trials) and another participant had pronounced head movements
during MRI scan (> 3mm displacement in a motion direction, see Supplementary Methods: fMRI
preprocessing for further details). Both were excluded prior to data analysis. The final sample
from both versions comprised a total of 61 participants (11 males) with a mean age of 19.92
years (sd= ± 2.11) and were all right-handed.
For further explanation of the decisions regarding our sample size, see Statement on
Statistics and Reproducibility below.
Materials
Food images: All pictures were colour photographs selected from different sources on the
Internet. They had a resolution of at least 512 x 384 pixels and were edited so that the single food
item was presented in the centre against a white background using GNU Image Manipulation
Program (GIMP) 2, a free open-source graphics editor. A selection of food was chosen based on
the following criteria: first, the items would be familiar to participants to avoid hesitation due to
26
uncertainty during decision-making; second, there was a wide variety of items including
fruits/vegetables, sweets, snacks and savoury bites (e.g. grapes, salad, chocolate, nuts, sausage
roll, etc.), which might accommodate different individual preferences and tastes for food and
elicit different levels of desirability in participants.
Magic trick videos: Magic tricks, performed by three professional magicians including a
champion of an international magic competition, were recorded in a TV studio with a
professional cameraman using high resolution video cameras. All videos were then edited using
Adobe® Premiere Pro CC® (2015) software to a similar monotonic (dark) background, size (720
x 404 pixels) and viewing focus. The videos were muted (and subtitles were added in a few
videos, when needed). The face of the magician was hidden to avoid potential distraction due to
appearance and any facial expressions (see Supplementary videos 1-2; refer also to the preprint79
from Ozono et al. for more information about this set of magic trick videos). Out of the pool of
166 video clips, we selected magic tricks to be used in the current study by ensuring that they (1)
included a range of different features (such as the use of cards, sleight of hands, optical illusions)
and (2) likely elicited curiosity to different extents (based on curiosity ratings obtained in a
different pilot study). Our initial behavioural experiment included 45 food items and 45 magic
trick videos. These videos ranged between 8 – 46 s in length (mean=22.22 s; median=20 s). Due
to time constraints (an increase in duration of each trial with an extra event), the follow-up
‘subjective outcome probability estimation’ experiment used only a subset of 36 food items and
36 magic tricks from the initial experiment (length of the videos: range= 8-46 s; mean=20.61 s;
median=18.5 s). The magic version of the fMRI experiment used the same subset of stimuli as
the follow-up experiment.
27
Trivia questions: Sixty trivia questions were selected from a publicly-available 244-item
database 80 (http://koumurayama.com/resources.php). The selected questions were not obviously
culture or age specific. Also, for all questions, the answers were likely to be unknown to the
majority of participants. The selection of items corresponded to different trivia categories that
might elicit curiosity among individuals to different extents, including art/music,
history/geography, movies/TV, nature/animals, science, space, sports, food, as well as other
miscellaneous facts. To ensure within-person variability in curiosity evoked across the
experiment, half of the chosen questions were picked among those with high mean curiosity
scores in the database and the other half among those with low mean scores (rated by a sample of
1498 respondents from a separate online study; for more information, refer to 80). The trivia
version of the fMRI experiment used 60 trivia questions, as well as 60 food items. On average,
the chosen questions contained 10 (ranging between 6-16) words.
Experimental Procedure
Curiosity-driven Decision-Making Task
The main task of the study followed similar procedures (although there were slight
modifications for the follow-up behavioural and fMRI experiments, which are detailed in
Supplementary Methods). In brief, each trial started with a central fixation cross and then a brief
letter cue (‘M’ signified ‘magic trick’, or ‘T’ for ‘trivia question’ in the ‘trivia version’ fMRI
experiment; ‘F’ signified ‘food’) to prepare participants for the kind of stimulus they were about
to see. This was followed by the stimulus, which was either a video of a magic trick (or a trivia
question in the ‘trivia version’ fMRI experiment) in the curiosity condition or an image of a food
item. Participants then gave a rating to indicate their level of curiosity about the magic trick (i.e.
28
how curious they were to see the solution to the trick) or level of desirability of the food (i.e.
how much they would like to eat the food), on a 7-point scale (1=not at all, 7=very much). In
curiosity trials, they also had to report how confident they were that they knew the solution to a
magic trick, using also a 7-point scale (1=not at all, 7=very much). However, because rated
confidence was not associated with a participant’s decision and the inclusion of this measure did
not change any main results, to make straightforward comparisons between curiosity and food
trials, it was not included in the reported analysis here. After rating the stimulus, participants
were presented with a wheel of fortune (WoF) representing a lottery which visualised the
probability of them winning (the chance of getting the reward) versus losing (the chance of
receiving electric shock) in that trial, and were asked to decide whether to gamble or not.
Participants were instructed that if they accepted the gamble and won, they would receive a
token that might allow them to see the secret behind the magic trick/get the food item after the
experiment. If they gambled and lost, they would get a token that might increase the duration of
shock they were to experience at the end of the experiment. Participants could also opt to reject
the gamble. At the end of each trial, the outcome of the lottery was presented. Participants were
informed that the final amounts of rewards and shock to be delivered would be probabilistic as
determined by a mathematical algorithm, but with more tokens collected, the likelihood of
getting more solutions, food, and shock would be augmented. Participants had an understanding
that, as a general rule, the more ‘win’ tokens they collected, the more likely they would get to see
more solutions to the tricks and obtain more food items (i.e. the rewards). Similarly, the more
‘loss’ tokens they got, the more likely they would receive more electric shock.
There were 5 versions of WoF, each displaying a different combination of the
probabilities of winning and losing a gamble: i) 16.7% (1/6) win vs. 83.3% (5/6) loss; ii) 33.3%
29
(2/6) win vs. 66.7% (4/6) loss; iii) 50% (3/6) win vs. 50% (3/6) loss; iv) 66.7% (4/6) win vs.
33.3% (2/6) loss; v) 83.3% (5/6) win vs. 16.7% (1/6) loss. In the experiments, participants were
never shown the actual percentages but the relative win-to-loss contrast of probabilities was
illustrated visually by the relative sizes of the constituent slices on the WoF (Fig. 1). To control
for the number of ‘success’ and ‘loss’ experiences, unbeknownst to the participants, there was an
equal chance of winning or losing in the lottery across all trials.
The curiosity and food trials were mixed and shown in a random order to the participants.
The task was programmed and presented using PsychoPy 81.
Program on the day of the testing session
Participants were asked not to consume any food and drinks (apart from water) within at
least 2 hours before attending their testing session, so as to maximise their desire for food during
the experiment. This was confirmed with the participants at the beginning of the study, including
asking them to indicate when they last ate and had their last meal. Following standard procedures
of informed consent and completing corresponding health and safety screening, participants
underwent calibration for electric stimulation to identify a maximum (uncomfortable yet non-
painful) threshold of electric shock they can endure (see Supplementary Methods for details).
Participants did not receive electric shock during the experiment although stimulating electrodes
were continuously attached to them. As informed by a pilot study, expectation of electric shock
would have more sustained effects on fear perception than receiving actual electric shock
multiple times. After the calibration procedures, participants were then given the instructions on
the decision-making task (also presented via PsychoPy). There was a practice task that used a
different set of stimuli (3 curiosity, 3 food) prior to the main task.
30
At the end of the experiment, participants were asked in a questionnaire the extent to
which they expected to receive electric shock. In this post-experiment questionnaire, the majority
of participants across the follow-up behavioural and fMRI experiments reported prospectively
that they expected to receive the electric shock during the experiment - 89% of them gave a
rating of 3 or above out of 5 (mean=3.67, mode=4), representing their belief that the shock
would have happened (we do not have this information from the initial behavioural study).
Wherever relevant, in our analysis this shock expectation rating was included as a covariate
variable. After completing the questionnaire, rewards (i.e. solutions to some magic tricks and
food items) were delivered. Participants did not actually receive any electric shock. They were
told that as determined by a probabilistic equation programmed in the task, they were assigned
with zero or negligible shock at the end.
fMRI acquisition
For participants in the fMRI experiments, whole-brain functional and anatomical images
were acquired in a single one-hour scanning session using a 3.0 Tesla Siemens MAGNETOM
scanner with a 32-channel Head Matrix coil at the Centre for Integrative Neuroscience and
Neurodynamics (CINN), University of Reading.
Magic version fMRI experiment
Functional images were acquired using a T2*-weighted gradient-echo echo planar
imaging (EPI) pulse sequence with 37 axial slices (in-plane resolution of 3 x 3 x 3mm, interslice
gap: 0.75mm), interleaved from bottom to top (echo time (TE): 30 ms; repetition time (TR):
2000 ms; flip angle: 90˚; field of view (FOV): 1344 x 1344 mm2; in-plane matrix: 64 x 64). A
31
high-resolution T1-weighted three-dimensional anatomical image was also collected, using an
MPRAGE-gradient sequence with 176 x 1mm slices (in-plane resolution of 1 x 1 x 1 mm; TE:
2.52 ms; TR: 2020 ms; Inversion Time (TI):1100 ms; FOV: 250 x 250; flip angle: 9°), enabling
optimal localisation of the functional effects.
Trivia version fMRI experiment
Functional images were acquired using the same sequence and parameters as in fMRI
experiment 1. A high-resolution T1-weighted three-dimensional anatomical image was collected
using an MPRAGE-gradient sequence with 192 x 1 mm slices (in-plane resolution of 1 x 1 x 1
mm; TE: 2.29 ms; TR: 2300 ms; TI:900 ms; FOV: 240 x 240; flip angle: 8°).
fMRI analysis
Preprocessing and data analyses of the imaging data were performed using the SPM12
software (www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/~spm). The preprocessing procedures included spatial
realignment of the EPI volumes, co-registration with the structural image, segmentation, group-
wise normalisation using DARTEL, and smoothing (see Supplementary Methods for more
details).
Region-of-Interest (ROI) Mask
Based on past findings, the striatal reward network is modulated by motivational states
and plays an important role in influencing motivation-driven behaviour 5,6,82,83. We examined
bilateral striatal structures including caudate nucleus and NAcc, as well as VTA/SN, and
performed in these anatomical masks the small volume correction 84, implemented in SPM. The
32
masks were anatomically defined using a high-resolution probabilistic atlas of human subcortical
brain nuclei by Pauli and colleagues 85, and only the voxels that were part of the brain areas of
interest with a probability of at least 15% were included in the ROIs. Our ROI masks included
565 voxels (3.7 resels) for caudate nucleus, 53 voxels (0.3 resels) for NAcc, and 66 voxels (0.3
resels) for VTA/SN. Results were yielded with a height-defining threshold at voxel-level P <
0.001 and a cluster extent: k ≥ 5. Also, to control for the risk of type I error due to multiple
comparisons using several anatomical masks, we focused on results that only survived an
adjusted familywise error-corrected significance threshold of P < 0.0167 at cluster level (i.e. 0.05
over 3 comparisons).
As an exploratory attempt to examine any other brain regions outside of the reward
system that are related to motivation-driven decisions, in addition to the ROI approach, we also
analysed the fMRI data with a whole-brain approach. Again, results were obtained using a
height-defining threshold at voxel-level P < 0.001, and we focused only on results that survived
a familywise error-corrected significance threshold of P < 0.05 at cluster level.
GLM - Activation predicting motivated decision-making
One of the aims of the current study was to test whether curiosity about knowledge and
desire for food influenced a participant’s decision in a similar manner via the reward system and
also whether there were similarities and differences in effects depending on the type of stimuli
presented. To this aim, we implemented a general linear model (GLM 1) for each subject that
regressed brain activation depending on the dichotomous decision in the lottery – whether an
individual accepted or rejected it – in each incentive category. Specifically, four separate
regressors were specified for the accepted and rejected trials in curiosity and food categories (i.e.
33
4 conditions), at the onset of the decision phase of each trial (i.e. when a wheel of fortune
appeared and the participant had to make a choice). To account for the brain activation related to
the elicitation of curiosity and food desirability, another 4 regressors were specified to model the
stimulus presentation onset (for magic trick trials specifically, this was time-locked to the
moment of subjective surprise defined by the group; see Supplementary Methods for details) of
the accepted and rejected trials in the two categories. Moreover, reaction time of the decision
response was added for parametric modulation in the four ‘decision phase’ regressors and head
motion parameters were included as regressors of no interest. To test for group-level effects, beta
images for the four conditions from each subject in the fMRI experiments were entered as input
data for second-level analysis. Using a flexible factorial design in the second-level models
(separately for the elicitation phase and the decision phase), we specified the factors of
‘Decision’ (accept vs. reject), ‘Incentive Category’ (food vs. curiosity) and ‘Experimental
Version’ (magic vs. trivia), and included each subject’s gender and shock expectation rating (see
above) as covariates of no interest. Our main focus was the main effect of ‘Decision’ (i.e.
accepted vs. rejected trials) to examine if curiosity and food influenced decision-making in a
similar way via the reward system. We also examined the interaction effects to probe any
potential variations in neural activity specific to the type of materials used (i.e. stimuli of
different incentive categories or different curiosity-triggering materials).
To run a multilevel mediation analysis (explained below), we also created a different
linear model (GLM 2) in which each trial was modelled as a separate regressor. These models
(implemented separately for the elicitation phase and the decision phase) enabled us to estimate a
separate statistical map for each trial (i.e. single-trial activation patterns). We were then able to
extract parameter estimates (beta values associated with ‘brain activations’) for each trial in these
34
maps as inputs for the mediation analysis. As was the case in GLM 1, head motion parameters
were included as regressors of no interest.
Parametric modulation analysis - Accounting for the presented outcome probability in
evaluating the relationship between decision and brain activation
To account for the effect of the presented probability of winning/losing on decisions, we
implemented a further linear model (GLM 3) and performed parametric modulation analysis.
This time, in first-level design, two regressors were specified to model the onsets of the decision
phase of trials for the two incentive categories (curiosity, food). To each regressor, the
participant’s decision in the lottery was added as a parametric modulator (PM) (i.e. ‘accept’
choice was coded as +1; ‘reject’ choice as -1); the corresponding outcome probability presented
in each trial was also centred and added as another PM (i.e. 83.3% shock probability was coded
as -2; 66.7% as -1; 50% as 0; 33.3% as 1; and 16.7% as 2). In addition, we included reaction
time as another PM. Importantly, these parametric modulators were not orthogonalized, meaning
that no priority was given specifically to the first PM (or a particular PM) over other PMs in
explaining the variance in neural response (see the method paper by Mumford and colleagues 86).
The onsets of the elicitation phase (stimulus presentation) for the two incentive categories were
specified as separate regressors, along with the head motion parameters as regressors of no
interest. Our main focus of interest here was to examine whether the ‘accept/reject’ decision (i.e.
the ‘Decision’ PM) still parametrically modulated activations in the pre-defined ROIs even after
taking the presented outcome probability of into account.
Functional Connectivity Analysis
35
Functional connectivity was examined with the beta series correlation method 87
implemented in BASCO toolbox 88. This method allowed us to use trial-by-trial variability to
characterise dynamic inter-regional interactions. We specifically tried to explore the functional
interaction between brain regions during decision-making and used the left and right caudate
nuclei as the ROIs in this connectivity analysis (as the peaked activations at the decision phase
were shown within the caudate in the main fMRI analysis; see Results). The anatomical masks
used here were defined similarly as in the ROI approach of the main fMRI analysis above. Left
and right caudate was analysed separately because brain connectivity might be strongly
constrained by laterality 89,90. We corrected for multiple comparisons across the results using
separate left and right caudate seeds with a Bonferroni-adjusted (FWE-corrected) alpha level of
0.025 per analysis.
At the first level of the analysis, a new GLM was constructed (implemented in BASCO),
in which BOLD response time-locked to the onset of the decision phase of each trial was
modelled individually by a separate regressor using a canonical haemodynamic response
function. This resulted in different parameter estimates for each trial for each participant. The six
motion parameters for each run were also included in this GLM. Next, seed-based correlations
were computed voxel-wise for each participant and for each of the experimental conditions of
interest. This procedure generated an individual’s correlation map between each seed region’s
beta series and the beta series of all other voxels in the brain separately for each condition of
interest, which was normalised using Fisher’s r-to-z transformation. At the second level, the set
of correlation maps from each participant was subjected to random-effects analysis to identify
voxels that showed changes in functional connectivity with the seed (based on trial-by-trial
variability in parameter estimates) across different conditions at the group level. Specifically, we
36
used a flexible factorial design (implemented in SPM) and specified factors of ‘Decision’ as well
as ‘Incentive Category’ and ‘Experiment Version’. We also included the participant’s gender and
his/her shock expectation rating as covariates of no interest. Again, our main focus was the main
effect of ‘Decision’ (i.e. accepted vs. rejected trials), but we also examined the interaction effects
to probe any potential variations in functional connectivity that may be specific to the type of
materials used (i.e. stimuli of different incentive categories or different curiosity-triggering
materials).
Behavioural analysis
Linear mixed-effects modelling
To examine the main question of whether curiosity and food desirability influence
decisions on a trial-by-trial basis at the behavioural level, we performed a generalised linear
mixed-effects modelling (GLME) analysis. In the ‘full’ model, a participant’s decision in the
lottery (i.e. accept or reject) was specified as the dichotomous outcome, in a logistic link
function. Stimulus rating (group-mean centred), the presented shock probability, and the
category of incentive (curiosity vs. food) as well as their interaction terms (including the three-
way interaction), were entered as predictors of the decision. To account for the nested structure
of the data, we specified random intercepts and slopes of participants.
Mixed-effects model with multiple random slopes is prone to convergence errors given
the complexity of the model 91. We first modelled all the possible random slopes and then
dropped one random slope each time until model convergence (i.e. error-free). The results
reported here were based on the models acquired with this strategy. Importantly, we also carried
out a sensitivity check to make sure that the results were not biased by omitting specific random
37
slopes 92. The sensitivity analysis also check for the random effects of stimulus as this effect
could potentially inflate Type-1 error rates 93. All the reported results were demonstrated to be
very robust to the specification of random effects.
We analysed behavioural data from the initial experiment, the follow-up experiment and
the fMRI experiments. In the GLME for the fMRI experiments, we added the experiment version
(ver 1: magic vs. ver 2: trivia) as an extra fixed-effect term. Note that this ‘experiment version’
term was not a significant predictor, indicating no evidence for differences in participants’
performance (in terms of acceptance rate) between different versions of the experiment. To
facilitate the understanding of the results further, Supplementary Table 1 present GLME results
separately for curiosity and food conditions.
As noted earlier, for the initial behavioural experiment we carried out additional data
collection in order to attain more reliable parameter estimates. We recognise this procedure
would result in repeated analyses (as data accumulation continued), thereby increasing the
potential risk of overestimation of any effects and type 1 error 94. To control for this risk, we
followed a conservative Šidák approach94,95 to adjust critical P-value for multiple interim
analyses conducted (similar to multiple comparisons). Based on the Šidák adjustment [P’ = 1- (1-
P)1/k], with an ordinary critical P-value being 0.05 and the number of interim analyses k=2 in our
case, the adjusted critical value P’ would be 0.025. Any analyses reported here that used data
from the initial behavioural experiment applied this adjusted critical value as a cut-off in
significance testing.
The follow-up ‘subjective outcome estimation’ experiment had a specific aim to
investigate whether curiosity and food desirability distort a participant’s subjective estimation of
the probability of winning/losing the lottery (a continuous dependent variable). The main
38
analysis in this experiment was based on a linear mixed-effects model (LME) that included the
stimulus rating (curiosity/food desirability) and the presented probability of winning/losing as
predictors of subjective outcome probability estimation. Again, we specified random intercepts
and slopes of participants. We compared two models, one including the stimulus rating and one
without, and computed Bayes factors based on the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) from
each model (readily extracted using ‘BIC’ function in R) to evaluate the effect of the rating. A
measure of BIC quantifies a formal model’s goodness of fit to data, taking into account the
number of free parameters in the model 96,97. A lower BIC value indicates a better fit, and vice
versa. As described by Wagenmakers97, Bayes factor (BF) can be estimated using this
transformation (exponentiation of the average of the difference in BIC values for two competing
models, i & j): BF ≃ exp[(BIC – BIC)/2] (see also Masson’s tutorial 98). The resulting estimate
i j
of the Bayes factor yields the odds favouring the alternative hypothesis, relative to the null
hypothesis.
Testing of GLME and LME models was carried out using the package ‘lme4’ 99 and
graph plotting of the behavioural data was achieved using ‘ggplot’ and ‘raincloud plot’ 100 in R.
Mediation analysis
To test whether the link between rated curiosity/food desirability and the decision to
gamble is mediated by the striatal activations observed in the main fMRI analysis, we performed
a multilevel mediation analysis using multilevel structural equation modelling with Mplus 101
(version 7). Specifically, we attempted to test the involvement of the activities of the ventral
striatum during the elicitation phase and the dorsal striatum during decision-making in mediating
the link.
39
In this analysis, we specified the indirect paths as starting from Rating through Striatal
activations at elicitation phase and decision phase to Decision response (i.e. Rating  NAcc
activity at Elicitation  Caudate activity at Decision-Making  Decision response) as well as
the corresponding direct paths, and analysed data of curiosity and food conditions altogether
using trials as the unit of analysis (Fig 4). Incentive category (curiosity vs. food), the presented
shock probability, as well as the experiment version were included as covariates in the model.
Moreover, gender of the participant as well as their shock expectation rating in the post-
experiment questionnaire were accounted for in the model as subject-level covariates. Decision
here is a binary outcome variable (accept vs. reject).
To account for the multilevel nature of the data, we used person-mean centring 102 before
parameter estimation and computed cluster robust-standard error to make statistical inference 103.
After estimating the model, the standard error of the mediation effect was computed using the
delta method and statistical significance of the mediation effect was tested.
Statement on statistics and reproducibility
The study employed a within-subject design and participants were not assigned to
different experimental treatments. Data collection and analysis were not performed blind to the
conditions of the experiments. All statistical tests on behavioural data were two-tailed and used
an alpha level of 0.05 (except analysis with data from the initial behavioural experiment and
unless otherwise stated). In the analysis with continuous dependent variable, residual distribution
was assumed to be normal but this was not formally tested. By making reference to the estimated
effect size of a separate pilot study (N = 34), the original sample size of the initial behavioural
experiment (N = 17) was sufficient to detect the estimated effect at a statistical power of 95%.
40
Additional fifteen participants were added later into this initial experiment in order to achieve
more reliable estimates in data modelling and also for better comparison with other experiments
(upon reviewers’ suggestion). To control for the potential risk of inflated type 1 error due to this
subsequent addition of participants, we followed the Šidák approach94,95 to adjust critical P-value
for multiple interim analyses conducted (see Methods above). For the follow-up behavioural
experiment, the sample size (N = 29) was sufficient to detect a small to medium effect (of
curiosity rating on subjective probability estimation) with a statistical power of 80% 104. The
sample sizes of the fMRI experiments were determined to be comparable to or larger than other
neuroimaging studies of motivational biases 105 and curiosity-based effects 5,6. Also, such a
sample size should be sufficient to reliably detect medium effect sizes in task-based fMRI
analysis 106.
Data availability
The behavioural data that support the findings of the current study would be available at
https://osf.io/mafe3/. The unthresholded statistical maps of the fMRI results can be accessed at
https://neurovault.org/collections/AWZZIZCZ/.
Code availability
The analyses in this study were performed in standard software and based on published
routine, as specified in detail in the Methods and the Supplementary Information. Custom codes
can be accessed through https://osf.io/mafe3/ and are available from the corresponding authors
on request.
41
References
1. Gottlieb, J., Oudeyer, P.-Y., Lopes, M. & Baranes, A. Information-seeking, curiosity, and
attention: computational and neural mechanisms. Trends Cogn. Sci. 17, 585–593 (2013).
2. Jirout, J. & Klahr, D. Children’s scientific curiosity: In search of an operational definition
of an elusive concept. Dev. Rev. 32, 125–160 (2012).
3. Kidd, C. & Hayden, B. Y. The psychology and neuroscience of curiosity. Neuron 88,
449–460 (2015).
4. von Stumm, S., Hell, B. & Chamorro-Premuzic, T. The hungry mind: Intellectual
curiosity is the third pillar of academic performance. Perspect. Psychol. Sci. 6, 574–588
(2011).
5. Gruber, M. J., Gelman, B. D. & Ranganath, C. States of curiosity modulate hippocampus-
dependent learning via the dopaminergic circuit. Neuron 84, 486–496 (2014).
6. Kang, M. J. et al. The wick in the candle of learning: Epistemic curiosity activates reward
circuitry and enhances memory. Psychol. Sci. 20, 963–973 (2009).
7. Renninger, K. A. & Hidi, S. The power of interest for motivation and engagement.
(Routledge, NY, 2016).
8. Sakaki, M., Yagi, A. & Murayama, K. Curiosity in old age: A possible key to achieving
adaptive aging. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 88, 106–116 (2018).
9. Rozek, C. S., Svoboda, R. C., Harackiewicz, J. M., Hulleman, C. S. & Hyde, J. S. Utility-
value intervention with parents increases students’ STEM preparation and career pursuit.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 114, 909–914 (2017).
10. Loewenstein, G. The psychology of curiosity: A review and reinterpretation. Psychol.
Bull. 116, 75–98 (1994).
42
11. Berlyne, D. E. Conflict, arousal, and curiosity. (McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1960).
doi:10.1037/11164-000
12. Silvia, P. J. Exploring the Psychology of Interest. (Oxford University Press, 2006).
doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780195158557.001.0001
13. Marvin, C. B. & Shohamy, D. Curiosity and reward: Valence predicts choice and
information prediction errors enhance learning. J. Exp. Psychol. Gen. 145, 266–272
(2016).
14. Gottlieb, J. & Oudeyer, P.-Y. Towards a neuroscience of active sampling and curiosity.
Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 19, 758–770 (2018).
15. Murayama, K. A reward-learning framework of autonomous knowledge acquisition: An
integrated account of curiosity, interest, and intrinsic-extrinsic rewards. Preprint at OSF
doi:10.31219/osf.io/zey4k (2019).
16. Gruber, M. J. & Ranganath, C. How Curiosity Enhances Hippocampus-Dependent
Memory: The Prediction, Appraisal, Curiosity, and Exploration (PACE) Framework.
Trends Cogn. Sci. 23, 1014–1025 (2019).
17. Kobayashi, K., Ravaioli, S., Baranès, A., Woodford, M. & Gottlieb, J. Diverse motives for
human curiosity. Nat. Hum. Behav. 3, 587–595 (2019).
18. Blanchard, T. C., Hayden, B. Y. & Bromberg-Martin, E. S. Orbitofrontal cortex uses
distinct codes for different choice attributes in decisions motivated by curiosity. Neuron
85, 602–614 (2015).
19. Daddaoua, N., Lopes, M. & Gottlieb, J. Intrinsically motivated oculomotor exploration
guided by uncertainty reduction and conditioned reinforcement in non-human primates.
Sci. Rep. 6, 20202 (2016).
43
20. Vasconcelos, M., Monteiro, T. & Kacelnik, A. Irrational choice and the value of
information. Sci. Rep. 5, 13874 (2015).
21. Bennett, D., Bode, S., Brydevall, M., Warren, H. & Murawski, C. Intrinsic valuation of
information in decision making under uncertainty. PLOS Comput. Biol. 12, e1005020
(2016).
22. Brydevall, M., Bennett, D., Murawski, C. & Bode, S. The neural encoding of information
prediction errors during non-instrumental information seeking. Sci. Rep. 8, 6134 (2018).
23. Eliaz, K. & Schotter, A. Paying for confidence: An experimental study of the demand for
non-instrumental information. Games Econ. Behav. 70, 304–324 (2010).
24. Berridge, K. C. Motivation concepts in behavioral neuroscience. Physiol. Behav. 81, 179–
209 (2004).
25. Anselme, P. & Robinson, M. J. F. Incentive Motivation: The Missing Piece between
Learning and Behavior. in The Cambridge Handbook of Motivation and Learning (eds.
Renninger, K. A. & Hidi, S.) 163–182 (Cambridge University Press, 2019).
doi:10.1017/9781316823279.009
26. Berridge, K. C. From prediction error to incentive salience: mesolimbic computation of
reward motivation. Eur. J. Neurosci. 35, 1124–1143 (2012).
27. Robinson, T. E. & Berridge, K. C. The incentive sensitization theory of addiction: some
current issues. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 363, 3137–3146 (2008).
28. Kringelbach, M. L. & Berridge, K. C. Neuroscience of Reward, Motivation, and Drive. in
Recent Developments in Neuroscience Research on Human Motivation (eds. Kim, S.,
Reeve, J. & Bong, M.) 23–35 (Emerald Group Publishing Limited, Bingley, 2016).
doi:10.1108/S0749-742320160000019020
44
29. Berridge, K. C. ‘Liking’ and ‘wanting’ food rewards: Brain substrates and roles in eating
disorders. Physiol. Behav. 97, 537–550 (2009).
30. Tang, D. W., Fellows, L. K., Small, D. M. & Dagher, A. Food and drug cues activate
similar brain regions: A meta-analysis of functional MRI studies. Physiol. Behav. 106,
317–324 (2012).
31. O’Doherty, J. P., Deichmann, R., Critchley, H. D. & Dolan, R. J. Neural Responses during
Anticipation of a Primary Taste Reward. Neuron 33, 815–826 (2002).
32. Knutson, B., Adams, C. M., Fong, G. W. & Hommer, D. Anticipation of Increasing
Monetary Reward Selectively Recruits Nucleus Accumbens. J. Neurosci. 21, RC159–
RC159 (2001).
33. Lawrence, N. S., Hinton, E. C., Parkinson, J. A. & Lawrence, A. D. Nucleus accumbens
response to food cues predicts subsequent snack consumption in women and increased
body mass index in those with reduced self-control. Neuroimage 63, 415–422 (2012).
34. Litman, J. Curiosity and the pleasures of learning: Wanting and liking new information.
Cogn. Emot. 19, 793–814 (2005).
35. Oosterwijk, S., Snoek, L., Tekoppele, J., Engelbert, L. & Scholte, H. S. Choosing to view
morbid information involves reward circuitry. Preprint at bioRxiv doi:10.1101/795120
(2019).
36. Kobayashi, K. & Hsu, M. Common neural code for reward and information value. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. 116, 13061–13066 (2019).
37. Gerdeman, G. L., Partridge, J. G., Lupica, C. R. & Lovinger, D. M. It could be habit
forming: drugs of abuse and striatal synaptic plasticity. Trends Neurosci. 26, 184–192
(2003).
45
38. Telzer, E. H. Dopaminergic reward sensitivity can promote adolescent health: A new
perspective on the mechanism of ventral striatum activation. Dev. Cogn. Neurosci. 17, 57–
67 (2016).
39. Wright, W. F. & Bower, G. H. Mood effects on subjective probability assessment. Organ.
Behav. Hum. Decis. Process. 52, 276–291 (1992).
40. van Doorn, J. et al. The JASP Guidelines for Conducting and Reporting a Bayesian
Analysis. Preprint at PsyArxiv doi:10.31234/osf.io/yqxfr (2019).
41. Moss, S. A., Irons, M. & Boland, M. The magic of magic: The effect of magic tricks on
subsequent engagement with lecture material. Br. J. Educ. Psychol. 87, 32–42 (2017).
42. Ligneul, R., Mermillod, M. & Morisseau, T. From relief to surprise: Dual control of
epistemic curiosity in the human brain. Neuroimage 181, 490–500 (2018).
43. Baranes, A., Oudeyer, P.-Y. & Gottlieb, J. Eye movements reveal epistemic curiosity in
human observers. Vision Res. 117, 81–90 (2015).
44. Westfall, J., Nichols, T. E. & Yarkoni, T. Fixing the stimulus-as-fixed-effect fallacy in
task fMRI. Wellcome Open Res. 1, 23 (2016).
45. Adcock, R. A., Thangavel, A., Whitfield-Gabrieli, S., Knutson, B. & Gabrieli, J. D. E.
Reward-Motivated Learning: Mesolimbic Activation Precedes Memory Formation.
Neuron 50, 507–517 (2006).
46. Shenhav, A., Cohen, J. D. & Botvinick, M. M. Dorsal anterior cingulate cortex and the
value of control. Nat. Neurosci. 19, 1286–1291 (2016).
47. Kolling, N. et al. Value, search, persistence and model updating in anterior cingulate
cortex. Nat. Neurosci. 19, 1280–1285 (2016).
48. Pochon, J.-B., Riis, J., Sanfey, A. G., Nystrom, L. E. & Cohen, J. D. Functional Imaging
46
of Decision Conflict. J. Neurosci. 28, 3468–3473 (2008).
49. Botvinick, M. M., Cohen, J. D. & Carter, C. S. Conflict monitoring and anterior cingulate
cortex: an update. Trends Cogn. Sci. 8, 539–546 (2004).
50. Niv, Y. Reinforcement learning in the brain. J. Math. Psychol. 53, 139–154 (2009).
51. O’Doherty, J. Dissociable Roles of Ventral and Dorsal Striatum in Instrumental
Conditioning. Science 304, 452–454 (2004).
52. Marche, K., Martel, A.-C. & Apicella, P. Differences between Dorsal and Ventral
Striatum in the Sensitivity of Tonically Active Neurons to Rewarding Events. Front. Syst.
Neurosci. 11, (2017).
53. Morrison, I., Tipper, S. P., Fenton-Adams, W. L. & Bach, P. “Feeling” others’ painful
actions: The sensorimotor integration of pain and action information. Hum. Brain Mapp.
34, 1982–1998 (2013).
54. Guo, X. et al. Empathic neural responses to others’ pain depend on monetary reward. Soc.
Cogn. Affect. Neurosci. 7, 535–541 (2012).
55. Whitmarsh, S., Nieuwenhuis, I. L. C., Barendregt, H. P. & Jensen, O. Sensorimotor alpha
activity is modulated in response to the observation of pain in others. Front. Hum.
Neurosci. 5, (2011).
56. Jepma, M., Verdonschot, R. G., van Steenbergen, H., Rombouts, S. A. R. B. &
Nieuwenhuis, S. Neural mechanisms underlying the induction and relief of perceptual
curiosity. Front. Behav. Neurosci. 6, (2012).
57. Kruger, J. & Evans, M. The paradox of Alypius and the pursuit of unwanted information.
J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 45, 1173–1179 (2009).
58. Bromberg-Martin, E. S. & Hikosaka, O. Midbrain Dopamine Neurons Signal Preference
47
for Advance Information about Upcoming Rewards. Neuron 63, 119–126 (2009).
59. Rodriguez Cabrero, J. A. M., Zhu, J.-Q. & Ludvig, E. A. Costly curiosity: People pay a
price to resolve an uncertain gamble early. Behav. Processes 160, 20–25 (2019).
60. Oosterwijk, S. Choosing the negative: A behavioral demonstration of morbid curiosity.
PLoS One 12, e0178399 (2017).
61. Hsee, C. K. & Ruan, B. The Pandora effect: The power and peril of curiosity. Psychol.
Sci. 27, 659–666 (2016).
62. Noordewier, M. K. & van Dijk, E. Curiosity and time: from not knowing to almost
knowing. Cogn. Emot. 31, 411–421 (2017).
63. Dickinson, A. & Balleine, B. The Role of Learning in the Operation of Motivational
Systems. in Stevens’ Handbook of Experimental Psychology (eds. Pashler, H. & Gallistel,
R.) (John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2002). doi:10.1002/0471214426.pas0312
64. Litman, J., Hutchins, T. & Russon, R. Epistemic curiosity, feeling-of-knowing, and
exploratory behaviour. Cogn. Emot. 19, 559–582 (2005).
65. Schonberg, T. et al. Selective impairment of prediction error signaling in human
dorsolateral but not ventral striatum in Parkinson’s disease patients: evidence from a
model-based fMRI study. Neuroimage 49, 772–781 (2010).
66. Takahashi, Y., Schoenbaum, G. & Niv, A. Silencing the critics: understanding the effects
of cocaine sensitization on dorsolateral and ventral striatum in the context of an
actor/critic model. Front. Neurosci. 2, 86–99 (2008).
67. van Lieshout, L. L. F., Vandenbroucke, A. R. E., Müller, N. C. J., Cools, R. & de Lange,
F. P. Induction and Relief of Curiosity Elicit Parietal and Frontal Activity. J. Neurosci. 38,
2579–2588 (2018).
48
68. Di Domenico, S. I. & Ryan, R. M. The Emerging Neuroscience of Intrinsic Motivation: A
New Frontier in Self-Determination Research. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 11, (2017).
69. Preuschoff, K., Quartz, S. R. & Bossaerts, P. Human Insula Activation Reflects Risk
Prediction Errors As Well As Risk. J. Neurosci. 28, 2745–2752 (2008).
70. Alexander, W. H. & Brown, J. W. The Role of the Anterior Cingulate Cortex in Prediction
Error and Signaling Surprise. Top. Cogn. Sci. 11, 119–135 (2019).
71. Silvia, P. J. What Is Interesting? Exploring the Appraisal Structure of Interest. Emotion 5,
89–102 (2005).
72. Silvia, P. J. Appraisal components and emotion traits: Examining the appraisal basis of
trait curiosity. Cogn. Emot. 22, 94–113 (2008).
73. Noordewier, M. K. & van Dijk, E. Interest in Complex Novelty. Basic Appl. Soc. Psych.
38, 98–110 (2016).
74. Botvinick, M. M., Braver, T. S., Barch, D. M., Carter, C. S. & Cohen, J. D. Conflict
monitoring and cognitive control. Psychol. Rev. 108, 624–652 (2001).
75. Shenhav, A., Botvinick, M. M. & Cohen, J. D. The Expected Value of Control: An
Integrative Theory of Anterior Cingulate Cortex Function. Neuron 79, 217–240 (2013).
76. Murayama, K., FitzGibbon, L. & Sakaki, M. Process Account of Curiosity and Interest: A
Reward-Learning Perspective. Educ. Psychol. Rev. 31, 875–895 (2019).
77. Zink, C. F., Pagnoni, G., Martin-Skurski, M. E., Chappelow, J. C. & Berns, G. S. Human
Striatal Responses to Monetary Reward Depend On Saliency. Neuron 42, 509–517 (2004).
78. Krebs, R. M., Boehler, C. N., Roberts, K. C., Song, A. W. & Woldorff, M. G. The
Involvement of the Dopaminergic Midbrain and Cortico-Striatal-Thalamic Circuits in the
Integration of Reward Prospect and Attentional Task Demands. Cereb. Cortex 22, 607–
49
615 (2012).
79. Ozono, H. et al. Magic Curiosity Arousing Tricks (MagicCATs): A novel stimulus
collection to induce epistemic emotions. Preprint at PsyArXiv doi:10.31234/osf.io/qxdsn
(2020).
80. Fastrich, G. M., Kerr, T., Castel, A. D. & Murayama, K. The role of interest in memory
for trivia questions: An investigation with a large-scale database. Motiv. Sci. 4, 227–250
(2018).
81. Peirce, J. W. Generating stimuli for neuroscience using PsychoPy. Front. Neuroinform. 2,
(2009).
82. Murayama, K., Matsumoto, M., Izuma, K. & Matsumoto, K. Neural basis of the
undermining effect of monetary reward on intrinsic motivation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 107,
20911–20916 (2010).
83. Murayama, K. et al. How self-determined choice facilitates performance: A Key role of
the ventromedial prefrontal cortex. Cereb. Cortex 25, 1241–1251 (2015).
84. Worsley, K. J. et al. A unified statistical approach for determining significant signals in
images of cerebral activation. Hum. Brain Mapp. 4, 58–73 (1996).
85. Pauli, W. M., Nili, A. N. & Tyszka, J. M. A high-resolution probabilistic in vivo atlas of
human subcortical brain nuclei. Sci. Data 5, 180063 (2018).
86. Mumford, J. A., Poline, J.-B. & Poldrack, R. A. Orthogonalization of Regressors in fMRI
Models. PLoS One 10, e0126255 (2015).
87. Rissman, J., Gazzaley, A. & D’Esposito, M. Measuring functional connectivity during
distinct stages of a cognitive task. Neuroimage 23, 752–763 (2004).
88. Göttlich, M., Beyer, F. & Krämer, U. M. BASCO: a toolbox for task-related functional
50
connectivity. Front. Syst. Neurosci. 9, (2015).
89. Tomasi, D. & Volkow, N. D. Laterality Patterns of Brain Functional Connectivity: Gender
Effects. Cereb. Cortex 22, 1455–1462 (2012).
90. Wang, D., Buckner, R. L. & Liu, H. Functional Specialization in the Human Brain
Estimated By Intrinsic Hemispheric Interaction. J. Neurosci. 34, 12341–12352 (2014).
91. Barr, D. J., Levy, R., Scheepers, C. & Tily, H. J. Random effects structure for
confirmatory hypothesis testing: Keep it maximal. J. Mem. Lang. 68, 255–278 (2013).
92. Brauer, M. & Curtin, J. J. Linear mixed-effects models and the analysis of nonindependent
data: A unified framework to analyze categorical and continuous independent variables
that vary within-subjects and/or within-items. Psychol. Methods 23, 389–411 (2018).
93. Murayama, K., Sakaki, M., Yan, V. X. & Smith, G. M. Type I error inflation in the
traditional by-participant analysis to metamemory accuracy: A generalized mixed-effects
model perspective. J. Exp. Psychol. Learn. Mem. Cogn. 40, 1287–1306 (2014).
94. Ludbrook, J. Interim analyses of data as they accumulate in laboratory experimentation.
BMC Med. Res. Methodol. 3, 15 (2003).
95. Šidák, Z. Rectangular Confidence Regions for the Means of Multivariate Normal
Distributions. J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 62, 626–633 (1967).
96. Stone, M. Comments on Model Selection Criteria of Akaike and Schwarz. J. R. Stat. Soc.
Ser. B 41, 276–278 (1979).
97. Wagenmakers, E.-J. A practical solution to the pervasive problems of p values. Psychon.
Bull. Rev. 14, 779–804 (2007).
98. Masson, M. E. J. A tutorial on a practical Bayesian alternative to null-hypothesis
significance testing. Behav. Res. Methods 43, 679–690 (2011).
51
99. Bates, D., Mächler, M., Bolker, B. & Walker, S. Fitting Linear Mixed-Effects Models
Using lme4. J. Stat. Softw. 67, 1–48 (2015).
100. Allen, M., Poggiali, D., Whitaker, K., Marshall, T. R. & Kievit, R. A. Raincloud plots: a
multi-platform tool for robust data visualization. Wellcome Open Res. 4, 63 (2019).
101. Muthén, L. K. & Muthén, B. O. Mplus User’s Guide. Seventh Edition. (2012).
102. Enders, C. K. & Tofighi, D. Centering predictor variables in cross-sectional multilevel
models: A new look at an old issue. Psychol. Methods 12, 121–138 (2007).
103. McNeish, D., Stapleton, L. M. & Silverman, R. D. On the unnecessary ubiquity of
hierarchical linear modeling. Psychol. Methods 22, 114–140 (2017).
104. Arend, M. G. & Schäfer, T. Statistical power in two-level models: A tutorial based on
Monte Carlo simulation. Psychol. Methods 24, 1–19 (2019).
105. Leong, Y. C., Hughes, B. L., Wang, Y. & Zaki, J. Neurocomputational mechanisms
underlying motivated seeing. Nat. Hum. Behav. 3, 962–973 (2019).
106. Geuter, S., Qi, G., Welsh, R. C., Wager, T. D. & Lindquist, M. A. Effect Size and Power
in fMRI Group Analysis. Preprint at bioRxiv doi:10.1101/295048 (2018).
52
Acknowledgments
The study was supported by the Marie Curie Career Integration Grant (CIG630680 to K.M.),
JSPS KAKENHI (15H05401; 16H06406 , 18H01102, and 18K18696 to K.M.), F. J. McGuigan
Early Career Investigator Prize (to K.M.), Jacobs Foundation Advanced Fellowship (to K.M.)
and the Leverhulme Trust (RPG-2016-146 and RL-2016-030 to K.M.). The funders had no role
in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish or preparation of the manuscript.
We are grateful of the magicians (including Shota Irieda, Ohkubo Kohei and Malka) for
producing magic tricks for our research. We thank C. Ogulmus, E. Daveau and the rest of the
MeMo Lab as well as S. Shen and the CINN for helping with data collection, C. Inaltay, A. Firat,
A. Haffey, J. Raw, and G. Fastrich for editing and pilot-testing magic video clips, A. Mihalik for
advice on further advanced analysis, and C. McNabb for providing useful comments on the
drafts of the article.
Author contributions
K.M. conceived the idea; J.K.L.L. and K.M. jointly designed the study; J.K.L.L., H.O., A.K., and
K.K. created experimental materials. J.K.L.L. performed research and analysed the data; J.K.L.L.
and K.M. jointly wrote the paper. All authors provided critical comments.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interest.
53
Fig. 1: Experimental task
In each experimental trial, participants viewed either a video of a magic trick (curiosity
condition) or an image of a food item (food condition). They then gave a rating to indicate their
level of curiosity about the magic trick or the level of desirability of the food. After rating the
stimulus, participants were shown a wheel of fortune (WoF) representing a lottery, which
visualised the probability of them winning/losing in that trial (in this example, as visually
presented in the WoF, there is a higher probability of winning compared with losing).
Participants had to decide whether to gamble or not. Participants were instructed that if they
accepted the gamble and won, they might see the secret behind the magic trick (or get the food,
for food condition) after the experiment as a reward. If they gambled and lost, they would expect
to receive electric shock after the experiment. Participants could also opt to reject the gamble.
Participants understood that, in general, the more gambles they won, the more likely they were to
see more solutions to the tricks and obtain more food items. Similarly, the more gambles they
lost, the more likely they were to receive electric shock for a longer duration. In the modified
version of the task for fMRI experiments, (due to time constraints in scanning) the rating phase
54
appeared in only 10% of all the trials during the task. In addition, for the ‘trivia version’ of the
fMRI experiment, participants were presented with trivia questions (instead of magic tricks) as
stimuli in the curiosity condition.
55
Fig. 2: Behavioural results of motivation-driven decision-making.
Both graphs include data of 32 participants from the initial behavioural experiment. a) As
illustrated by the modelled logistic curve, participants tended to reject the gamble more as the
probability of electric shock presented in a wheel of fortune increased, in curiosity (Z=-7.80,
P<0.001, β=-1.28; red curve) and food (Z=-6.29, P<0.001, β=-1.21; blue curve) conditions.
Acceptance rate on y-axis ranges from 0 (100% rejection) to 1 (100% acceptance). Each dot
represents the average acceptance rate of a participant at that level of shock probability presented
in each condition. b) As illustrated in the raincloud plot on the right, higher average ratings of
curiosity about magic tricks (Z=7.24, P<0.001, β=1.16) and food desirability (Z=7.49, P<0.001,
β=1.15) were shown for accepted (orange solid circle) compared with rejected (blue solid circle)
trials. Each dot represents the average rating per participant, for each condition. The split-half
violin plots show the probability density of the data at different ratings. Error bars indicate
standard error of the mean. In both graphs, dots are jittered for better visual display. Statistical
significance was assessed with generalised linear mixed-effects models (see ‘Behavioural
analysis’ in Methods).
56
Fig. 3: Neural activity in the reward network is modulated by motivation-driven decision-
making.
a) Brain activity associated with decision-making was analysed according to whether, in the
trials, participants accepted or rejected the gamble to satisfy curiosity/obtain the food item at the
risk of electric shock. b) Activity was stronger within (i) NAcc at elicitation phase and within (ii)
all the dopaminergic circuit ROIs at decision phase for accepted over rejected trials. For visual
illustration here, a voxel-wise threshold of P<0.001 (uncorrected) is applied, and all these
clusters survived the ROI analysis with an adjusted FWE-corrected statistical significance of
P<0.0167 (at cluster level, correcting for multiple comparisons due to the number of ROIs tested).
A, anterior; L, left; P, posterior; R, right.
57
Fig. 4: Mediation path diagram.
Activations of NAcc and caudate nucleus at different phases of decision-making partially
mediated the relationship between the level of curiosity/food desirability (represented by rating)
and the decision to gamble. The mediation effect (paths a x b x c) was significant (Z=2.015,
P=0.044) and so was the direct path d’ (controlling for mediators). The entire analysis also
accounted for the incentive category of the stimulus (curiosity-inducing or food), the stimulus
version of the experiment (v1 or v2), the presented outcome probability, as well as participants’
characteristics (including gender and subjective shock expectation). Trial-by-trial average striatal
activations were extracted within the anatomical masks of bilateral NAcc at the elicitation phase
and of bilateral caudate nuclei at the decision phase (see Methods: fMRI analysis). Path lines are
labelled with path coefficient (β), Z-value and P-value.
58
Fig. 5: Functional connectivity of caudate nucleus at decision phase.
Whole-brain analysis of functional connectivity was based on the beta series correlation
approach using anatomical masks of left and right caudate nuclei as the ROIs. A significant main
effect of decision was revealed in the left sensorimotor areas (SMA) near central gyrus,
exhibiting less connectivity to the left and right caudate ROIs respectively when accepted trials
were compared with rejected trials. For visual illustration here, a voxel-wise threshold of
p<0.001 (uncorrected) is applied, and all clusters shown survived an adjusted FWE-corrected
statistical significance of p<0.025 (correcting for multiple comparisons due to the multiple ROIs
applied). L, left; R, right.
59
Extended Data Fig 1. Exploratory whole-brain analyses at elicitation phase showed
differential brain activations when comparing ‘rejected’ with ‘accepted’ trials. Activity was
stronger within prefrontal cortex and insular gyrus at the elicitation phase of trials in which
participants rejected the gamble. For visual illustration here, a voxel-wise threshold of P<0.001
(uncorrected) is applied; all clusters survived a FWE-corrected statistical significance threshold
of P<0.05 (at cluster level). L, left; R, right.
60
Extended Data Fig 2. Exploratory whole-brain analyses with a main effect of decision
(accepted > rejected trials) at decision phase. Peak activation is shown for the right caudate
nucleus (MNI coordinate: 9, 12, 0) and the left caudate nucleus (MNI coordinate: -9, 6, -3) in an
extensive medial reward network cluster, extending into the thalamus and the medial frontal
cortex, as well as the right frontal cortex and anterior insula. For visual illustration here, a voxel-
wise threshold of P<0.001 (uncorrected) is applied; all clusters survived a FWE-corrected
statistical significance threshold of P<0.05 (at cluster level). See ROI results in Figure 3. A,
anterior; L, left; P, posterior; R, right.
61
Extended Data Fig 3. ROI activations for motivation-driven decision-making in a
parametric modulation analysis accounting for presented outcome probability. Differential
activations for accepted (> rejected) trials were observed within the ROIs of caudate nucleus,
NAcc, and VTA/SN at the Decision phase, even when taking into account the shock/outcome
probability presented as an additional parametric modulator in the model. For visual illustration,
a voxel-wise threshold of P<0.001 (uncorrected) is applied here; clusters survived the ROI
analysis with an adjusted FWE-corrected statistical significance threshold of P<0.0167 (at cluster
level). A, anterior; L, left; P, posterior; R, right.
62