Articles
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-020-00972-y
Distinct regions of the striatum underlying effort,
movement initiation and effort discounting
Shosuke Suzuki1, Victoria M. Lawlor1, Jessica A. Cooper 1, Amanda R. Arulpragasam1 and
Michael T. Treadway 1,2 ✉
The ventral striatum is believed to encode the subjective value of cost–benefit options; however, this effect has notably been
absent during choices that involve physical effort. Previous work in freely moving animals has revealed opposing striatal sig-
nals, with greater response to increasing effort demands and reduced responses to rewards requiring effort. Yet, the rela-
tionship between these conflicting signals remains unknown. Using functional magnetic resonance imaging with a naturalistic
maze-navigation paradigm, we identified functionally segregated regions within the ventral striatum that separately encoded
effort activation, movement initiation and effort discounting of rewards. In addition, activity in regions associated with effort
activation and discounting oppositely predicted striatal encoding of effort during effort-based decision-making. Our results
suggest that the dorsomedial region hitherto associated with action may instead represent the cost of effort and raise funda-
mental questions regarding the interpretation of striatal ‘reward’ signals in the context of effort demands. This has implications
for uncovering the neural architecture underlying motivated behaviour.
W
eighing the costs and benefits of actions is critical for in rodents32. This observation is markedly at odds with prevailing
everyday decisions. The ventral striatum (VS) is widely theories about the functional role of the VS, and discordant with
recognized as a central hub for processing cost/benefit consistent patterns of value-related VS activity found in other forms
information1–3. This role for the VS has been supported by robust of cost/benefit decision-making12–14 as well as evidence demonstrat-
findings from animal models implicating striatal dopamine (DA) ing that disrupting the VS reliably impairs the willingness to work
signals in valuation and motivating movements for rewards4–8. for rewards7,33,34.
Building on the rich preclinical literature, human neuroimaging Recent work examining striatal function in freely moving ani-
studies have yielded relatively homogeneous results regarding the mals offers one potential resolution to this discrepancy35–38. Such
involvement of the VS in encoding subject-specific, discounted studies have found that DA inputs to the striatum signal the ini-
value signals1. For example, functional magnetic resonance imag- tiation of vigourous movement (‘effort activation’)38, while also
ing (fMRI) studies have demonstrated that the VS responses not representing the value of cost/benefit choices that are discounted
only are consistently greater for immediate compared with delayed by effort-related costs (‘effort discounting’)6,36. These observa-
rewards9–11 but also explicitly track the delay-discounted subjective tions raise the possibility that detection of effort-discounting sig-
value rather than the objective magnitude of rewards12–14. Similarly, nals may perhaps be hindered by the simultaneous presence of an
VS activity is strongly associated with expected reward such that less effort-activation signal in most neuroimaging paradigms, and that
probable rewards elicit decreased responses15,16, and tracks with the critical aspects of striatal function may be revealed only by carefully
probability-discounted subjective value13. Moreover, it has been pro- parsing these opposing influences.
posed that the VS encodes subjective-value signals that are domain Importantly, these movement- and value-related signals associ-
general, such that different types of cost/benefits are incorporated ated with effort demands may arise from distinct neural popula-
and represented on a common scale17. Consistent with this, the tions within the striatum39,40. For example, previous work examining
VS has been shown to track subjective value regardless of whether the neural substrates of goal-directed behaviour has suggested that
the reward was probabilistic or delayed13. Thus, the representation morphological subregions of the VS, including the nucleus accum-
of subjective-value signals in the VS detected during cost/benefit bens (NAcc) core and shell41, have different functions that together
decision-making has been largely consistent with the vast preclini- guide movements for rewards2,42. Such studies have provided evi-
cal literature highlighting the role of striatal signalling in valuation. dence suggesting that neighbouring regions within the VS have
A notable exception has been the neural representation of separable roles in processing reward- and effort-related informa-
costs related to effort (that is, the amount of work required to tion43–46. In a separate line of work, striatal subregions have also
obtain rewards). Researchers have used various effort-based been identified by parcellating the striatum based on intrinsic func-
decision-making paradigms to decode effort-related value sig- tional connectivity47, although the precise functions of these sub-
nals14,18–31 with widely varying study designs (for example, timing at regions remain unclear. Notably, patterns of cortical projections to
which effort/reward information is presented, type and magnitude striatal subregions may play a critical role in assigning function to
of effort demands, inclusion of effort performance during the task these subregions48. For example, inputs from reward-related corti-
and inclusion of a learning component). Critically, the majority of cal areas including the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC), the
these studies did not find a significant association between subjec- orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) and the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex
tive value and VS activity14,19,21,23–25,27,28,30, not only in humans but also (dACC) may project to overlapping striatal areas along with inputs
1Translational Research in Affective Disorders Laboratory, Department of Psychology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA. 2Department of Psychiatry and
Behavioral Science, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA. ✉e-mail: mtreadway@emory.edu
NATuRe HuMAN BeHAViouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTUre HUmaN BeHavIOUr
from regions associated with motor and cognitive functions (for statistically significant effect of anticipation or initiation of move-
example, dorsolateral PFC (dlPFC)), giving rise to striatal subre- ment alone was found in this effort-related dorsomedial subre-
gions that integrate cross-domain signals49. These reported striatal gion of the striatum overlapping with and extending from the VS
organizations raise the hypothesis that effort activation and dis- (‘dmS’), evaluated by comparing the simple-movement condition
counting signals may originate from different subregions within the to a passive-motion condition that involved automatic progression
VS; however, this has previously not been tested. through the maze without any required finger movement. Instead,
In addition, the importance of including a naturalistic movement initiation of simple movements strongly recruited a distinct stria-
component within experimental paradigms is highlighted by evi- tal subregion in the bilateral putamen (left subpeak: [−24, 0, −6],
dence suggesting that (1) midbrain DA activity controls the initiation k = 411; right subpeak: [24, 3, −3], k = 359; whole-brain P < 0.05
FWE
of future movement35 and (2) reward-related striatal DA inputs are cluster corrected at two-tailed voxelwise P < 0.0005). These effects
attenuated in the absence of movement initiation38. So far, however, of effort activation (effortful movement > simple movement) and
most studies investigating the mechanisms of effort-based choice in movement initiation (simple movement > passive motion) in the
humans have focused on neural responses during the presentation dmS and putamen, respectively, were not explained by motor-related
or outcome of effort- or reward-related cues or choices—but not effects of button pressing (Supplementary Fig. 1). In a follow-up
during periods of effortful movement—as the primary method with region of interest (ROI) analysis using ROIs independently defined
which to identify the neural substrates of subjective value14,18–31. More for each subject via leave-one-subject-out approach (Methods and
importantly, these previous studies have not been designed to clearly Fig. 2a,b), we found evidence for a functional dissociation between
distinguish effortful or vigourous movement from simple movement. the dmS (defined via effortful movement > simple movement con-
The potentially critical role of dynamic movement raises fundamen- trast during initiation; Fig. 2c) and putamen (defined via simple
tal questions regarding the interpretation of striatal ‘reward’ signals. movement > passive motion contrast during initiation; Fig. 2d) with
Notably, it has been demonstrated that naturalistic movement within respect to condition (Region × Condition interaction: F = 30.81,
(2,56)
virtual-reality paradigms can invoke midbrain DA neuron activity in P < 0.001, eta-squared η2 = 0.52, 90% confidence interval (CI) = [0.35,
the mouse brain50, offering a means by which this preclinical work 0.62]). Specifically, post hoc analyses revealed evidence for a double
can be translated to human neuroimaging. dissociation such that the dmS showed a disproportionate sensitiv-
Here we combined fMRI with virtual navigation to evaluate ity to effort activation (Region × Condition interaction for effort-
activity in the human striatum associated with initiation and acti- ful movement/simple movement: F = 6.69, P = 0.02, η2 = 0.19,
(1,28)
vation of vigourous movement (effort), initiation of simple move- 90% CI = [0.02, 0.38]; effort activation, dmS > putamen: t = 2.59,
(28)
ment (‘movement’) and reward. Specifically, participants navigated two-tailed P = 0.02, Cohen’s d = 0.48, 95% CI = [0.09, 0.86]) whereas
through three-dimensional mazes with the objective of obtaining the putamen exhibited a disproportionate sensitivity to movement
rewards (Fig. 1a). Mazes varied across four conditions: two in which initiation (Region × Condition interaction for effortful movement/
individuals actively controlled navigation using (1) effortful and simple movement: F = 51.10, P < 0.001, η2 = 0.65, 90% CI = [0.44,
(1,28)
(2) simple button pressing, and two in which individuals passively 0.75]; movement initiation, putamen > dmS: t = 7.15, two-tailed
(28)
completed navigation (3) with motion and (4) without motion. To P < 0.001, d = 1.33, 95% CI = [0.82, 1.82]).
isolate the effect of effort demands on individuals’ neural responses
to the anticipation and initiation of movement independently of Effort discounting is represented in ventral striatal activity
reward expectations, reward amounts were varied independently during reward receipt. We then examined whether the VS also
of condition. Neural activity during the maze-navigation task was encoded effort discounting. On completion of mazes, participants
additionally examined in relation to neural responses during a sec- were presented with a reward amount (US$0.00–5.00) that varied
ond effort-based decision-making task, which was independently independently of the navigation condition. An anterior/ventral sub-
assessed using a paradigm previously published by our group30. region of the VS (‘aVS’) responded to reward receipt (left subpeak:
During this second task, participants made choices about their will- [−3, 15, −3], k = 27; right subpeak: [6, 15, −3], k = 31; whole-brain
ingness to perform manual button presses for monetary rewards. As P < 0.05 cluster corrected at two-tailed voxelwise P < 0.0005),
FWE
such, we were able to examine neural responses to periods of effort and was positively correlated with trial-by-trial reward magnitude
activation and effort discounting, and then see how they contributed (left subpeak: [−6, 18, −6], k = 65; right subpeak: [6, 15, −3], k = 35;
to neural responses when making decisions about the value of work. whole-brain P < 0.05 cluster corrected at one-tailed voxelwise
FWE
P < 0.0005) across all navigation conditions (Supplementary Table
Results 1), including a no-motion condition that involved simply wait-
Effort activation is represented in ventral striatal activity during ing for the approximate duration of the maze. Importantly, while
anticipation and initiation of vigourous movement. To examine the aVS showed a reward response within the effortful-movement
whether the VS encoded effort activation in the maze-navigation condition (t = 2.15, two-tailed P = 0.04, d = 0.40, 95% CI = [0.02,
(28)
task, we compared hemodynamic response signals between an 0.77]), the aVS response to reward was significantly lower after
effortful-movement condition that required rapid and repeated but- effortful navigation compared with navigation that required no
ton pressing to move through the maze, and a simple-movement effort (t = −1.88, one-tailed P = 0.04, d = 0.35, 95% CI = [−0.03,
(28)
condition in which individuals could simply hold down buttons 0.72]; Fig. 2e), suggesting evidence of effort discounting. To fur-
to move. This signal was compared at two separate timepoints: (1) ther isolate effort discounting in the VS, we examined whether
when participants learned about the required effort (that is, antici- there were areas of the VS that responded to reward only during the
pation) and (2) when participants began moving (that is, initiation). effortful-movement condition. This analysis isolated a region of the
Indeed, both the anticipation and initiation of the effortful relative VS that was at the intersection of the aVS and the dmS, suggesting a
to simple movement increased activity in a dorsal subregion of the node of interaction between effort activation and effort discounting
VS extending up into the dorsomedial striatum and caudate body (Fig. 2f; peak: [6, 0, −9], k = 72; whole-brain P < 0.05 cluster cor-
FWE
(Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) coordinates [x, y, z] for rected at one-tailed voxelwise P < 0.005).
peaks of clusters surviving whole-brain familywise-error corrected
P (P ) < 0.05 at two-tailed voxelwise P < 0.0005, anticipation: left Functional segregation of effort-, movement- and reward-related
FWE
subpeak: [−12, 0, 15], cluster size k = 58; right subpeak: [12, 12, 6], striatal subregions recapitulate connectivity-based parcellation
k = 44; initiation: left subpeak: [−9, 0, 6], k = 142; right subpeak: [9, of the striatum. Mapping together the above results (Fig. 3a), we
6, −3], k = 122; Fig. 1b and Supplementary Table 1). Notably, no observed functional segregation of bilateral striatal subregions
NATuRe HuMAN BeHAViouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTUre HUmaN BeHavIOUr Articles
a
3ISI 4Navigation 5ISI
One of four conditions:
(1) Effortful movement
(2) Simple movement
(3) Passive motion
(4) No motion
2Cue 6Reward
$4.35
1Initial
approach 7ITI
Participant
Participant view
Initial Cue ISI Navigation ISI Reward ITI
approach (2 s) (2–5 s) (~4.75 s) (2–5 s) (2 s) (2–6 s)
b
Effort (effortful movement > simple movement) Movement (simple movement > passive-motion)
t < 6.84
(28)
Anticipation
x = 6 y = 4
Initiation
t ≥ 3.67
(28)
P < 0.05, voxelwise P < 0.0005
FWE
Fig. 1 | Maze-navigation task schematic and whole-brain results (N = 29). a, Schematic of a task trial. b, Whole-brain results examining the effect of
effortful and simple movement during anticipation and initiation of navigation. Maps are P FWE < 0.05 cluster corrected with voxelwise threshold P < 0.0005.
associated with effort activation (dmS), reward (aVS) and simple connectivity profiles were additionally replicated in an independent
movement (putamen). Critically, the neighbouring regions associ- resting-state dataset collected with high-resolution (7 T) fMRI51
ated with effort and reward showed clear evidence of double dis- (Fig. 3b).
sociation (Region × Effect interaction: F = 13.77, P < 0.001, To further examine whether these striatal subregions partici-
(1,28)
η2 = 0.33, 90% CI = [0.10, 0.50]), with the dmS responding strongly pate in distinct functional networks, we evaluated direct contrasts
to the anticipation and initiation of effortful movement, but not between connectivity profiles and found notable differences in cor-
receipt of reward, while the aVS responded strongly to the magni- tical regions associated with each subregion identified during maze
tude of reward and appeared to discount reward values by effort, navigation (Fig. 3c). Comparing the dmS and aVS, we found that
but showed significantly less engagement to anticipation or initia- the dmS has significantly stronger associations with various regions
tion of effortful movement (dmS > aVS, effort activation: t = 2.73, including a cluster spanning dACC and dorsomedial PFC (dmPFC;
(28)
two-tailed P = 0.01, d = 0.51, 95% CI = [0.12, 0.89]; Fig. 2c; also see MNI peak coordinates: [−10, 20, 50], k = 4,083; results are P < 0.05
FWE
Supplementary Fig. 1 for results using unsmoothed data). Notably, cluster corrected at two-tailed voxelwise threshold P < 0.005), as well
this functional segregation appeared to largely overlap with a pre- as a large cluster (peak: [10, 10, 8], k = 22,205) including the dlPFC,
viously reported connectivity-based parcellation of the striatum47 ventrolateral PFC (vlPFC) and lateral OFC, whereas the aVS has
(Fig. 3a). To validate the apparent functional distinction between significantly stronger associations with other regions, including the
these two VS subregions, we compared patterns of functional con- medial OFC (peak: [0, 16, −2], k = 6,040) and primary motor cortex
nectivity during resting state using each of the functionally defined (peak: [2, −36, 60], k = 908). Comparing the dmS and putamen, we
and connectivity-based striatal subregions as seed regions (func- found that dmS has significantly greater associations with medial
tionally defined seed regions: dmS: left peak: [−9, 0, 6]; right peak: PFC regions (peak: [8, 8, 0], k = 11,895) and the posterior cingu-
[9, 6, −3]; k = 264; aVS: left peak: [−6, 18, −6]; right peak: [6, 15, late cortex (PCC; peak: [6, −6, 32], k = 1,434), whereas putamen has
−3]; k = 77; putamen: left subpeak: [−24, 0, −6]; right subpeak: significantly greater associations with somatomotor regions (peak:
[24, 3, −3]; k = 770). Indeed, despite only partial overlap of the ROI [−22, 6, −2], k = 18,776). Finally, comparing the aVS and putamen,
definitions derived from our task and the previous parcellation we found that aVS has significantly stronger associations with the
study47 (Sørensen–Dice: aVS, 0.19; putamen, 0.40; dmS, 0.20), we vmPFC and medial OFC (peak: [−14, 22, −10], k = 6,656) as well as
observed highly overlapping connectivity profiles (Fig. 3b). These the PCC (peak: [−4, −58, 14], k = 264), whereas putamen has sig-
NATuRe HuMAN BeHAViouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTUre HUmaN BeHavIOUr
1.0
0.5
0
–0.5
–1.0 Reward after Reward after
effort no effort
nificantly stronger associations with the anterior insula and vlPFC reward or effort information (dmS, (mean ± s.d.) group-level
(peak: [−24, 2, −2], k = 10,444) as well as the dACC and supplemen- accuracy 0.48 ± 0.05; aVS, (mean ± s.d.) group-level accuracy
tary motor area (peak: [10, −6, 64], k = 3,859). 0.48 ± 0.03; Supplementary Fig. 2). In contrast, classifiers trained
on activity across all brain voxels successfully decoded whether
Lack of ventral striatal activity related to value during reward or effort information was presented for 78.9% of individuals
effort-based decision-making paradigm. To test the hypothesis ((mean ± s.d.) group-level accuracy 0.67 ± 0.14; Supplementary Fig.
that effort-activation and -discounting signals may interfere with the 3). As described above, the absence of such an effect is noteworthy,
detection of subjective signals during effort-based decision-making, given the robust activation of the VS by subjective values derived
we also measured neural activity during a second fMRI paradigm from cost/benefit decisions involving other categories of response
in which participants made a series of binary choices based on the costs (for example, delay, risk or loss).
presented amount of reward and effort required for each option
(Fig. 4a). Importantly, the effort and reward amounts were pre- Ventral striatal activity is modulated by opposing effects of
sented sequentially in an attempt to isolate an effort-activation sig- effort activation and effort discounting. One possible explana-
nal during the anticipation of various effort demands. Replicating tion for the absence of effort-related subjective-value encoding in
our previous findings using this same task30 as well as results from the VS is that when response costs involve physical effort, oppos-
other fMRI effort-based paradigms, we did not find a statistically ing effort-activation and effort-discounting signals within the VS
significant association between VS activity and subjective value of may impede the ability to detect overall VS responses. To test this
the chosen option (whole-brain P < 0.05 cluster corrected with possibility in the maze-navigation task, we tracked responses within
FWE
voxelwise threshold P < 0.0005; Fig. 4b and Supplementary Table the VS region that responded to reward after individuals completed
2). Even when using multivoxel pattern analysis, voxels in the VS effortful navigation (Fig. 2f). This revealed two distinct patterns
were unable to classify whether presented information reflected of effort-related activity in the VS depending on the timepoint, as
sretemarap
detcartxE
3
2
1
0
–1 Navigation Reward
initiation
sretemarap
detcartxE
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0
–0.5
–1.0
dmS aVS
Effortful movement
Simple movement
Passive motion
sretemarap
detcartxE
a c
1.5
Effortful movement
100% Simple movement Passive motion 0.5
dmS
–0.5
Putamen
aVS –1.5
dmS aVS
0%
b y = 4 y = 13
y = –12 –8 –4
d e
Putamen y = 4 aVS
y = 13
0 4 8
100%
f
12 16 20 Reward (reward > no reward)
after effortful movement
Overlap between effort activation
(effortful > simple) and reward
magnitude (all conditions)
0% y = 13 y = 13
sretemarap
detcartxE
Navigation initiation Reward (reward > no reward)
Region
P = 0.02
Region ×
Condition
P < 0.001
y = 4 y = 13
P = 0.04
Phase ×
Condition
P < 0.001
Fig. 2 | Maze-navigation task Roi analyses and results (N = 29). a,b, Degree of overlap between ROIs defined for each participant using the
leave-one-participant-out approach, including the dmS (depicted in red), aVS (depicted in blue) and putamen (depicted in light blue), mapped on
a subcortical surface (a) and coronal sections (y = −12 to 20) (b). ROIs were defined using P FWE < 0.05 cluster correction with voxelwise threshold
P < 0.0005. c, The dmS and aVS response to navigation initiation and reward. A significant region × effect (effort activation, reward receipt) interaction
(F (1,28) = 13.77, P < 0.001, η2 = 0.33, 90% CI = [0.10, 0.50]) suggests functional dissociation between the dmS and aVS. d, Putamen response to navigation
initiation and reward, showing sensitivity to movement but not to effort or reward. e, Reward response in the aVS is significantly reduced after any level
of effort (effortful movement/simple movement) compared with non-effortful conditions (passive motion/no motion); t (28) = −1.88, one-tailed P = 0.04,
d = 0.35, 95% CI = [−0.03, 0.72]). f, The VS response to reward after effortful navigation and conjunction between effects of effort activation (effortful
movement > simple movement, navigation initiation) and reward magnitude (across all conditions, reward phase). Maps are P FWE < 0.05 cluster corrected
with voxelwise threshold P < 0.0005. Error bars in bar plots represent s.e.m.
NATuRe HuMAN BeHAViouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTUre HUmaN BeHavIOUr Articles
a c
Current study Choi et al.47 dmS > aVS
t(18) < 8.79
dlPFC
vlPFC
Effort dmPFC
Movement M1
Reward dACC t(18) > –18.12
mOFC
y = 10 y = 10
b
Maze-navigation seeds Choi et al.47 seeds Maze-navigation seeds dmS > putamen
R (e cs uti rn reg n s t t sa tt ue d: y3 ) T R (e cs uti rn reg n s t t sa tt ue d: y3 ) T (GR oe rgs otin leg w s st ka it e e: t 7 a l.T 51) dmPFC SMA/M1/S1 t(18) < 14.54
t(18) < 34.19 t(18) < 26.69 t(21) < 41.72
dlPFC
aIns
Movement lOFC S1 SMA
dACC
t(18) > –12.05
x = 8 z = 6 PCC mPFC
t(18) ≥ 0 t(18) ≥ 0 t(21) ≥ 0 mOFC
t(18) < 45.50 t(18) < 31.80 t(21) < 46.24
Effort aVS > putamen
SMA t(18) < 20.48
x = –3 z = 6
t(18) ≥ 0 t(18) ≥ 0 t(21) ≥ 0 vlPFC
t(18) < 29.29 t(18) < 35.11 t(21) < 46.00 aIns
SMA
t(18) > –13.00
dACC
PCC vmPFC
Reward
mOFC
x = 4 z = –5
t(18) ≥ 0 t(18) ≥ 0 t(21) ≥ 0
Fig. 3 | Functional segregation of striatum, and comparison of connectivity profiles with previously identified striatal parcellation based on intrinsic
connectivity. a, Striatal subregions identified in the current study (N = 29) and corresponding subregions identified via connectivity-based parcellation47.
b, Seed-to-voxel functional connectivity maps using the striatal regions in a as seed regions and resting-state data from the current study (N = 19) and
previous work (N = 22)51. Maps are P FWE < 0.05 cluster-corrected with voxelwise threshold P < 0.0005. c, Comparisons between functional connectivity
maps using different striatal seed regions (N = 19). Maps are P FWE < 0.05 cluster-corrected with voxelwise threshold P < 0.005. The contrast label indicates
the seed regions being compared. A lateral and medial view of the left hemisphere is shown for each contrast. aIns, anterior insula; vlPFC, ventrolateral
prefrontal cortex; dmPFC, dorsomedial prefrontal cortex; lOFC, lateral orbital frontal cortex; mOFC, medial orbital frontal cortex; M1, primary motor cortex;
S1, somatosensory cortex; SMA, supplementary motor area; PCC, posterior cingulate cortex.
evidenced by a significant Condition (effortful movement, simple positively associated with VS responses during presentation of effort
movement) × Phase (navigation initiation, reward receipt) interac- information during decision-making (r = 0.51, P = 0.02, 95%
(17)
tion (F = 16.72, P = 0.0003, η2 = 0.37, 90% CI = [0.14, 0.54]): VS CI = [0.07, 0.78]), whereas individual differences in effort-discounting
(1,28)
responses were (1) significantly greater when individuals began signals showed no significant correlation, but a non-significant trend
executing effortful compared with simple movement (t = 3.42, in the opposite direction (r = −0.41, P = 0.08, 95% CI = [−0.73,
(28) (17)
two-tailed P = 0.002, d = 0.64, 95% CI = [0.23, 1.03]), reflecting an 0.05]; Fig. 5a). These correlations were significantly different
effort-activation signal, and (2) significantly lower during reward (Steiger’s Z = 2.88, P = 0.004). A post hoc exploratory analysis using
receipt after individuals have expended effort compared with less a ‘searchlight’ approach (Methods) revealed that opposing effects
effort (t = −2.66, two-tailed P = 0.01, d = 0.49, CI = [0.10, 0.88]), of effort-activation and effort-discounting signals were localized to
(28)
reflecting an effort-discounting signal. Importantly, averaging the a region at the intersection between the dmS and aVS (Fig. 5b,c).
opposing effects associated with effort activation and effort dis- Importantly, this region also encompassed 52% of the voxels within
counting within individuals led to a statistically non-significant the NAcc (Fig. 5d). These findings provide a potential explanation
group-level effect (t = 1.45, two-tailed P = 0.16, d = 0.27, for the longstanding discrepancy regarding the involvement of the
(28)
CI = [−0.10, 0.64]; Fig. 4c), and Bayesian analysis indicated greater VS in encoding subjective value during effort-based decision-making
preference for the hypothesis that this effect is null (Bayes factor, epochs, as such epochs might reasonably be expected to elicit both
2.6; mean, 0.08; 95% credible interval, [−0.04, 0.19]). effort-discounting and effort-activation signals.
However, such ‘averaging’ is clearly artificial, as these task con-
ditions did not occur simultaneously. A much stronger test would Discussion
therefore be to show a mix of effort-activation and effort-discounting For almost two decades, neural responses in the VS have been
signals in response to the same effort-related stimulus. We there- commonly observed in response to rewards and discounted value
fore extracted the ‘effort activation’ and ‘effort discounting’ signals of rewards. Thus, it has been a conundrum that most functional
from the maze-navigation task and used them as predictors of imaging studies in humans and animals have shown weak or incon-
neural responses to effort cues in our second (independent) task. sistent activation of the VS during effort-based choice14,18–31. One
Interestingly, individual differences in effort-activation signal were methodological gap in previous studies is the failure to take into
NATuRe HuMAN BeHAViouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTUre HUmaN BeHavIOUr
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0
–0.5
–1.0
–1.5
Effort Effort Average
activation discounting
consideration striatal signals during effortful movement that have while studies investigating neural correlates of valuation frequently
been detected under free-movement conditions in rodents35,38,52,53, report any activation, the functional localization of the aVS and dmS
which may impact the interpretation of reward-related striatal is consistent with a previous meta-analysis1, which has suggested that
blood-oxygen-level-dependent (BOLD) activity. Such studies have there may be subtle functional differences between anteroventral and
highlighted the presence of striatal signals that are heavily linked dorsomedial subregions within the VS. Interestingly, we observed an
to dynamic movement35,38, which can also be evoked by movement invigouration effect in the dmS during the anticipation and initiation
within virtual-reality paradigms50. Thus, the present study used a of effortful but not simple movement, suggesting that mere move-
virtual navigation paradigm and revealed the presence of opposite ment (that is, making a single-choice response) may not be sufficient
signals in the VS related to (1) effort activation during the anticipa- to shape dmS signalling—further highlighting the importance of
tion and initiation of effortful movement and (2) effort discounting studying the neural substrates of effort-based decision-making that
during reward receipt after individuals expended effort. Importantly, include effortful-movement components.
the current study finds that effortful movement is needed to isolate The existence of the VS subregions identified here is supported
these effects in the VS, as our second fMRI paradigm that relied by previous large-scale connectivity results47. Indeed, we found
solely on effort and reward cues failed to differentiate them, even overlap in functional connectivity profiles between the striatal sub-
when using more sensitive multivariate techniques. This observa- regions identified here and the connectivity-based striatal parcel-
tion is critical as previous studies of effort-based decision-making lation47. In addition, we show that each of the striatal subregions
have largely focused on encoding of values at the point of choice or has a distinct pattern of cortical connectivity, with the dmS notably
in response to feedback14,19–21,23–25,27–30. Critically, by using individ- showing connectivity with the dACC, OFC and PFC regions associ-
ual differences in estimates of effort-activation/effort-discounting ated with reward processing and cognitive functions, the aVS show-
signals derived from the maze-navigation task, we were able to ing connectivity with the vmPFC and OFC associated with reward
observe their simultaneous, conflicting influences when process- processing, and the putamen showing connectivity with sensorimo-
ing effort-related cues, providing a viable explanation to the gen- tor areas. Critically, this finding helps uncover potential functions
eral failure to detect clear subjective-value signals in the VS during of these network-based subregions of the striatum. Our results also
effort-based decision-making in previous work. Specifically, our show similarity to the pattern of results of a recent meta-analysis of
results suggest that increased effort requirements may invoke a subjective-value encoding1, where positive subjective value across
greater effort-activation response that may obscure detection of the studies was found to scale with activity in the aVS, whereas nega-
value-related effort-discounting effect in the VS, particularly within tive subjective value (that is, loss or punishment) was associated
a subregion encompassing a substantial portion of the NAcc. with activity in an area similar to the dmS. As activity in the dmS
In addition, the current results provide insight into the functional was only apparent as a function of effort but not mere movement,
topography of signals associated with effort, movement and reward. whereas motor areas of putamen appeared to respond to both effort-
Despite the rich body of research implicating midbrain DA in rep- ful and simple movements, it raises the intriguing possibility that
resenting value-related information and invigourating movement4, the dmS is more specifically involved with encoding negative value
little work has been done to simultaneously examine the striatal rep- or cost associated with effortful movements. Consistent with this
resentation of these two functions in humans. Here we identified two idea, we observed significantly greater connectivity with sensorim-
striatal regions intersecting within the VS—an anterior region (that otor areas in putamen compared with the dmS, further suggesting a
is, the aVS) associated with reward and a dorsal region (that is, the role for the dmS in processing non-motor aspects of effort. Finally,
dmS) associated with initiation of effortful movement—and bilateral it is worth noting that similar functional heterogeneity within the
putamen associated with initiation of simple movement. Importantly, VS has been observed in animal models34. Electrical recordings in
sretemarap
detcartxE
0.4
0.2
0
–0.2 dACC VS
(negative) (positive)
CVS
fo
tceffE
a b c
Valuation (cue 2 > cue 1) Reward-sensitive VS in
Effort 20% Cue 1 effortful-movement condition
(2–6 s) t (18) < 7.91 y = 13
Cue 2
Effort 20%
(2–6 s)
x = –6 y = 2
US$3.00 t (18) ≥ 3.88
Subjective value of chosen option during cue 2
Choose one
t
(18)
< 8.12
Effort 20%
US$3.00
x = 6 t (18) ≥ 3.92
Fig. 4 | Schematic and results of effort-based decision-making task (N = 19). a, Schematic of a task trial. b, Whole-brain results replicate our previous
findings using this paradigm30, including activation of the dACC and insula at cue 2, association between the dACC and negative subjective value, and
lack of statistically significant evidence of the VS response across contrasts (difference: t (18) = 2.15, P = 0.05, d = 0.49, 95% CI = [0.01, 0.96]). Maps are
P FWE < 0.05 cluster-corrected with voxelwise threshold P < 0.0005. SVC, subjective value of chosen option. c, The aVS encodes both effort activation
(effortful movement > simple movement at navigation initiation; t (28) = 3.42, P = 0.002, d = 0.64, 95% CI = [0.23, 1.03]) and effort discounting (effortful
movement > simple movement at reward receipt; t (28) = −2.66, P = 0.01, d = 0.49, 95% CI = [0.10, 0.88]) that average to a statistically non-significant
group effect (t (28) = 1.45, two-tailed P = 0.16, d = 0.27, CI = [−0.10, 0.64]). Error bars in bar plots represent s.e.m.
NATuRe HuMAN BeHAViouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTUre HUmaN BeHavIOUr Articles
a b
Distribution of effect sizes:
correlations with neural response to effort cue
Effort activation Effort discounting
y = –4 r < 0.50 (17)
0.1
0 0
–0.1
r ≥ 0.00 –0.2 4 (17)
–0.3
–0.4
8
c 12
Distribution of effect sizes:
comparison of opposing signals
y = 1 3 5
16
z < 4.44
20
7 9 11 z ≥ 1.96
13 15 17
non-human primates have found that distinct neuronal popula- tation of the current findings is limited by the operationalization
tions within the striatum may be responsible for coding action and of effort (that is, rapid button pressing) employed in this study.
outcomes39,40. In rodents, while both the NAcc core and shell are Specifically, to what extent the current findings generalize to cog-
involved in Pavlovian learning of stimulus and outcome (for exam- nitive effort or other effortful tasks encountered in our daily lives
ple, cue and reward), they play markedly different roles in terms of remain unclear.
mediating Pavlovian influences on instrumental behaviour42,54. Taken together, our results suggest that simultaneous and con-
There are several limitations to this study. Although the flicting influences of invigouration and value in neighbouring dmS
maze-navigation task was designed to parse out effects related to and aVS may confound the absence of subjective-value signals in
effort and movement, we were unable to fully isolate the two effects effort-based decision-making tasks. It is further notable that these
given that movement is an integral component of physical effort. distinct subregions of the VS were only observable when using a
However, given the inherent link between effort and movement, naturalistic paradigm, echoing recent discoveries of striatal DA
isolating the two effects may not produce ecologically meaningful function found in freely moving animals35–38. In sum, these data
observations. Importantly, using the maze-navigation task, we were will help advance our understanding of how the VS distinctly
able to identify notable differences in striatal subregions associated encodes effort-related costs and highlight the value of naturalistic
with effort, movement and reward, and their patterns of cortical and dynamic paradigms for achieving a deeper understanding of
connectivity that support these functions. In addition, interpre- real-world brain function55.
MDBE
gnirud
euc
troffe
ot
esnopser
SV
Cross-paradigm predictions
0.4
0.3
y = 4 0.2 Effort
activation
Effort
discounting Linear (effort y = 13
activation)
Linear (effort
discounting)
r = 0.51 r = –0.41
P = 0.02 P = 0.08
–0.6 –0.3 0 0.3 0.6 0.9 1.2
Response during maze navigation
d
Voxels with opposing signals (blue) and NAcc (red)
y = 8 z = –8
Fig. 5 | Cross-paradigm analyses (N = 19). a, Effort-activation and -discounting signals during maze-navigation are oppositely associated with VS
responses to effort information during effort-based decision-making (EBDM) (effort activation: r (17) = 0.51, P = 0.02, 95% CI = [0.07, 0.78]; effort
discounting: r (17) = −0.41, P = 0.08, 95% CI = [−0.73, 0.05]; Steiger’s Z = 2.88, P = 0.004). The x axis represents magnitude of effort-activation and
-discounting responses in respective striatal subregions during maze navigation. b, Distribution of effect sizes for correlations between neural response
to effort information with effort-activation and -discounting signals within spherical ROIs defined at each striatal voxel. c, Voxels in which correlation
coefficients in b were found to be significantly different. d, Comparison of voxels with opposing effort-activation and -discounting signals (in blue) and
NAcc (in red). Fifty-two per cent of NAcc voxels are encompassed in the region showing opposing signals.
NATuRe HuMAN BeHAViouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTUre HUmaN BeHavIOUr
Methods immediately followed by a jittered fixation period, whereby a ‘+’ was rendered
All procedures were approved by the Emory Institutional Review Board on top of the maze scene for a Poisson-distributed jitter period (2–5 s) with a
(#00077835/00101351) and informed consent was obtained from all human mean duration of 2.5 s. (4) Navigation phase: after the fixation cross disappeared,
participants. We recruited 30 healthy adults from the Atlanta community through participants regained control of movement and completed navigation according
fliers and online advertisements. This sample size was predetermined based on to the navigation condition, as detailed above. On failed trials, participants were
previous publications28–30. Eligibility was determined using an online pre-screening presented with a feedback screen for 2 s indicating that they failed, followed by an
survey. Participants were eligible if they were right-handed, English-speaking intertrial interval (ITI; skip to (8)). (5) Jittered ISI: upon successfully reaching the
individuals between the ages of 18 and 35. Exclusion criteria included: (1) door at the end of the maze (the ‘goal’), participants were again rendered immobile
MRI contraindications (for example, claustrophobia, metallic implants, central for another jitter period (2–5 s) with a mean duration of 2.5 s. (6) Reward phase:
nervous system diseases, pregnancy in females); (2) current use of psychoactive following the ISI, participants were presented with an animation of the door
medications, investigational drugs or those that affect blood flow (for example, opening followed by a monetary reward, represented by a dollar amount rendered
for hypertension); and (3) current medical, neurological or psychiatric illnesses as on the surface of a coin. Each trial was associated with one of four bins of reward
assessed by participant self-report. magnitudes (US$0, US$1.68–2.78, US$2.79–3.89, US$3.90–5.00), from which an
Participants first provided informed consent and completed the MRI safety amount was randomly selected. (7) Rating phase: once every four trials, starting
form. Before MRI scanning, participants underwent a training and calibration on the first trial of each run, the participant was asked to make a mood rating on
procedure on the maze-navigation task, and on the effort-based decision-making a Likert-scale between 1 (not happy at all) to 4 (very happy) using button press.
task for a subset of the participants (n = 19). In the MRI scanner, all participants (8) Jittered ITI: after reward receipt, failure feedback or mood rating, participants
completed the maze-navigation task (n = 30), and two subsets of the participants were presented with a ‘+’ rendered on a grey screen for a duration (2–6 s) jittered
completed the effort-based decision-making task (n = 19) and/or a resting-state around 3 s.
scan (n = 19). Participants also completed a functional localizer task designed Before scanning, participants completed a 15 min training procedure of the
to localize brain regions that selectively respond to visual scenes. Independent maze-navigation task. Participants were introduced to the movement controls,
analyses using this task to examine the functional roles of scene-selective regions navigation conditions and trial structure, and informed that a proportion of the
will be reported separately. After scanning, participants were taken to a separate reward they obtain on each trial will be added to their compensation as a bonus.
interview room to complete a debriefing interview. Participants were compensated Once participants indicated understanding of task instructions, they completed 16
for their participation on completion of study procedures. practice trials (4 per navigation condition) on a laptop computer. Participants were
Imaging data acquired from one participant during the maze-navigation task instructed to use the same hand and fingers that would be used to perform the task
was excluded before analysis due to the individual falling asleep during the task. in the MRI scanner.
Thus, the final sample included 29 participants for the maze-navigation task Each participant’s average rate of key pressing during the effortful-movement
analysis (mean age (M age) = 24.41; s.d. age = 5.43; 21 female), 19 participants for the trials were used to calibrate their effort levels for the in-scanner task. To ensure
effort-based decision-making task (M age = 24.26; s.d. age = 4.64; 14 female) and 19 collection of button-pressing rates for sufficient durations of time, the distance
participants for the resting-state scan (M age = 24.94; s.d. age = 5.53; 12 female). travelled per button press in the effortful-movement condition during the
practice was set low (0.11 units per press) and no time limits were imposed.
Maze-navigation task. The task was programmed using Unity 3D (Unity However, participants were informed that there would be a time limit for the
Technologies ApS). A schematic of a single trial is shown in Fig. 1a. On each trial, active-navigation conditions when they complete the task in the scanner and were
participants completed first-person navigation through a single-path virtual maze instructed to complete the mazes during the practice as quickly as possible. From
in pursuit of monetary rewards. Each trial was associated with one of four maze the practice data, the calibrated effort level (that is, distance, d, per button press)
structures, two of which required a single 90° turn (left or right), two of which for each participant was calculated as
required two 90° turns (left then right or right then left), and all of which were 2:2
equated in approximate navigation time (~5 s). Regardless of structure, each maze d
¼0:7r
was composed of 1 × 1 unit2 floors placed adjacently to form a path, bounded by
1 × 1 unit2 walls. Participants controlled movement using a four-button box with where r is the average key-pressing rate during the first 5.5 s of the navigation
the right (that is, dominant) hand. Specifically, the middle-finger button moved phase (time limit on in-scanner trials) in the effortful-movement trials. The 2.2
the participant forward (velocity = 2.2 units s−1), and the index- and ring-finger corresponds to the default rate of motion (units s−1). Seventy per cent of the average
buttons each rotated the player clockwise and anticlockwise, respectively rate was chosen to minimize motion in the scanner, while maintaining similar
(angular velocity = 0.5π rad s−1). Holding down the buttons resulted in continuous completion times across conditions. All participants successfully completed the
movement or rotation (except during the effortful-movement condition, as detailed practice trials and demonstrated understanding of the four navigation conditions.
below). Acceleration was applied to player motion to mimic real-life motion. Only During the in-scanner task, the four navigation conditions and four reward
one type of motion was allowed at any given moment (that is, pressing multiple bins were equally distributed and balanced across trials and runs. Each participant
buttons resulted in no motion). The participant view was set at 0.6 units above the completed 3 runs with 32 trials each (~11 min run−1), and trials were presented
floor, with a −10° tilt along the axis parallel to the ground. in a fixed-randomized order. Participants successfully completed the maze on
Importantly, each trial was associated with one of four navigation conditions. 93 ± 2% of trials (M effortful movement = 85%; M simple movement = 96%, M passive motion = 99%;
(1) The effortful-movement condition required participants to repeatedly press M no motion = 93%), indicating low rates of failure. Importantly, mean completion
the button associated with forward motion to advance through the maze. In this times across conditions were all within 100 ms (M effortful movement = 4.6 s;
condition, each button press moved the participant forward by an incremental M simple movement = 4.5 s, M passive motion = 4.7 s; M no motion = 4.7 s), suggesting that
distance, and the distance travelled per button press (that is, effort level) was condition-based differences in ‘time on task’ were unlikely to significantly affect
individually calibrated during the training procedure. (2) The simple-movement results. Individuals initiated navigation faster on effortful-movement trials
condition required participants to advance through the maze with the default button (M = 550 ms, s.d. = 200 ms) compared with simple-movement trials (M = 630 ms,
controls (that is, simply hold down buttons to move and rotate). This condition s.d. = 210 ms; t (28) = 2.59, P = 0.02, d = 0.48, CI = [0.09, 0.86]). There was no
served as an active-navigation control for the effortful-movement condition, which evidence of a statistically significant difference in self-reported mood ratings
allows for examination of effects specifically related to vigour by subtracting out between the active (effortful movement/simple movement; M = 2.9, s.d. = 0.7) and
activity associated with mere movement. (3) The passive-motion condition required passive (passive motion/no motion) navigation conditions (M = 2.9, s.d. = 0.7;
participants to view moving through the maze without making any movement. This t (28) = 1.41, P = 0.17, d = 0.26, CI = [−0.11, 0.63]).
condition served as a no-movement control for the simple-movement condition to
examine effects related to mere movement. (4) The no-motion condition required Effort-based decision-making task. The task was previously programmed using
participants to wait for the approximate duration of the maze (~4.7 s), after which Psychtoolbox for MATLAB30. A schematic of a single trial is shown in Fig. 4a. In
the participant was teleported to the goal. This condition served as a visual motion this task, participants made a series of binary choices based on information about
control for the passive-motion condition. Thus, two of the conditions (effortful the dollar amount of the reward and the required amount of physical effort to
movement/simple movement) required individuals to actively navigate through the obtain that reward for each choice option. Specifically, participants chose whether
maze, while the other two conditions (passive motion/no motion) entailed passive to receive US$1.00 for no work or to complete an effortful task for a larger reward
completion of navigation. Participants failed the trial if they did not reach the goal of varying amounts. On each trial, the effortful task option was associated with
within a liberal time limit (5.5 s) in the active-navigation conditions, or if they one of four bins of reward magnitude (US$1.25–2.39, US$2.40–3.49, US$3.50–4.60
initiated movement in the passive navigation conditions. and US$4.61–5.73), from which a dollar amount was randomly selected. The effort
Each trial proceeded as follows. (1) Initial approach phase: at the beginning level was presented as the height of a vertical bar (20%, 50%, 80% or 100% of the
of each trial, the participant position was initialized to the beginning of a maze, participant’s individually calibrated maximum effort level).
immediately after which participants could initiate movement. (2) Cue phase: upon Before the scan, participants completed a training and calibration procedure.
reaching a ‘trigger’ location in the maze, participants were rendered immobile Calibration was conducted via three independent trials in which participants
and the floor unit immediately in view changed colour for 2 s, before returning were asked to repeatedly press a key using their left (that is, non-dominant) pinky
to its original texture. The coloured cue informed participants to the navigation finger as rapidly as possible within 20 s. Each participant’s maximum effort level
condition for that trial. (3) Jittered interstimulus interval (ISI): the cue was was operationalized as the average number of keys pressed across the three trials.
NATuRe HuMAN BeHAViouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTUre HUmaN BeHavIOUr Articles
Participants then practiced completing the effortful tasks that varied in the required outliers. Effects in group-level whole-brain analyses were considered significant
amount of key press (20, 50, 80 and 100% of their maximum effort level) within at a two-tailed voxelwise threshold of P < 0.0005 combined with a cluster-extent
a constant time limit (20 s). They completed 4 trials at each level for a total of 16 threshold estimated for each contrast map, resulting in P FWE < 0.05, unless
trials. Participants were informed that the physical effort component would not be otherwise specified. Data distributions were assumed to be normal but this was not
completed inside the MRI scanner, but would be completed immediately following formally tested. For all ROI analyses, extracted parameters were entered into SPSS
the scan, based on the in-scanner choices. In addition, participants were instructed for significance testing and estimation of effect sizes.
that three trials would be randomly selected at the end of the session, from which For the maze-navigation task, the subject-level general linear model (GLM)
the reward they earned would be added as a bonus to their compensation. included the cue phase, first half of the navigation phase (navigation-start
Each trial was structured as follows. Participants were first presented with phase) and reward phase as regressors of interest, with each regressor separated
either the reward or effort magnitude of the effortful option (cue 1) on the left or by navigation condition. To examine the effect of reward receipt, the reward
right half of the screen for a jittered duration (2–6 s; M = 2.98 s). This information phase was further divided into rewarded (reward > US$0.00) and non-rewarded
remained on the screen while the other piece of information (cue 2) appeared on (reward = US$0.00) trials. A second GLM included the trial-by-trial reward
the opposite side of the screen for another jittered duration (2–6 s; M = 3.23 s). magnitude as a parametric modulator for the reward phase, instead of separating
Participants were then prompted to choose whether to accept the presented the rewarded and non-rewarded trials. These models also included the initial
effortful task option or reject the option in favour of receiving US$1.00 for no work approach phase, latter half of the navigation phase and rating phase, as well as
(choice phase). Participants indicated their choice using button press (index-finger the ISIs, to omit their influences on the implicit baseline. In addition, motion
button to accept; middle-finger button to reject), which was then presented on parameters and their squares, as well as high-pass filter parameters were included
the screen with the words “ACCEPTED” or “REJECTED” according to their as additional nuisance regressors. Given the potential impact of smoothing on the
choice. Order of information (effort then reward versus reward then effort) and functional segregation of striatal subregions detected in the above models, two
the presented side of screen were counterbalanced across trials. Each participant other GLMs were generated using unsmoothed images but otherwise following
completed 2 runs with 44 trials each (~ 9 min run−1), and trials were presented in a the same procedures as the first and second GLMs. Given the potential impact of
fixed-randomized order. button pressing on neural effects, one additional GLM was generated including
After the scan, participants were presented with each of the effortful choice each participant’s number of button presses per trial as a parametric regressor for
options they accepted during the in-scanner task and performed the associated the navigation-start phase on effortful- and simple-movement trials, but otherwise
tasks. For each trial, participants were given the option to change their choice, following the same procedures as the first GLM.
to examine whether performing the effortful task in real time influenced their Group-level contrasts were generated to examine the effects of effortful
willingness to expend effort. We observed that choice behaviour was consistent movement (effortful movement > simple movement) and simple movement
across contexts, such that participants made the same choice on 95 ± 3% of trials. (simple movement > passive motion) during the cue and navigation-start phases,
and to examine the effect of reward (reward > no reward, across all conditions)
Behavioural and imaging data acquisition. Stimuli were presented via and magnitude of reward (in the parametric models) during the reward phase.
back-projection mirror, and participants completed the maze-navigation and One-tailed tests were used to examine regions that were positively, but not
effort-choice task using an MR-compatible four-button box (Current Designs). negatively, associated with reward magnitude. To examine the effect of effort on
Inflatable pads (Multipad 01; Pearltec AG) placed around participants’ heads were striatal response to reward, an ROI analysis was conducted by tracking responses
used to minimize head motion. within the aVS region found to respond to reward magnitude (left subpeak: [−6, 18,
Participants were scanned in a 3 T Siemens TIM Trio scanner (Siemens AG) −6]; right subpeak: [6, 15, −3]; k = 77) in the parametric model. Then, we extracted
with a 32-channel head-coil using multiband structural and functional imaging56. beta parameters during reward receipt on rewarded trials in this independently
Each session began with a three-plane localizer scan for slice alignment, and a defined ROI, and a one-tailed pairwise comparison was conducted between the
single-shot, high-resolution structural MPRAGE sequence (repetition time (TR)/ conditions that required any level of effort (effortful movement/simple movement)
echo time(TE) = 1,900/2.27 ms; flip angle = 9°; field of view (FoV) = 250 × 250 mm; and those that did not require effort (passive motion/no motion) to specifically
192 × 1.0mm slices). BOLD functional images were acquired with T2*-weighted examine whether reward-related aVS activity was negatively modulated by effort.
echo-planar imaging sequences with a multiband acceleration factor of 4 (TR/ To examine the functional selectivity of striatal subregions found
TE = 1,000/30.0 ms; flip angle = 65°; FoV = 220 × 220mm; 52 × 3.00 mm slices). during the maze-navigation task, ROI analyses were conducted using a
leave-one-participant-out approach to avoid any circularity or non-independence
Behavioural data analysis. Behavioural data from the maze-navigation task were in the definition of ROIs57. This was conducted by defining ROIs using
used to examine latencies to initiate movement, rates of navigation completion, group-level contrasts that include data from all but one participant; extracting
durations of navigation completion and mood ratings. Latency to initiate movement beta parameters from the removed participant’s data; and repeating this procedure
was operationalized as the time between the offset of the jittered ISI following for all participants. Beta parameters were extracted from striatal subregions
the cue phase and movement onset, and was computed separately for each of the associated with effortful-movement initiation (navigation-start phase, effortful
active-navigation conditions (effortful movement/simple movement). The rate of movement > simple movement), simple-movement initiation (navigation-start
navigation completion was calculated as the number of successfully completed trials phase, simple movement > passive motion) and reward receipt (reward phase,
divided by the total number of trials. Navigation time was calculated separately reward > no reward, across all conditions). Effects of effortful movement, simple
for each navigation condition, operationalized as the time between the onset of movement and reward for each subregion was calculated by subtracting beta
movement and reaching the goal for the active-navigation trials (effortful movement/ parameters according to the relevant contrasts (effortful movement: effortful
simple movement), and between the offset of the jittered ISI following the cue movement – simple movement; simple movement: simple movement – passive
phase and reaching the goal for the passive navigation trials (passive motion/no motion; reward: reward – no reward, averaged across navigation conditions). A
motion). Self-reported mood ratings were averaged across trials separately across the 2 Region (dmS, putamen) × 2 Effect (effortful movement, simple movement)
active-navigation conditions (effortful movement/simple movement) and across the repeated-measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) was conducted to test for
passive navigation conditions (passive motion/no motion). functional dissociation between the dmS and VS, and to examine whether dmS
Behavioural data from the effort-based decision-making task were used to activity was selective to effortful and not mere movement. In addition, a 2 Region
compute the estimated subjective costs that individuals associate with varying (dmS, VS) × 2 Effect (effort activation, reward receipt) repeated-measures ANOVA
levels of effort. Using custom code, participants’ choice data were fit using was conducted to test for functional dissociation between these neighbouring
maximum likelihood estimation to a two-parameter power function used in regions associated with effort and reward.
previous work27,30: In addition, to examine the presence of both effort-activation and
effort-discounting effects within a VS region, we functionally defined a VS
SV R kEp
¼ � ROI (peak: [6, 0, −9]; k = 72) that responded to reward after completing
effortful navigation (reward > no reward, effortful-movement condition). This
which describes subjective value (SV) as the objective reward magnitude (R)
reward-sensitive ROI specific to the effortful-movement condition was defined
discounted by the subjective cost determined by the effort level (E; between 0 and
at a more lenient one-tailed voxelwise P < 0.005 given that this region was
100%) that is scaled by two free parameters, k and p.
necessarily defined on only 25% of the data. A one-tailed test was used here given
our focus on identifying striatal regions increasing BOLD activity in response
Imaging data analysis. Functional images from the maze-navigation and
to reward receipt. We also note that this threshold was used for ROI definition
effort-based decision-making tasks were preprocessed using SPM12 scripts
only and not for subsequent inferential analyses. Beta parameters from this
through NeuroElf v1.1 (neuroelf.net). Specifically, images were co-registered to the
independently defined ROI were extracted from the effortful-movement and
structural image, motion-corrected, warped to the MNI template and smoothed
simple-movement conditions during the navigation-start and reward phases,
using a Gaussian filter (6 mm full-width at half-maximum). Raw and preprocessed
and a 2 Condition (effortful movement, simple movement) × 2 Phase (navigation
data were subjected to multiple tests for quality assurance and inspected for
start, reward) repeated-measures ANOVA was conducted. Pairwise comparisons
spiking and motion. Volumes were discarded if the root mean square of motion
were conducted to parse out the nature of significant effects. In addition, Monte
parameters exceeded a single voxel dimension (3 mm), or if striping was identified
Carlo approximation (10,000 samples) was used to estimate the Bayes factor
through visual inspection of each functional volume. Subject-level modelling of
for a one-sample t-test on the average effect between the effort activation and
trial events was conducted using robust regression to reduce the influence of strong
NATuRe HuMAN BeHAViouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTUre HUmaN BeHavIOUr
discounting signals to examine the likelihood of a null effect. Non-informative left peak: [−9, 0, 6]; right peak: [9, 6, −3]; k = 264) and the VS (obtained from
priors were used for the mean and variance given the lack of previous work reward phase, reward > no reward, effortful-movement condition; peak: [6, 0,
examining these opposing signals. −9]; k = 72) to compute individual differences in the effect of effort (effortful
The CONN toolbox was used for resting-state fMRI data analysis. Preprocessing movement – simple movement) during the navigation-start phase for the dmS
of images included motion correction, co-registration to structural scan, MNI (that is, effort activation signal) and during the reward phase for the VS (that is,
normalization and smoothing using an 8 mm Gaussian smoothing kernel. Striatal effort-discounting signal). We then correlated these effects with extracted beta
subregions were functionally defined from the maze-navigation data and used parameters from the VS during an open contrast of the presentation of effort
as seed regions to create individual seed-to-voxel functional connectivity maps. information at cue 1 (averaged across all presented effort levels) in the effort-based
Specifically, the seed regions included a bilateral dmS region associated with effort decision-making task. An open contrast (that is, contrasted against the implicit
activation (navigation-start phase, effortful movement > simple movement), a region baseline) was used as we felt this best represented neural responses to potential
in the bilateral putamen associated with movement initiation (navigation-start effort compared with the default ‘no effort’ option that was always available to
phase, simple movement > passive motion) and a bilateral VS region associated participants on this task. Further, to localize locations within the striatum where
with reward (reward phase, parametric effect of reward magnitude, across all effort-activation and -discounting signals had significant opposing effects, a post
conditions). Two-tailed contrast maps were generated to directly compare the hoc exploratory analysis was conducted using NeuroElf and custom code. For each
functional connectivity maps between each seed region in pairs (that is, dmS > aVS, voxel within a striatal mask47 (k = 37,551), we defined a spherical ROI (r = 2 mm)
dmS > putamen and aVS > putamen). For this analysis, we used a voxelwise and removed any voxels residing outside of the mask. Then, we extracted
height threshold of P < 0.005 combined with a cluster-extent threshold to achieve parameters from each of these ROIs during the presentation of effort information
P FWE < 0.05 given the proximity of the seed regions being compared. In addition, for in the effort-based decision-making task, and correlated these parameters with the
each of the three functional connectivity maps, comparison maps were generated effort activation and discounting signals from the maze-navigation task. Steiger’s
using the spatially corresponding subregions among the previously reported Z-test was used to compare correlation coefficients across these analyses. Voxels in
connectivity-based parcellation of the striatum (regions 4, 5 and 7 in the seven which there were significant differences in correlation coefficients were compared
subregion parcellation)47. Further, functional connectivity maps using striatal regions with voxels in bilateral NAcc as defined in the Harvard–Oxford atlas distributed
defined from the maze-navigation task were computed using an independent set of with FSL (http://www.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl/).
7 T resting-state fMRI data (N = 22)51 downloaded from OpenNeuro (openneuro.
org). Specifically, two runs per subject of whole-brain resting-state data from Reporting Summary. Further information on research design is available in the
session one in the dataset were included for the purpose of our study. Processing Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.
of these data followed the same procedures through CONN as described above,
except for using a 6 mm smoothing kernel to account for smaller voxel size. Lastly, Data availability
Sørensen–Dice indices were calculated for each ROI defined in the maze-navigation
Contrast maps of fMRI data that support the findings of this study are available
task and the corresponding connectivity-based ROI47 to test for spatial similarity
on NeuroVault (https://neurovault.org/collections/LLQYKRMV/). Other data are
between the ROI definitions. To do this, we used the nilearn (http://nilearn.github.
available from the corresponding author upon request.
io) library to resample the image space and affine of task-based ROI masks on the
connectivity-based ROI masks. Code availability
For the effort-based decision-making task, the first subjective-level GLM
Custom code that supports the findings of this study is available from the
included the cue 1 and cue 2 phases as regressors of interests, with cue 1 regressors
corresponding author upon request.
separated by type of information presented (effort versus reward). We also included
the choice and rating phases to omit their influence on the implicit baseline. Again,
Received: 3 February 2020; Accepted: 18 September 2020;
motion parameters and their squares, as well as high-pass filter parameters were
included as additional nuisance regressors. At the group level, we examined regions Published: xx xx xxxx
in which activity was higher during cue 2 compared with cue 1 (cue 2 > cue 1). To
examine the effect of subjective value during the valuation period, we additionally References
included the trial-by-trial SV of the chosen option as a parametric regressor for 1. Bartra, O., McGuire, J. T. & Kable, J. W. The valuation system: a
cue 2 in a second GLM. At the group level, we focused on the negative parametric coordinate-based meta-analysis of BOLD fMRI experiments examining
effects of SV to identify regions that increased in response to decreasing value (for neural correlates of subjective value. Neuroimage 76, 412–427 (2013).
example, higher effort costs). ROI analyses were conducted to examine the effect 2. Mogenson, G. J., Jones, D. L. & Yim, C. Y. From motivation to action:
of negative SV in the dACC and VS. To do this, the dACC ROI (left subpeak: [−10, functional interface between the limbic system and the motor system. Prog.
26, 32]; right subpeak: [10, 24, 36]; k = 334) was functionally defined using the Neurobiol. 14, 69–97 (1980).
same parametric analysis (effect of negative SV) from our previous study using 3. Knutson, B., Delgado, M. R. & Phillips, P. E. in Neuroeconomics: Decision
this task27,30 at P FWE < 0.05 cluster corrected with one-tailed voxelwise P < 0.0005, Making and the Brain (eds Glimcher, P. W., Fehr, E., Camerer, C., & Poldrack,
and the VS ROI was defined using an anatomical NAcc mask (left peak: [−10, 10, R. A.) 389–406 (Academic Press, 2009).
−8], k = 309; right peak: [10, 10, −8], k = 310). A one-tailed test was used to obtain 4. Berke, J. D. What does dopamine mean? Nat. Neurosci. 21, 787–793 (2018).
results associated with the effects of negative, but not positive, SV. A pairwise 5. Berridge, K. C. & Robinson, T. E. What is the role of dopamine in reward:
comparison was conducted on the extracted parametric effects of negative SV hedonic impact, reward learning, or incentive salience? Brain Res. Rev. 28,
within the dACC and VS. 309–369 (1998).
Multivariate pattern analysis of the effort-based decision-making task was 6. Schultz, W., Carelli, R. M. & Wightman, R. M. Phasic dopamine signals: from
performed using the scikit-learn58 and nilearn libraries. We trained linear support subjective reward value to formal economic utility. Curr. Opin. Behav. Sci. 5,
vector machines with the C parameter fixed at a value of 1. Each classifier used 147–154 (2015).
unsmoothed functional images as features to predict the type of information (effort 7. Salamone, J. D., Correa, M., Farrar, A. & Mingote, S. M. Effort-related
or reward) shown at cue 1. For each trial, we selected four fMRI volumes offset functions of nucleus accumbens dopamine and associated forebrain circuits.
by four seconds from the onset of cue 1 presentation. Classifiers were trained and Psychopharmacology 191, 461–482 (2007).
evaluated at the single-subject level using a fourfold cross-validation procedure 8. Wise, R. A. Dopamine, learning and motivation. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 5,
in which data were randomly partitioned into four subsets. To avoid temporal 483–494 (2004).
confounds, all volumes within a trial were kept in the same fold. The accuracies 9. McClure, S. M., Laibson, D. I., Loewenstein, G. & Cohen, J. D. Separate
reported are the average of the four folds. For each subject, we tested three neural systems value immediate and delayed monetary rewards. Science 306,
classifiers that differed in the spatial filtering of the images used as inputs. The first 503–507 (2004).
model used whole-brain images as inputs; feature selection was then performed by 10. Wittmann, M., Leland, D. S. & Paulus, M. P. Time and decision making:
selecting 1,000 voxels that were most strongly associated with the training labels differential contribution of the posterior insular cortex and the striatum
based on their ranking of ANOVA F-values. In the second and third models, inputs during a delay discounting task. Exp. Brain Res. 179, 643–653 (2007).
were constrained to voxels within the aVS (left peak: [−6, 18, −6]; right peak: 11. Gregorios-Pippas, L., Tobler, P. N. & Schultz, W. Short term temporal
[6, 15, −3]; k = 77) and dmS (left peak: [−9, 0, 6]; right peak: [9, 6, −3]; k = 264) discounting of reward value in human ventral striatum. J. Neurophysiol. 101,
masks, respectively. To test the significance of classifier performance, we ran 1507–1523 (2009).
permutation tests in which the same classification procedure was repeated using 12. Kable, J. W. & Glimcher, P. W. The neural correlates of subjective value during
1,000 random permutations of training labels59. This provided a distribution of intertemporal choice. Nat. Neurosci. 10, 1625–1633 (2007).
chance-level accuracy; we consider the performance of a classifier as significantly 13. Peters, J. & Büchel, C. Overlapping and distinct neural systems code for
above chance if is greater than 95% of accuracies obtained using permutated tests59. subjective value during intertemporal and risky decision making. J. Neurosci.
In addition, to examine whether individual differences in striatal responses 29, 15727–15734 (2009).
during maze-navigation predicted ventral striatal signals in the effort-based 14. Prévost, C., Pessiglione, M., Météreau, E., Cléry-Melin, M.-L. & Dreher, J.-C.
decision-making task, we used the extracted beta parameters from the dmS Separate valuation subsystems for delay and effort decision costs. J. Neurosci.
(obtained from navigation-start phase, effortful movement > simple movement; 30, 14080–14090 (2010).
NATuRe HuMAN BeHAViouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTUre HUmaN BeHavIOUr Articles
15. Abler, B., Walter, H., Erk, S., Kammerer, H. & Spitzer, M. Prediction error as 44. Van Der Plasse, G., Schrama, R., Van Seters, S. P., Vanderschuren, L. J. &
a linear function of reward probability is coded in human nucleus Westenberg, H. G. Deep brain stimulation reveals a dissociation of
accumbens. Neuroimage 31, 790–795 (2006). consummatory and motivated behaviour in the medial and lateral nucleus
16. Yacubian, J. et al. Dissociable systems for gain-and loss-related value accumbens shell of the rat. PLoS ONE 7, e33455 (2012).
predictions and errors of prediction in the human brain. J. Neurosci. 26, 45. Parkinson, J. A., Willoughby, P. J., Robbins, T. W. & Everitt, B. J.
9530–9537 (2006). Disconnection of the anterior cingulate cortex and nucleus accumbens core
17. Levy, D. J. & Glimcher, P. W. The root of all value: a neural common currency impairs Pavlovian approach behavior: further evidence for limbic cortical–
for choice. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 22, 1027–1038 (2012). ventral striatopallidal systems. Behav. Neurosci. 114, 42–63 (2000).
18. Croxson, P. L., Walton, M. E., O’Reilly, J. X., Behrens, T. E. & Rushworth, M. 46. Ko, D. & Wanat, M. J. Phasic dopamine transmission reflects initiation vigor
F. Effort-based cost–benefit valuation and the human brain. J. Neurosci. 29, and exerted effort in an action-and region-specific manner. J. Neurosci. 36,
4531–4541 (2009). 2202–2211 (2016).
19. Kurniawan, I. T. et al. Choosing to make an effort: the role of striatum in 47. Choi, E. Y., Yeo, B. T. & Buckner, R. L. The organization of the human
signaling physical effort of a chosen action. J. Neurophysiol. 104, 313–321 striatum estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity. J. Neurophysiol. 108,
(2010). 2242–2263 (2012).
20. Schmidt, L., Lebreton, M., Cléry-Melin, M.-L., Daunizeau, J. & Pessiglione, 48. Haber, S. N. & Knutson, B. The reward circuit: linking primate anatomy and
M. Neural mechanisms underlying motivation of mental versus physical human imaging. Neuropsychopharmacology 35, 4–26 (2010).
effort. PLoS Biol. 10, e1001266 (2012). 49. Haber, S. N., Kim, K.-S., Mailly, P. & Calzavara, R. Reward-related cortical
21. Burke, C. J., Brünger, C., Kahnt, T., Park, S. Q. & Tobler, P. N. Neural inputs define a large striatal region in primates that interface with associative
integration of risk and effort costs by the frontal pole: only upon request. cortical connections, providing a substrate for incentive-based learning. J.
J. Neurosci. 33, 1706–1713 (2013). Neurosci. 26, 8368–8376 (2006).
22. Kurniawan, I. T., Guitart-Masip, M., Dayan, P. & Dolan, R. J. Effort and 50. Engelhard, B. et al. Specialized coding of sensory, motor and cognitive
valuation in the brain: the effects of anticipation and execution. J. Neurosci. variables in VTA dopamine neurons. Nature 570, 509–513 (2019).
33, 6160–6169 (2013). 51. Gorgolewski, K. J. et al. A high resolution 7-Tesla resting-state fMRI
23. Skvortsova, V., Palminteri, S. & Pessiglione, M. Learning to minimize efforts test-retest dataset with cognitive and physiological measures. Sci. Data 2,
versus maximizing rewards: computational principles and neural correlates. 140054 (2015).
J. Neurosci. 34, 15621–15630 (2014). 52. Howe, M. W., Tierney, P. L., Sandberg, S. G., Phillips, P. E. & Graybiel, A. M.
24. Massar, S. A., Libedinsky, C., Weiyan, C., Huettel, S. A. & Chee, M. W. Prolonged dopamine signalling in striatum signals proximity and value of
Separate and overlapping brain areas encode subjective value during delay distant rewards. Nature 500, 575–579 (2013).
and effort discounting. Neuroimage 120, 104–113 (2015). 53. Roesch, M. R., Singh, T., Brown, P. L., Mullins, S. E. & Schoenbaum, G.
25. Scholl, J. et al. The good, the bad, and the irrelevant: neural mechanisms of Ventral striatal neurons encode the value of the chosen action in rats
learning real and hypothetical rewards and effort. J. Neurosci. 35, deciding between differently delayed or sized rewards. J. Neurosci. 29,
11233–11251 (2015). 13365–13376 (2009).
26. Bonnelle, V., Manohar, S., Behrens, T. & Husain, M. Individual differences in 54. Hall, J., Parkinson, J. A., Connor, T. M., Dickinson, A. & Everitt, B. J.
premotor brain systems underlie behavioral apathy. Cereb. Cortex 26, 807–819 Involvement of the central nucleus of the amygdala and nucleus accumbens
(2015). core in mediating Pavlovian influences on instrumental behaviour. Eur. J.
27. Klein-Flügge, M. C., Kennerley, S. W., Friston, K. & Bestmann, S. Neural Neurosci. 13, 1984–1992 (2001).
signatures of value comparison in human cingulate cortex during 55. Sonkusare, S., Breakspear, M. & Guo, C. Naturalistic stimuli in neuroscience:
decisions requiring an effort-reward trade-off. J. Neurosci. 36, critically acclaimed. Trends Cogn. Sci. 23, 699–714 (2019).
10002–10015 (2016). 56. Van Essen, D. C. et al. The WU-Minn human connectome project: an
28. Chong, T. T.-J. et al. Neurocomputational mechanisms underlying subjective overview. Neuroimage 80, 62–79 (2013).
valuation of effort costs. PLoS Biol. 15, e1002598 (2017). 57. Esterman, M., Tamber-Rosenau, B. J., Chiu, Y.-C. & Yantis, S. Avoiding
29. Hauser, T. U., Eldar, E. & Dolan, R. J. Separate mesocortical and mesolimbic non-independence in fMRI data analysis: leave one subject out. Neuroimage
pathways encode effort and reward learning signals. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 50, 572–576 (2010).
114, E7395–E7404 (2017). 58. Pedregosa, F. et al. Scikit-learn: machine learning in Python. J. Mach. Learn.
30. Arulpragasam, A. R., Cooper, J. A., Nuutinen, M. R. & Treadway, M. T. Res. 12, 2825–2830 (2011).
Corticoinsular circuits encode subjective value expectation and violation for 59. Ojala, M. & Garriga, G. C. Permutation tests for studying classifier
effortful goal-directed behavior. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 115, E5233–E5242 performance. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 11, 1833–1863 (2010).
(2018).
Acknowledgements
31. Aridan, N., Malecek, N. J., Poldrack, R. A. & Schonberg, T. Neural
correlates of effort-based valuation with prospective choices. Neuroimage 185, This work was supported by funding from the NIMH R00 MH102355 and R01
446–454 (2019). MH108605 to M.T.T. and F32 MH115692 to J.A.C. and the National Science Foundation
32. Endepols, H. et al. Effort-based decision making in the rat: an [18F] Graduate Research Fellowship Program DGE- 1444932 to A.R.A. The funders had no
fluorodeoxyglucose micro positron emission tomography study. J. Neurosci. role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish or preparation
30, 9708–9714 (2010). of the manuscript. We thank J. Buckholtz and D. Dilks for helpful discussion and
33. Cousins, M. S. & Salamone, J. D. Nucleus accumbens dopamine depletions in commentary. We also thank B. DeVries, M. Nuutinen, E. Hahn, D. Harrison, A. Lu, M.
rats affect relative response allocation in a novel cost/benefit procedure. Rehman, J. Yang, K. Kwok, S. Han and N. Ahad for their assistance in data collection.
Pharmacol. Biochem. Behav. 49, 85–91 (1994).
Author contributions
34. Floresco, S. B. The nucleus accumbens: an interface between cognition,
emotion, and action. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 66, 25–52 (2015). S.S. wrote the first draft of the paper; S.S. and M.T.T. designed the research; S.S.
35. da Silva, J. A., Tecuapetla, F., Paixão, V. & Costa, R. M. Dopamine neuron performed the research; S.S., V.M.L., J.A.C., A.R.A. and M.T.T. analysed the data; S.S.,
activity before action initiation gates and invigorates future movements. V.M.L., J.A.C., A.R.A. and M.T.T. wrote the paper.
Nature 554, 244–248 (2018).
Competing interests
36. Day, J. J., Jones, J. L., Wightman, R. M. & Carelli, R. M. Phasic nucleus
accumbens dopamine release encodes effort-and delay-related costs. The authors report no conflicts of interest, financial or otherwise. In the past three
Biol. Psychiatry 68, 306–309 (2010). years, M.T.T. has served as a paid consultant to Blackthorn Therapeutics and Avanir
37. Hamid, A. A. et al. Mesolimbic dopamine signals the value of work. Pharmaceuticals. None of these entities supported the current work, and all views
Nat. Neurosci. 19, 117–126 (2016). expressed herein are solely those of the authors.
38. Syed, E. C. et al. Action initiation shapes mesolimbic dopamine encoding of
future rewards. Nat. Neurosci. 19, 34–39 (2016). Additional information
39. Lau, B. & Glimcher, P. W. Action and outcome encoding in the primate
Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/
caudate nucleus. J. Neurosci. 27, 14502–14514 (2007).
s41562-020-00972-y.
40. Samejima, K., Ueda, Y., Doya, K. & Kimura, M. Representation of
action-specific reward values in the striatum. Science 310, 1337–1340 (2005). Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to M.T.T.
41. Zaborszky, L. et al. Cholecystokinin innervation of the ventral striatum: a Peer review information Primary Handling Editor: Jamie Horder.
morphological and radioimmunological study. Neuroscience 14, 427–453 (1985).
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
42. Penner, M. R. & Mizumori, S. J. Neural systems analysis of decision making
during goal-directed navigation. Prog. Neurobiol. 96, 96–135 (2012). Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
43. Di Chiara, G. et al. Dopamine and drug addiction: the nucleus accumbens published maps and institutional affiliations.
shell connection. Neuropharmacology 47, 227–241 (2004). © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2020
NATuRe HuMAN BeHAViouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
1
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
April
2020
Corresponding author(s): Michael T. Treadway
Last updated by author(s): Sep 10, 2020
Reporting Summary
Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency
in reporting. For further information on Nature Research policies, see our Editorial Policies and the Editorial Policy Checklist.
Statistics
For all statistical analyses, confirm that the following items are present in the figure legend, table legend, main text, or Methods section.
n/a Confirmed
The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
A statement on whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided
Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.
A description of all covariates tested
A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
A full description of the statistical parameters including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient)
AND variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)
For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted
Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.
For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated
Our web collection on statistics for biologists contains articles on many of the points above.
Software and code
Policy information about availability of computer code
Data collection The maze-navigation task was programmed using Unity 3D. The effort-based navigation-task was programmed using Psychtoolbox for
MATLAB.
Data analysis SPM12 was used in conjunction with NeuroElf v1.1 for preprocessing of task fMRI data. NeuroElf v1.1 was also used for preprocessing, first-
level and second-level modeling, and visualizations of task fMRI data. CONN v17.f was used for functional connectivity analysis of resting-state
fMRI data. Scikit-learn and nilearn libraries were used for testing of spatial similarity between regions of interests and for multivariate pattern
analysis of task fMRI data. Custom code was used for a searchlight parameter extraction of fMRI data and computational modeling of
behavioral data from the effort-based decision-making task. SPSS was used for conducting ROI analyses.
For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors and
reviewers. We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Research guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.
Data
Policy information about availability of data
All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable:
- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets
- A list of figures that have associated raw data
- A description of any restrictions on data availability
Contrast maps of fMRI data that support the findings of this study are available on NeuroVault (https://neurovault.org/collcetions/LLQYKRMV/). Other data are
available from the corresponding author upon request.
2
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
April
2020
Field-specific reporting
Please select the one below that is the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.
Life sciences Behavioural & social sciences Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences
For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/documents/nr-reporting-summary-flat.pdf
Behavioural & social sciences study design
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
Study description Quantitative experimental
Research sample 30 healthy adults (21 female) from the Atlanta community with mean age of 24.3. The sample is not representative. Existing 7T
resting-state fMRI dataset from 22 adults (10 female) with mean age of 25.1 obtained from https://openneuro.org/datasets/
ds001168/versions/1.0.1.
Sampling strategy Random sampling through online advertisements and fliers in Atlanta community. The sample size was predetermined based on
previous publications in the effort-based decision-making literature.
Data collection Neuroimaging data were collected using a MRI scanner. Behavioral data were collected and recorded on a computer. Only the
researcher and participant was present, and the researcher was not blind to experimental condition or study hypothesis during data
collection.
Timing Start date: October 11th, 2018
End date: March 8th, 2019
Data exclusions Imaging data from one participant was excluded prior to analysis due to the individual falling sleep during the maze-navigation task.
Exclusion of invalid data was pre-established.
Non-participation No participants declined participation.
Randomization Participants were not allocated to experimental groups.
Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods
We require information from authors about some types of materials, experimental systems and methods used in many studies. Here, indicate whether each material,
system or method listed is relevant to your study. If you are not sure if a list item applies to your research, read the appropriate section before selecting a response.
Materials & experimental systems Methods
n/a Involved in the study n/a Involved in the study
Antibodies ChIP-seq
Eukaryotic cell lines Flow cytometry
Palaeontology and archaeology MRI-based neuroimaging
Animals and other organisms
Human research participants
Clinical data
Dual use research of concern
Human research participants
Policy information about studies involving human research participants
Population characteristics See above.
Recruitment Online advertisements and fliers.
Ethics oversight Emory University Institutional Review Board.
Note that full information on the approval of the study protocol must also be provided in the manuscript.
3
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
April
2020
Magnetic resonance imaging
Experimental design
Design type Maze-navigation task (event-related); effort-based decision-making task (event-related); resting state.
Design specifications Maze-navigation task consisted of 3 runs of 32 trials per run (~11min/run) with variable trial length. Inter-trial interval
ranged between 2-6s. The effort-based decision-making task consisted of 2 runs of 44 trials/run (~9min), with variable
trial lengths. Inter-trial interval ranged between 2-8s.
Behavioral performance measures Maze-navigation task: Response time, rates of completion, duration for completion, and number of button presses.
Mean rates of completion were used to establish that subjects were completing the task as expected.
Effort-based decision-making task: Number of effortful and non-effortful choices selected. Mean rate of choice
selection was used to establish that subjects were completing the task as expected.
Acquisition
Imaging type(s) Functional and structural.
Field strength 3 Tesla.
Sequence & imaging parameters Structural images were acquired with MPRAGE sequence (TR/TE=1900/2.27ms; flip angle=9; FoV=250x250mm;
192x1.0mm slices). Functional images were acquired with T2*-weighted EPI sequences with a multiband acceleration
factor of 4 (TR/TE=1000/30.0ms; flip angle=65; FoV=220x220mm; 52x3.00mm slices).
Area of acquisition A whole-brain scan was used.
Diffusion MRI Used Not used
Preprocessing
Preprocessing software Preprocessing was conducted using SPM12 scripts through NeuroElf v1.1. Functional images were co-registered to the brain-
extracted structural image, motion-corrected, warped to the MNI template, and smoothed using a Guassian filter (6mm full
with-half maximum).
Normalization Nonlinear normalization using MNI template
Normalization template MNI305
Noise and artifact removal Volumes were discarded if the root mean square of motion parameters exceeded a single voxel dimension (3mm). Motion
parameters and their squares as well as high-pass filter parameters were included as nuisance regressors during first-level
analysis.
Volume censoring Volumes were discarded if the root mean square of motion parameters exceeded a single voxel dimension (3mm) or if
striping was identified through visual inspection. This resulted in removal of 5% of total number of volumes.
Statistical modeling & inference
Model type and settings Univariate
Effect(s) tested Maze-navigation task contrasts: [Navigation Start phase, Effortful-Movement>Simple-Movement]; [Navigation Start phase,
Simple-Movement>Passive-Motion]; [Reward phase, Reward>No-Reward, all conditions]; [Reward phase, Reward>No-
reward, Effortful-Movement]; [Reward phase, parametric effect of reward magnitude]
Specify type of analysis: Whole brain ROI-based Both
Three ROIs were functionally defined from whole-brain analyses of the maze-navigation task using
voxelwise threshold p<0.0005. Bilateral putamen was defined using the Simple-Movement>Passive-
Motion contrast during the Navigation Start phase. Dorsomedial striatum was defined used the Effortful-
Movement>Simple-Movement contrast during the Navigation Start phase. Anterior ventral striatum was
defined using the Reward>No-Reward contrast during the Reward phase. Another ventral striatum ROI
Anatomical location(s)
was defined at a voxelwise threshold p<0.005 using the Reward>No-Reward contrast specific to the
Effortful-Movement condition during the Reward phase. Definitions of three striatal subregions were
obtained from a previously-reported seven-region parcellation based on intrinsic connectivity (https://
surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu/fswiki/StriatumParcellation_Choi2012). A definition of the anatomical
nucleus accumbens was obtained from the Harvard-Oxford atlas distributed within FSL.
Statistic type for inference Voxel-wise threshold of p<0.0005 combined with cluster-extent threshold estimated for each contrast map resulting in FWE-
(See Eklund et al. 2016) corrected p<0.05. A voxelwise threshold of p<0.005 was used for comparison of functional connectivity maps and for defining
a ventral striatum ROI in the Reward>No-Reward contrast specific to the Effortful-Movement condition during the Reward
phase.
4
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
April
2020
Correction FWE correction using NeuroElf v1.1's AlphaSim
Models & analysis
n/a Involved in the study
Functional and/or effective connectivity
Graph analysis
Multivariate modeling or predictive analysis
Functional and/or effective connectivity Fisher-transformed bivariate correlation
Multivariate modeling and predictive analysis Linear support vectors machines with C parameter fixed at value of 1 was trained using unsmoothed
functional images at Cue 1 of the effort-based decision-making task. The first four functional volumes offset
by four seconds from the onset of Cue 1 presentation was used. Four-fold cross validation was used for
training and validation. All volumes within a trial were kept within the same fold to avoid temporal
confounds. Three classifiers were trained and tested that differed in spatial filtering of the input images. The
first model used whole-brain images as inputs; feature selection was then performed by selecting 1,000
voxels that were most strongly associated with the training labels based on their ranking of ANOVA F-values.
In the second and third models, inputs were constrained to voxels within the aVS and dmS masks. To test
significance of classifier performance, we ran permutation tests in which the same classification procedure
was repeated using 1,000 random permutations of training labels.