Attached are the instructions. Here is the video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=F2LVsAdXRkI

The study was conducted in the lab with undergraduate students. US participants were recruited using by posting an ad on the SONA subject pool maintained by the department. Indian participants were recruited by posting flyers on campus. As the original study was conducted in a lab under a controlled setting with minimal distractions, an online study would not count as an exact replication because the amount of environmental distraction is typically much higher online than in the lab. 

The original study was run using DirectRT using the attached Video1.csv file, along with the accompanying style.drt file (which has to be put in the same folder as the csv file). An equivalent study can be run on Qualtrics by showing the instructions on one page and the video on the next page. See comments in the attached instructions about slightly revised instructions to use on Qualtrics. Please insert a timer question on the video page so that you can record the clicks. Even with this minor change, your study would count as a replication if conducted in the lab. I am happy to check your Qualtrics survey if needed.

The raw data output from DirectRT is in the "Data by Trial.xls" file. I just added the "ObsNum" column that had unique subject numbers (as some of the same subject numbers were used in India and the US). The number of rows per participant were counted and added in the attached "Data by Subject.xls" file, under the column "numaction." Other variables int his file - culture, condition, gender - are self-explanatory (check the columns with "name" at the end). 

Note that the video data from one Indian participant is missing, so we only have valid data for 67 Indian participants, not 68. However, the participant with missing data is included in the "data by subject.xls" file.

Unfortunately I had not saved the original results files from the data analysis conducted in SPSS. When I re-analyzed the data in STATA, I got the same results in terms of statistical significance but not in terms of the F-values. I cannot explain the discrepancy other than the speculation that SPSS was buggy during the 2008-2010 period. The Cohen's d from STATA are very close to the original Cohen's d reported in the paper. 

Please let me know if you have any questions.
