Articles
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-020-0899-5
Exposure to peers’ pro-diversity attitudes increases
inclusion and reduces the achievement gap
Sohad Murrar 1,2, Mitchell R. Campbell 1 and Markus Brauer 1 ✉
There is a dearth of empirically validated pro-diversity methods that effectively create a more inclusive social climate.
We developed two scalable interventions that target people’s perceptions of social norms by communicating to them that their
peers hold pro-diversity attitudes and engage in inclusive behaviours. We tested the interventions in six randomized controlled
trials at a large public university in the United States (total n = 2,490). Non-marginalized students exposed to our interventions
reported more positive attitudes toward outgroups and greater appreciation of diversity, whereas marginalized students had
an increased sense of belonging, reported being treated more inclusively by their peers and earned better grades. While many
current pro-diversity initiatives focus on raising awareness about the fact that implicit bias and subtle discrimination are wide-
spread, our findings spotlight the importance of drawing people’s attention to their peers’ pro-diversity values and attitudes to
create positive and lasting effects on the social climate.
F
ostering positive relationships between members of different socially acceptable, which in turn influences their own attitudes
social groups is a major challenge of the twenty-first century. and behaviours15.
Global warming, growing populations and the depletion of Social norms are customary standards or guides for behaviour,
natural resources will increase the number of migrants across the attitudes and beliefs that are shared by a group16. They have a pow-
globe, increasing diversity in many countries1. In the United States, erful impact because people want to fit in with their peers and
White Americans will soon be a numerical minority2. Despite will modify their own attitudes and behaviours to align with what
increasing in number, members of marginalized groups still suffer they perceive to be socially normative17,18. Research has found that
poorer life outcomes. For example, many intelligent and motivated simply perceiving a behaviour to be descriptively normative (com-
individuals belonging to these groups perform poorly at, and drop mon) predicts the extent to which people engage in that behaviour,
out of, educational institutions3. The social climate seems to play a regardless of how many people actually engage in the behaviour15.
key role in this: the more inclusive the climate, the higher the reten- Social norms messaging entails providing individuals with informa-
tion and persistence among marginalized college students4,5. In fact, tion about their peers or relevant others. Relying on the power of
students’ sense of belonging has been tied to key educational out- perceived norms, such messaging has the potential to change peo-
comes such as academic self-concept, self-efficacy, intrinsic moti- ple’s understanding of group norms, their place in the group and
vation and academic success5–7. Creating an inclusive climate in the evaluative significance of the content of a persuasive message19.
universities—that is, getting students to get along with, reach out Social norms messaging can effectively reduce the abuse of alco-
to, work in teams with, and behave in a welcoming and respectful hol and tobacco among college and high school students20–22. It also
manner towards individuals from different social backgrounds—is has been used to enhance environmental conservation by increas-
one of the most pressing issues of our time. ing towel reuse in hotels23, reducing residential energy use24 and
Despite this urgency, researchers have come up with few methods decreasing residential water use25. Although social norms messag-
that reliably create a more inclusive climate. Diversity workshops ing has been shown to be effective in a variety of domains, it has yet
appear to be ineffective8, with some researchers reporting backlash to be shown whether such an approach can be leveraged to promote
effects9. Implicit bias training generally does not have effects that inclusion in real-world settings.
last for more than a day10 and seems to have little or no impact on Some research suggests that being told one’s peers endorse
discriminatory behaviours11. Many pro-diversity initiatives have non-stereotypical views of Black Americans can lead to less ste-
been implemented in schools, colleges and organizational settings, reotyping of Black Americans26 and overhearing a peer condemn
but few have been systematically tested12. In a field that is dominated racism can reduce the expression of racist opinions27. The public
by ‘best practices’ and ideological discussions, few heed the call for expression of prejudice toward social groups is highly correlated
rigorous evaluation of methods to promote inclusion6. with social approval of that expression28. By simply describing
In light of this situation, it is surprising that diversity scientists the attitudes and behaviours of people’s peers, social norms mes-
and practitioners have given little attention to an approach that sages emphasize autonomy and personal choice and such a fram-
has been proposed by several researchers: social norms messag- ing has been shown to be more effective than messages that present
ing13,14. This approach consists of communicating to people that non-discrimination as a moral and legal obligation that people
most of their peers hold certain pro-social attitudes or tend to must comply with29. Furthermore, some researchers have attempted
engage in certain pro-social behaviours, that is, that these atti- to leverage social norms to reduce bullying in schools by training
tudes or behaviours are ‘descriptively normative’. Such commu- well-connected students to publicly speak up against conflict at
nications shape people’s perceptions of what is common and school30. Although these researchers found no differences in social
1Department of Psychology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA. 2Governors State University, University Park, IL, USA.
✉e-mail: markus.brauer@wisc.edu
NatuRE HuMaN BEHaviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles Nature HumaN BeHaviour
norms between treatment and control schools, the training led to the former but not by the latter process measure. Finally, to better
fewer disciplinary reports of student conflict at treatment schools. understand whether the intervention affected behavioural inten-
Distinct from past research, the research described below tions, we asked participants to indicate their interest in a number of
focuses on the effects of making salient pro-diversity descriptive campus programmes. One of these was a social justice course, the
norms, which characterize normative practices and values of indi- others were unrelated to intergroup relations. We expected partici-
viduals within an institution rather than presenting an institutional pants in the social norms condition to report greater intention to
practice31. In the present paper, we propose that social norms mes- participate in the social justice course than in the control condition.
saging can be used to create a more inclusive climate and reduce the Experiment 5 had multiple purposes. First, we wanted to ensure
‘achievement gap’, that is, the difference in academic performance that the beneficial effects of our social norms video were not driven
between individuals with privileged versus marginalized social by the fact that instructors showed a video on diversity in their
identities. Using social marketing principles32, we developed two classrooms, so we included a third condition in which students
interventions designed to promote positive attitudes towards social viewed a different video on bias and micro-aggressions. Second, we
outgroups, increase commitment to diversity, strengthen feelings of wanted to see if the effects generalized to a larger set of outcomes.
social belonging and facilitate interactions in which people of all We thus included several additional scales measuring various inter-
backgrounds feel welcome and respected. We tested our interven- group constructs, some of which were indicative of an inclusive cli-
tions in a series of six randomized controlled trials conducted in a mate (for example, intergroup anxiety) and some of which were not
university setting. About one-third of the student participants were (for example, support for pro-diversity policies). Third, we wanted
from ‘marginalized’ groups (part of an ethnic or religious minority). to provide more direct evidence for the idea that students from
Experiment 1 was a proof-of-concept study. We created a non-marginalized groups actually changed their behaviours toward
professional-quality poster conveying the social norm that most their marginalized peers as a result of the social norms video being
students at the university where the research was conducted shown in their classrooms. We thus asked participants to rate their
endorse diversity and try to behave in an inclusive way (the num- peers’ behaviours. We also included a much larger sample so that
bers reported on the poster were based on real data; Supplementary we could conduct analyses in which we included only the responses
Information). Participants were exposed to either our poster or a of students from marginalized groups—defined as racial/ethnic and
neutral control poster in an experimental waiting room. After a religious minorities—and examine the effect of our intervention
short filler task, they were asked to complete an ostensibly unrelated on these students’ sense of belonging and well-being. Fourth, we
survey with several scales assessing constructs related to climate and wanted to see if perceived social norms played an equally impor-
intergroup attitudes. tant role in a more natural setting and we therefore included the
In experiment 2, we randomly assigned university classrooms to above-mentioned process measures in the outcome survey. As in
experimental conditions by putting up several of our social norms the previous experiment, we expected the beneficial effects of the
posters (social norms condition) or no poster (control condition) social norms video on the outcome measures to be mediated by par-
during the first 5 weeks of the semester. Students completed a sur- ticipants’ perceptions of peer norms but not by their perceptions of
vey assessing a variety of climate-related outcomes in weeks 10–12 the university’s commitment to diversity.
of the semester. In experiment 6, we sought to determine whether the beneficial
For experiments 3–6, we created a 5-min video (Supplementary effects of the social norms video on classroom climate had down-
Information). About half of the scenes in the video were unscripted stream effects on a consequential outcome for marginalized stu-
interviews with students who expressed how much they appreci- dents: the academic achievement gap. We recruited instructors of
ated the diversity on campus and that they enjoyed getting to know STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics) courses
people from other social groups. The other half of the video con- that had multiple sections but in which all students in the course
sisted of short scenes with local scientists and diversity specialists took the same exams. We limited ourselves to courses that histori-
who reported research showing that most students on campus cally had achievement gaps. In half of the sections, the instructors
attempt to behave in a non-prejudiced and inclusive manner. They showed our social norms video on the first day of class, whereas the
acknowledged that blatant acts of discrimination undoubtedly other half of the sections served as control (the syllabus included a
occur on campus, but cited data suggesting that these acts seemed short statement about diversity). We obtained student grade infor-
to be attributable to a numerical minority of students, whose val- mation at the end of the semester.
ues were fundamentally at odds with those of most members of the
campus community. Results
In experiment 3, students in classrooms were exposed to our Experiment 1. We computed outcome scores by combining the
social norms video on the first day of the semester (or not) and items belonging to the same scales. We also formed an ‘attitudes
completed the outcome survey 10–12 weeks later. toward minorities score’ by averaging across the feeling thermome-
In experiment 4, we wanted to see if the beneficial effects of the ter ratings for Blacks, Hispanics, Arabs and gay men (see Methods).
social norms video generalize to a different setting, verify if the Supplementary Information Table 1 shows the descriptive statistics,
effects were actually due to a change in perceived social norms and Cronbach’s alphas and correlations for all the outcome scores. For
assess behavioural intentions. The study took place online and par- this and all subsequent experiments, normality and equal variance
ticipants were randomly assigned to watch either our social norms of outcome scores were examined visually but not formally tested
video or a control video about cranberry production. Watching a (Figs. 1, 3 and 4). The six inclusive climate variables—positive traits,
video on diversity may have multiple effects: it may change partici- modern racism, internal motivation to respond without prejudice,
pants’ perceptions of peer norms and it may change their impres- rejection of racism, rejection of discrimination and attitudes toward
sion of how committed the university is to diversity. Our theoretical minorities—clustered tightly together. We submitted these vari-
analysis suggests that the effect of the social norms video on atti- ables to an exploratory factor analysis. The scree plot suggested a
tudes and behaviours should be due to a shift in perceived peer one-factor solution and all outcome scores loaded highly (>0.491)
norms. We thus included, in addition to the standard outcomes on the first unrotated factor. We formed an ‘inclusive climate score’
used in experiments 2 and 3, the following two process measures: by standardizing the six outcome scores and then averaging across
participants’ perceptions of peer norms and of the university’s com- them (Cronbach’s α = 0.85). If participants had missing values on
mitment to diversity. We expected the beneficial effects of the social any of the six variables, the remaining variables were averaged (and
norms video on the standard outcome measures to be mediated by unless otherwise mentioned the same is true for all experiments
NatuRE HuMaN BEHaviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Nature HumaN BeHaviour Articles
1.0
0.5
0
–0.5
–1.0
Experiment 1
described). A power analysis revealed that we had 0.833 power to Experiment 2. We computed five outcome scores by averaging
detect a medium effect (d = 0.5) and 0.216 power to detect a small across items belonging to the same scales (appreciation of diversity,
effect (d = 0.2). We conducted an independent samples t-test. Like allophilia, climate, belonging and attitudes toward minorities). We
all other analyses reported in this paper, the test was two-tailed and submitted all outcome scores to an exploratory factor analysis. The
analyses were not performed blind to the conditions of the experi- scree plot suggested a one-factor solution and all five outcome scores
ment. There was a statistically significant difference between exper- loaded highly (>0.514) on the first unrotated factor. We formed an
imental conditions on the inclusive climate score, t(137) = 2.229, inclusive climate score by standardizing all five outcome scores and
P = 0.027, d = 0.381, 95% confidence interval, CI [0.032, 0.536] then averaging across them (Cronbach’s α = 0.81). Supplementary
(Fig. 1 and Extended Data Fig. 2). Information Table 2 shows the descriptive statistics, Cronbach’s
To demonstrate that our results were not affected by our spe- alphas and correlations for all outcomes. A power analysis revealed
cific choice regarding the variables we included in the inclusive cli- that we had 0.991 power to detect a medium effect (d = 0.5) and
mate score, we also formed a ‘total score’ for which we combined 0.411 power to detect a small effect (d = 0.2). An independent
all outcome variables included in the experiment: the six variables samples t-test revealed that there was a statistically significant dif-
mentioned earlier and feeling accepted, external motivation to ference between experimental conditions on the inclusive climate
respond without prejudice, perceived variability and perceived dif- score, t(298) = 2.016, P = 0.045, d = 0.230, 95% CI [0.004, 0.360]
ferences. An independent samples t-test revealed a statistically sig- (Fig. 1 and Extended Data Fig. 3). Participants who were exposed
nificant condition effect on the total score, t(137) = 2.083, P = 0.039, to our social norms poster had higher inclusive climate scores than
d = 0.356, 95% CI [0.010, 0.378]. The significant condition effects did participants in the control condition. According to Cohen’s clas-
on the inclusive climate score and on the total score show that par- sification33, the effect is small, but it is worth noting that outcomes
ticipants who were exposed to our social norms poster were con- were assessed 10–12 weeks after the beginning of the study and that
siderably more inclusive—endorsed fewer racist beliefs, were more many students in the experimental condition may not have noticed
highly motivated to respond in an unprejudiced manner and were our poster. Note also that the somewhat artificial labels for values
more likely to reject discrimination—than participants who saw our of Cohen’s d were developed for laboratory research in controlled
control poster. Admittedly, not all of the individual outcome scores settings, where effect sizes tend to be larger than in field research.
showed significant effects individually (Extended Data Fig. 2). We used the same definition of ‘privilege’ as that used in experi-
It should be noted, however, that some participants may not even ment 1 to divide the sample into two groups. A 2 × 2 ANOVA with
have looked at the poster that was put up in the waiting room. ‘condition’ and ‘privilege’ as independent variables revealed that the
We divided our sample in two groups: Caucasian (non-Hispanic) condition effect on the inclusive climate score was not moderated
participants who were either Christian or had no religion were con- by ‘privilege’ (P = 0.123). We ran a linear mixed-effects model in
sidered ‘privileged’, whereas all other participants were considered which we regressed the inclusive climate score on a fixed intercept
‘marginalized’. Two 2 × 2 ANOVA with ‘condition’ and ‘privilege’ as and a by-classroom random intercept. The variance of the random
independent variables revealed that the condition effect was not mod- intercept was small and non-significant, s2 = 0.032, Wald
random_intercept
erated by ‘privilege’, neither for the inclusive climate score nor for the Z = 1.337, P = 0.182, suggesting that clustering by classroom was
total score (for both P > 0.30), suggesting that privileged and margin- negligible and that there was no need to adjust the standard errors
alized individuals were equally affected by our social norms poster. for the above-mentioned inferential tests.
etamilc
evisulcni
fo
snoitpecreP
Control
Bias
Social norms
Experiment 2 Experiment 3 Experiment 4 Experiment 5
Fig. 1 | Perceptions of inclusive climate as a function of experimental condition in experiments 1–5. Participants who were exposed to information about
their peers’ pro-diversity attitudes and inclusive behaviours (social norms condition) scored higher on a variety of indicators related to the inclusiveness of
the climate than participants in the control condition or, in experiment 5, than participants who saw a video about bias. The inclusive climate score plotted
on the y axis was computed by first standardizing the scores of the individual indicators and then averaging them. We plotted the data for a range −1.2
to +1.2. As a result, 98 of the 1,543 data points (6.4%) with extreme values are not represented. The effect sizes are: d = 0.381 (experiment 1, n = 139),
d = 0.230 (experiment 2, n = 300), d = 0.375 (experiment 3, n = 329), d = 0.644 (experiment 4, n = 147) and d = 0.199 (experiment 5, n = 628, control
versus social norms). See Results and Extended Data Figs. 2–5 and 7 for full statistical results. Error bars, ±1 s.e.m.
NatuRE HuMaN BEHaviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles Nature HumaN BeHaviour
Experiment 3. Since the outcome measures were the same as in ab = 0.173*
1 1
experiment 2, our data analytic strategy was identical. We first
computed outcome scores by combining the items belonging to the
a = 0.50** Perception of b = 0.35***
same scales. An exploratory factor analysis suggested a one-factor 1 peer norms 1
solution and all five outcome scores loaded highly (>0.415) on the
first unrotated factor (Cronbach’s α = 0.77). We formed an inclusive Condition c′ = 0.332** Inclusive
climate score by standardizing and then averaging across all five (control versus social
outcomes (see Supplementary Information Table 3 for the descrip- norms video) (c = 0.455***) climate score
tive statistics, Cronbach’s alphas and correlations for all of the out-
comes). We had 0.995 power to detect a medium effect (d = 0.5) and University
a = 0.74** commitment b = –0.07 ('NS)
0.443 power to detect a small effect (d = 0.2). Participants’ inclusive 2 2
climate scores differed significantly between experimental condi-
ab = –0.050
tions, t(327) = 3.403, P = 0.001, d = 0.375, 95% CI [0.113, 0.423] 2 2
(Fig. 1 and Extended Data Fig. 4). Participants who were exposed to
Fig. 2 | Results from the mediation analysis in Experiment 4. The results
our social norms video on the first day of the semester had higher
suggest that the effect of the social norms video on inclusive climate is
inclusive climate scores 10–12 weeks later than participants in the
probably due to a shift in perceived peer norms and not in their perceptions
control condition. The effect is larger than in experiment 2, which
may be because more students saw the video than saw the poster. of the university’s commitment to diversity (n = 147).The video affects
how normative respondents perceive inclusive behaviours to be among
This difference in effect size provides indirect support for the idea
their peers, and this perception in turn influences their own attitudes and
that a short video can be more effective than a poster at bringing
behaviours. The numbers next to the arrows are unstandardized path
across the message to students that most of their peers value diver-
coefficients. Estimates of the indirect effect, labelled ab and ab, were
sity and try to create a welcoming climate for students from all 1 1 2 2
obtained via non-parametric bootstrapping with 1,000 samples. The direct
backgrounds.
effect (c') and the total effect (c) are also reported. The indirect effect
As in the previous experiment, the condition effect on the inclu-
sive climate score was not moderated by ‘privilege’ (P = 0.377) and through perceptions of peer norms is statistically significant, a 1b 1 = 0.173,
the clustering by classroom was small and negligible, s2 = z = 2.265, P = 0.023, 95% CI [0.038, 0.332]. The indirect effect through
0.022, Wald Z = 1.310, P = 0.190. random_intercept university commitment is non-significant (NS), a 2b 2 = −0.050, z = −1.139,
P = 0.225. 95% CI [−0.149, 0.032]. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001.
Experiment 4. As in experiments 2 and 3, we averaged across items
belonging to each of the scales. On the basis of the results of an
exploratory factor analysis (all factor loadings on the first unrotated in joining the other programmes, t(145) = 0.559, P = 0.577, 95% CI
factor >0.488; Cronbach’s α = 0.80), we combined the five standard [−0.177, 0.319].
outcome scores into a single inclusive climate score (Supplementary We conducted mediation analyses in which we divided the total
Information Table 4). We had 0.853 power to detect a medium effect effect of experimental condition on the inclusive climate score into
(d = 0.5) and 0.228 power to detect a small effect (d = 0.2). There was three parts: the indirect effect through ‘perceptions of peer norms’,
a statistically significant difference between the two experimental ab = 0.173 [0.038, 0.332], s.e.m. = 0.076, z = 2.265, P = 0.023,
1 1 bootstrap
conditions on participants’ inclusive climate score, t(145) = 3.870, the indirect effect through ‘university commitment’, ab = −0.050
2 2
P < 0.001, d = 0.644, 95% CI [0.222, 0.687] (Fig. 1 and Extended [−0.149, 0.032], s.e.m. = 0.044, z = −1.139, P = 0.255 and the
bootstrap
Data Fig. 5). Participants who viewed our social norms video appre- direct effect, c' = 0.332 [0.119, 0.543], s.e.m. = 0.106, z = 3.133,
bootstrap
ciated diversity more, had more positive attitudes toward outgroups, P = 0.002 (Fig. 2 and Extended Data Fig. 6). The estimates of the
evaluated the climate more positively and reported an increased effects, their 95% CIs and the standard errors are based on 1,000
sense of belonging compared with participants who watched the percentile-bootstrapped samples. The fact that the former indirect
control video. effect is statistically significant, whereas the latter indirect effect is
Unlike in the previous experiments, a 2 × 2 ANOVA revealed that not, is consistent with the idea that the condition effect is driven by
the condition effect on the inclusive climate score was stronger for participants’ perceived social norms, that is, by a shift in their per-
privileged students than for marginalized students, t(143) = 2.647, ceptions of their peers’ inclusiveness and not by their perceptions of
P = 0.009, d = 0.444, 95% CI [0.177, 1.220]. We have no explana- the university’s commitment to diversity.
tion for this effect. Note, however, that relatively fewer individuals
from marginalized groups took part in this experiment (n = 42). Experiment 5. As in previous experiments, we computed an inclu-
Experiment 5 specifically examined the effects of our intervention sive climate score by first standardizing, then averaging across all
on marginalized students. outcomes indicative of an inclusive climate: allophilia, climate,
To explore students’ interest in, and likelihood of joining, various belonging, attitudes toward minorities, intergroup anxiety, physical
campus programmes we formed two scores. We averaged across the health and emotional health. Note that these outcomes overlap par-
two ratings for the social justice course (r = 0.76) to form a ‘joining tially but not fully with the standard outcomes used in experiments
social justice course score’. And we averaged across the six ratings 2–4. In an exploratory factor analysis extracting a single factor, all
for the other programmes (α = 0.77) to form a ‘joining other pro- variables had satisfactory loadings (all >0.328; Cronbach’s α = 0.64).
grammes score’. We then conducted a 2 × 2 mixed-model ANOVA To demonstrate that our results did not depend on the particular
with condition as the between-subjects factor (social norms versus constructs that we had decided to include in the inclusive climate
control) and type of programme as the repeated measure (social score we also computed a ‘total score’ that consisted of all outcome
justice course versus other programmes). The predicted interaction variables except the two hypothesized mediators, perceptions of
was just shy of conventional levels of significance, F(1, 145) = 3.760, peer norms and university commitment (all factor loadings on the
P = 0.054, 95% CI [−0.004, 0.695]. Whereas participants in the first unrotated factor >0.205; Cronbach’s α = 0.75; Supplementary
control condition were less interested in joining the social justice Information Table 5). We computed composite scores only for
course than the other programmes, t(145) = 3.315, P < 0.001, 95% participants who completed at least 80% of the measures com-
CI [0.170, 0.663], participants in the social norms condition were prising them, leaving 628 participants (inclusive climate score)
just as interested in joining the social justice course as they were and 627 participants (total score) to be included in the analyses.
NatuRE HuMaN BEHaviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Nature HumaN BeHaviour Articles
1.5
1.0
0.5
Control
0 Bias
Social norms
0.5
1.0
–1.5
Physical
Climate Belonging health Peer behaviour Peer respect
Outcome measure
We examined our hypotheses in a series of one-way ANOVAs in significantly more inclusively, t(180) = 3.104, P = 0.002, d = 0.463,
which we tested both the overall condition effect (with 2 d.f.), as well 95% CI [0.208, 0.934] and treated them with more respect,
as two dummy codes that contrast the no-exposure control condi- t(177) = 2.734, P = 0.007, d = 0.410, 95% CI [0.142, 0.876] (Fig. 3).
tion to each of the two video conditions (0, 1, 0 and 0, 0, 1 for the Unlike in the previous experiments, the condition effect (social
control, bias and social norms conditions respectively; see ref. 34). norms video versus control) on the inclusive climate score was
For each of the two contrasts, we had 1.00 power to detect a medium stronger for marginalized students than for privileged students,
effect (d = 0.5) and 0.705 power to detect a small effect (d = 0.2). t(617) = −4.353, P < 0.001, d = 0.351, 95% CI [−0.692, −0.262].
Students exposed to the social norms video had significantly higher Note that this interaction effect is in the opposite direction as in
inclusive climate scores than students in the control condition, experiment 4. The findings suggest that the effects on marginalized
t(625) = 2.488, P = 0.013, d = 0.199, 95% CI [0.027, 0.227], while students in experiment 5 are not simply due to marginalized stu-
those exposed to the bias video did not significantly differ from the dents being exposed to the social norms video but rather to privi-
control, t(625) = 1.165, P = 0.245, d = 0.094, 95% CI [−0.047, 0.185] leged students viewing the video and then changing their behaviour:
(Fig. 1 and Extended Data Fig. 7). Students exposed to the social students from marginalized backgrounds reported that their peers
norms video also had significantly higher total scores than students treated them more inclusively and with more respect.
in the control condition, t(624) = 2.700, P = 0.007, d = 0.216, 95% CI The clustering by classroom was statistically significant,
[0.033, 0.212], while those exposed to the bias video did not signifi- s2 = 0.025, Wald Z = 2.381, P = 0.017. We completed the
random_intercept
cantly differ from control, t(624) = 1.472, P = 0.141, d = 0.119, 95% same analyses as those reported above, taking into account the
CI [−0.026, 0.182] (Extended Data Fig. 7). Mediational analyses non-independence due to classroom (Extended Data Figs. 9 and 10).
suggest that this effect is driven by a shift in perceived peer norms, In these analyses, the effects are comparable to those obtained
rather than by a different perception of the university’s commitment in tests using the individual as the unit of analysis, but, due to the
to diversity (Extended Data Fig. 6). small number of clusters, the P values are generally larger than the
Because of the larger sample size in experiment 5, we were able P values reported above.
to conduct analyses in which we included only students from mar-
ginalized backgrounds. We used the same definition of ‘marginal- Internal meta-analysis experiments 1–5. To assess the robustness
ized’ as in the previous experiments (that is, all religious minorities of the effect of the social norms manipulation, we conducted an
and non-Whites; n = 184). For each of the two contrasts, we had internal meta-analysis35. We distilled the results of experiments 1–5,
0.920 power to detect a medium effect (d = 0.5) and 0.270 power recording the standardized mean difference effect sizes found on the
to detect a small effect (d = 0.2). Among students from marginal- inclusive climate score. For experiment 5, we included the compari-
ized backgrounds, the social norms video had a strong and sig- son between the control condition and the social norms condition.
nificant positive effect on inclusive climate scores, t(178) = 3.904, We submitted these effect sizes to an internal meta-analysis func-
P < 0.001, d = 0.585, 95% CI [0.162, 0.492] (Extended Data Fig. 8). tion in the R package metafor using a random effects estimation
The beneficial effects of the social norms video (compared to con- procedure. The standardized mean difference effect sizes for the
trol) were consistently larger than those of the bias video, which individual studies ranged from 0.23 (experiment 5) to 0.64 (experi-
seemed to have a weak impact at best (compared to control). ment 4). The meta-analysis yielded an overall effect size estimate of
Most importantly, marginalized students in courses that were 0.33, which differed significantly from 0, z = 5.510, P < 0.001, 95%
exposed to the social norms video reported that their peers behaved CI [0.214, 0.451] (Extended Data Fig. 1). This test provides strong
etamilc
evisulcni
fo
snoitpecreP
Intergroup
anxiety (R)
Fig. 3 | Perceptions of inclusive climate as a function of experimental condition among marginalized students in Experiment 5. The social norms video
caused significant increases in climate-related outcomes for marginalized students compared to control. Data were plotted for a range −1.5 to +1.5.
As a result, 123 of the 1,097 data points (11.2%) with extreme values are not represented in the figure. Intergroup anxiety was recoded so that higher
values represent less anxiety. The effect sizes are d = 0.574 (climate), d = 0.542 (intergroup anxiety), 0.521 (belonging), 0.464 (physical health), 0.442
(peer behaviour) and 0.402 (peer respect). See Results and Extended Data Fig. 8 for full statistical results. Error bars, ±1 s.e.m. Number of marginalized
students, n = 184. R, reverse-coded.
NatuRE HuMaN BEHaviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles Nature HumaN BeHaviour
First, they are quite scalable; it is easy to create a poster or a video
communicating to people that their peers value diversity and try to
behave in a welcoming way towards others. Such posters and videos
can easily be disseminated on a large scale in a variety of settings
(for example, universities, grade schools, organizations and com-
munity settings).
Second, the effects of our social norms interventions can easily
be amplified by using multiple channels to communicate the same
message. Imagine a campus on which students are not only exposed
to our social norms video or poster, but where instructors talk about
the frequency of inclusive behaviours on campus, the university
leadership mentions most students’ commitment to diversity, stu-
dent organizations publicly distance themselves from all forms of
bigotry and the university adopts an internal communication strat-
egy that conveys to members of the campus community that most of
their peers make an effort to treat others in a welcoming, respectful
and inclusive way.
A common approach to creating an inclusive climate consists of
raising awareness about bias. As part of this approach, it is com-
municated to students and employees that they and their peers have
implicit biases and, without being aware of it, frequently engage in
Marginalized micro-aggressions and other discriminatory behaviours. Not only
Student privilege are such communications often unsupported by data36, our research
suggests that they probably have a detrimental effect. Telling people
that their peers frequently engage in discriminatory behaviours is
likely to create a less, rather than a more, inclusive climate37.
Descriptive norms messaging is likely to be particularly effec-
tive if it validates the experiences of discrimination of students
from marginalized groups. This is precisely what we did in our
social norms video: the local scientists and diversity specialists
explicitly state that acts of bigotry undoubtedly occur on campus
evidence for the effect of our manipulations of social norms on the and although most students hold pro-diversity attitudes and try
inclusive climate in classrooms. to behave inclusively, this by no means implies that students from
marginalized groups are no longer the target of discrimination.
Experiment 6. We conducted a 2 × 2 ANOVA with condition and Without such acknowledgement, a descriptive norms message
privilege as independent variables and grades as the dependent could adversely affect members of marginalized groups, leading
variable. We used the same definition of marginalized as in previ- them to blame themselves for negative experiences, or fail to detect
ous studies: 218 marginalized students and 553 privileged students biased treatment, in turn undermining the overall positive effect of
provided usable data. We had 1.00 power to detect a medium effect the message38.
(d = 0.5) and 0.787 power to detect a small effect (d = 0.2). The pre- Our research is not without limitations. The effects on some of
dicted interaction was statistically significant, F(1, 759) = 4.772, the outcomes were small and sometimes non-significant. Some stud-
P = 0.029, d = 0.155, 95% CI [−0.560, −0.030] (Fig. 4). Post-hoc ies included outcome measures that were included for exploratory
tests revealed that in the control condition, marginalized students purposes. We slightly varied the outcome measures from one experi-
had significantly lower grades (mean = 83.69, s.d. = 10.78) than ment to the next. We consider this aspect a strength because it con-
privileged students (mean = 86.77, s.d. = 8.35), F(1, 759) = 9.757, tributes to the generalizability of our research, but some researchers
P = 0.002, d = 0.227, 95% CI [0.115, 0.502]. In the social norms might consider the variability in outcome measures a limitation. The
condition, however, there was no significant achievement gap: outcome measures in experiments 1–5 were primarily self-reports.
marginalized students’ grades (mean = 86.47, s.d. = 7.46) did not Although experiment 5 provides some evidence that members of
differ from privileged students’ grades (mean = 86.61, s.d. = 7.84), non-marginalized groups actually changed their behaviour, this
F(1, 759) = 0.022, P = 0.883, d = 0.011, 95% CI [−0.167, 0.194]. evidence is indirect and should be confirmed in future studies with
The clustering by section was statistically significant, s2 = behavioural outcome measures. In experiments 2, 3, 5 and 6, students
random_intercept
11.495, Wald Z = 2.825, P = 0.005. We thus tested whether were clustered in classrooms. We reported inferential tests based on
the effect on students’ grades held up when we accounted for analyses with the individual as the unit of analysis and, when the
non-independence due to classrooms (that is, by including a clustering by classroom was statistically significant, we also reported
by-classroom random intercept and by-classroom random slope for inferential tests from multilevel models where we took into account
privilege). When this random effect structure was included, there the non-independence due to classrooms. Our approach follows the
was a statistically significant difference between marginalized and guidelines by well-known experts in the field39,40, but some research-
privileged students in the control condition, F(1, 9.967) = 7.639, ers might argue that we should have reported only the results of the
P = 0.020, 95% CI [0.229, 0.851], but there was no significant differ- multilevel models. Note that failure to take into account clustering
ence between the two groups of students in the social norms condi- by classroom increases type I error rates. However, given that we rep-
tion, F(1, 11.582) = 0.463, P = 0.509, 95% CI [−0.176, 0.359]. licated the effect in six consecutive experiments it is highly unlikely
that our basic finding is a false positive41.
Discussion We tested the effectiveness of our social norms interventions
Our research demonstrates the effectiveness of inclusive climate in a setting in which most individuals truly held egalitarian views
interventions with randomized controlled trials and delayed and valued diversity. Thus, the pro-diversity norm was factual in
outcome measures. Our interventions have two particular strengths. the experimental environment and probably characteristic of most
)tniop
edarg(
edarg
esruoC
4
3
Control
2 Social norms
1
0
Privileged
Fig. 4 | Course grades as a function of experimental condition and
student privilege in experiment 6. Participants were students in STEM
courses (n = 763). The social norms video led to a significant reduction
in the achievement gap between privileged and marginalized students,
F(1, 759) = 4.772, P = 0.029, d = 0.155, 95% CI [−0.560, −0.030].
Error bars, ±1 s.e.m.
NatuRE HuMaN BEHaviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Nature HumaN BeHaviour Articles
university contexts. More research is necessary to determine how people’s motivations to respond in non-prejudiced ways for internal reasons (for
social norms messaging can be used in settings in which outgroup example, values). ‘Rejection of racism’ consisted of the ‘acceptance of racist conduct
scale’46 and evaluated the extent to which people would accept racism in a university
attitudes are more negative and intergroup relations are more con-
context. Similarly, ‘rejection of discrimination’, measured how acceptable participants
flictual. In such settings, it may be possible to focus people’s atten- found discrimination to be28. Feeling thermometers assessed participants’ warmth
tion on the widespread agreement with general statements about towards, and liking, for different social groups. Four outcome measures were
fairness (for example, ‘94% of the people in this county agree that it included for exploratory purposes. ‘Feeling accepted’ was modified from the ‘socially
is wrong to discriminate against others based on race’) or the mes- valued role classification scale’47 and measured how socially accepted participants
felt. The ‘external motivation to respond without prejudice scale’45 assessed people’s
sages could reference dynamic norms (for example, by suggesting
motivations to respond in non-prejudiced ways for external reasons (for example,
that an increasing number of individuals now hold a certain attitude fear of disapproval from others). Finally, ‘perceived variability’ and ‘perceived
or engage in a certain behaviour42). A third solution is to report data differences’ measured the extent to which participants perceived Black Americans
from a larger group of people where pro-diversity norms may be as being different from one another with a modified version of the range task48. For
more details on outcome measures, see Supplementary Information.
more prevalent, for example, all university students in the United
States, or all technology sector employees in California.
Procedure. The experiment took place in two laboratory rooms of the Psychology
Communication about social norms—telling people what most building. After consenting to partake in the study, the experimenter escorted the
of their peers do—is a highly effective way to influence human participants to a waiting room. The room was set up with three chairs against one
behaviour. This approach has been used in many domains25,43 and wall divided by a small side table with a lamp and plant on it. Three posters were
placed on the opposite wall. The two posters on the left and right sides were the same
the present research suggests that it can be leveraged to promote
in both experimental conditions. One poster simply said ‘Don’t Text and Drive’ and
inclusive behaviours in real-world settings. The approach requires the other said ‘More Reasons to Eat Fruit’ and had a list of fruits and their benefits.
regular climate surveys and, ideally, empirical studies that include The social norms poster (or the control poster) was always placed in the centre of the
behavioural outcome measures of discrimination and inclusion22. wall. To ensure participants would actually look at the posters, the experimenter had
The data from these surveys and studies would serve as a gauge for instructed them to leave their belongings, including electronic devices, in the room
where they had filled out the consent forms. Participants were left in the waiting room
actual norms that can be communicated in interventions. With such
for 5–7 min before the experimenter returned to get them to supposedly start in the
data in hand, a given institution can inform its members about the study. The experimenter explained that the laboratory was running multiple studies
many respondents who enjoy the presence of others belonging to at the same time and that they would first complete a short memory study and then
different social groups, who try to create a welcoming environment another unrelated study on social attitudes. They were then escorted to another room
for all, who support the institution’s commitment to diversity and with computers where they did a 6-min memory filler task in which they saw a group
of 16 words for 1 min followed by 1 min to write down all the words they could recall.
who reject bigotry in all forms. As demonstrated in our six ran-
They completed the task three times, after which the computer directed them to a
domized controlled trials, communicating such information helps so-called second study in which they completed all of the outcome measures. After
address one of the major challenges of the twenty-first century: how completing the outcome measures, participants were thanked and debriefed.
to create harmonious relationships between members of different
Experiment 2. Participants. We recruited 366 individuals ranging from 18 to 41
social groups in a rapidly diversifying society.
years of age and retained 300 who identified as being from the United States. A total
159 identified as female and one chose a non-binary gender identity. Additionally,
Methods
248 participants identified as Caucasian (non-Hispanic) and 244 as being Christian
All experiments reported in this paper were approved by the Institutional Review or having no religion. All participants were students at a large Midwestern university
Board at the University of Wisconsin-Madison and comply with all relevant ethical from 18 different courses who received extra credit in their respective course for
regulations. Participants provided informed consent. In each of the experiments completing the outcome measures. All participants consented to participate in the
conducted in the field (all except experiments 1 and 4), we recruited the largest assessment portion of the study, whereas a waiver of informed consent was obtained
number of classrooms possible and tried to maximize participation within each of for exposure to the intervention itself (the same was true for experiments 3, 5 and 6).
these classrooms. The power analyses for experiments 1 and 4 are reported below.
Outcome measures. ‘Appreciation of diversity’ assessed how much participants
Experiment 1. Participants. We recruited 163 individuals ranging from 18 to value diversity. ‘Allophilia’ was measured on the basis of a modified allophilia
60 years of age. Only those who identified as being from the United States were scale49 and assessed how positive participants felt about people from different
included in the analyses, n = 139. Of these, 97 identified as female, 118 were social outgroups. ‘Climate’ was a measure of how welcoming the classroom climate
Caucasian (non-Hispanic) and 101 identified as being Christian or having no was. ‘Belonging’ measured the extent to which participants felt they belonged at the
religion. All participants were students at a large Midwestern university who received university. ‘Attitude toward minorities’ consisted of warmth ratings on the feeling
extra credit in their introductory psychology course for completing the study. thermometers towards Blacks, Hispanics, Arabs and gay men. See Supplementary
Information for more details about the outcome measures.
Stimulus material. All participants were exposed to a poster in an experimental
waiting room. Participants in the social norms condition were exposed to a poster Procedure. Before the start of the semester, instructors agreed to have their students
suggesting that it was normative to value diversity. The following statement participate in the study. Courses were paired up to match as much as possible
appeared at the top of the poster: ‘We embrace diversity and welcome people from in topic, size, level, day of week and time of day. For each pair, one course was
all backgrounds into our UW-Madison community’. In the middle of the poster randomly assigned to the social norms condition and the other to the control
was an outline of the state of Wisconsin. Inside the outline were 24 headshots of a condition. During the exposure period, students were not aware they were part of
diverse group of students (though most were Caucasian to accurately represent the a scientific study (the same is true for experiments 3, 5 and 6). Participants in the
University’s population). The bottom of the poster included two statistics that were social norms condition were exposed to our social norms poster (see experiment 1),
previously collected in a survey with a representative sample of students. In the which was placed on the walls of the classroom for the first five weeks of the
survey, students indicated whether or not they agreed with the above statements and semester. Depending on the size of the room, four to six posters were placed on
if they would be willing to have their picture appear on the poster. The statements the classroom walls. Posters were put up 10–30 min before the start of each class
on the poster read ‘93% of students we approached agreed with the message on this session, before the instructor’s and students’ arrival and taken down 5 min after
poster’ and ‘84% of those students agreed to have their picture put on this poster’. everyone had left the room. Those in the control condition were not exposed to a
The poster was pilot-tested with both students who did and did not come from poster. In weeks 10–12 of the semester, students in all of the courses were invited
marginalized backgrounds to ensure that it contained only non-offensive material to complete a survey that included the outcome measures. Afterwards, they were
and conveyed a message that reflected their experiences. The social norms poster is thanked and given extra credit for participating in the study.
included in the Supplementary Information. Participants in the control condition
were exposed to a poster from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Experiment 3. Participants. We recruited 348 individuals ranging from 18 to
communicating the importance of getting a flu vaccine (control condition). 48 years of age. Again, we removed those who were not from the United States,
retaining 329. A total 147 participants identified as female, 270 as Caucasian
Outcome measures. Participants were asked to complete a series of outcome (non-Hispanic) and 279 as being Christian or having no religion. All participants
measures. Some of these measures were indicators of positive intergroup attitudes were students at a large Midwestern university from 13 different courses who
and behaviours. Positive traits called upon participants to rate Black Americans on received extra credit in their respective course for completing the study.
a number of positive traits (for example, pleasant and trustworthy). Participants
also completed a modern racism measure modified from the modern racism scale44. Stimulus material. Participants in the social norms condition watched a 5-min
The variable ‘internal motivation to respond without prejudice scale’45 assessed social norms video (Supplementary Information). The video depicted students from
NatuRE HuMaN BEHaviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles Nature HumaN BeHaviour
different ethnic backgrounds (largely Caucasian to accurately represent the student belonging and university commitment. Climate was also measured using different
population at the university) expressing how much they value the diversity on campus items (listed in the Supplementary Information). Additionally, we measured the
and try to be inclusive in their daily interactions. The video also included local following constructs. ‘Policy support’ assessed the extent to which participants
scientists and diversity specialists who discussed anecdotal evidence and empirical believed the university should instate and maintain policies promoting diversity.
studies that had been conducted at the university. According to these individuals, ‘Intergroup anxiety’ measured how comfortable participants felt interacting with
most students support the university’s commitment to diversity and do not engage members of social outgroups. ‘Confronting discrimination’ was an indicator of
in discriminatory behaviour and the bigoted acts that occurred at the university were participants’ self-reported tendency to speak up when witnessing discriminatory
committed by a minority of individuals whose values are fundamentally different behaviour. Participants indicated how frequently they had engaged in a series of
from those of most other people on campus. Overall, the video communicated the specific ‘inclusive behaviours’ over the course of the semester. They also completed
message that it was descriptively normative for people in the university community measures assessing their ‘physical health’ and ‘emotional health’ over the course of
to value diversity and try to be welcoming to people from all social backgrounds. the semester because a large body of research shows that health disparities arise
Like the poster in experiments 1 and 2, the video was pilot-tested with students from from discrimination50. Finally, they reported their perceptions of how inclusively
different social backgrounds to ensure that it did not contain offensive material and the professor of their course behaved (‘professor behaviour’), how inclusively their
conveyed a message that reflected the students’ experiences. peers in the course behaved (‘peer behaviour’) and how much they felt respected by
their peers in the course (‘peer respect’).
Outcome measures. We collected the same outcome measures as in experiment
2: appreciation of diversity, allophilia, climate, belonging and attitudes toward Procedure. The procedure used in this study was similar to that used in experiment
minorities. 3 with two notable differences. First, outcome measures were collected 2 weeks
later, in weeks 12–14 of the semester. Second, there were three experimental
Procedure. The procedure used in this study was very similar to that used in conditions in which professors screened the social norms video described above
experiment 2, but instead of being exposed to the poster in their classrooms, (social norms condition), screened a video that consisted primarily of minority
participants in the social norms condition watched the video on the first day of the students encouraging a dialogue about the micro-aggressions and discrimination
semester. Instructors in the social norms condition told students that the university that occur on campus (bias condition) or showed no video at all (control
had encouraged them to show a video and then screened the social norms condition). The bias condition was added to determine whether the effects of the
video. The courses proceeded for the remainder of the semester as usual, with social norm video were attributable to students viewing a video related to diversity.
no additional exposure. Those in the control condition did not watch any video. Again, courses were sorted into groups of three based on topic, size and level,
Outcome measures were collected in weeks 10–12 of the semester. then randomly assigned to condition within these trios. In some cases, there were
only two similar courses, which we assigned either to the social norms video or
Experiment 4. Participants. We conducted an a-priori power analysis assuming to the control condition. The professors were told both videos could be effective
a medium effect (d = 0.50), an attrition rate up to 20% and a power of 0.800. to eliminate expectancy effects. As in previous classroom studies, students did
Accordingly, we recruited 155 individuals ranging from 18 to 48 years of age and not know they were participating in an experiment in the exposure period. Three
retained the 147 from the United States for the analyses. Eighty identified as female, courses were randomly assigned to condition at the level of the discussion section,
122 as Caucasian (non-Hispanic) and 126 as Christian or having no religion. yielding 51 clusters.
All participants were students at a large Midwestern university who received extra
credit in their introductory psychology course for completing the study online. Experiment 6. Participants. We recruited 776 individuals enrolled in four STEM
All participants consented to participate in the study. courses at a large Midwestern university ranging from 18 to 30 years of age. Of
these, 533 identified as female (three selected a non-binary gender identity), 585
Outcome measures. All of the standard outcome measures in experiments 2 and were Caucasian (non-Hispanic) and 626 identified as Christian or having no
3 were included in experiment 4: appreciation of diversity, allophilia, climate, religion. Using the same definition of marginalized as in previous studies, 223
belonging and attitudes toward minorities, although climate and belonging students were marginalized and 553 were privileged. Among the marginalized
were measured using different items (listed in the Supplementary Information). students, 152 were part of an ethnic minority but not of a religious minority, 32
Together, these five outcome measures comprised the inclusive climate score were part of a religious minority but not of an ethnic minority and 39 were part of
discussed earlier. We also measured perceptions of peer norms, which assessed both an ethnic and a religious minority. The courses were Physiology, Introductory
participants’ perceptions of social norms among their peers regarding diversity Biology, Technical Communication (Engineering) and Research Methods
on campus and university commitment, which assessed the extent to which (Agriculture and Life Sciences). All courses had multiple sections and students in
participants believed the university, as an institution, valued diversity. To measure different sections of the same course completed the same exams and were graded
behavioural intentions, we also assessed participants’ self-reported interest in, and according to the same criteria. There were 35 sections in all.
likelihood of joining, four programmes on campus. One of the programmes was a
social justice course (joining social justice course), whereas the three others were Procedure. Sections of each course were randomly assigned to one of two
unrelated to race relations (joining other programmes). experimental conditions (so there were equal numbers of sections in both
conditions in each course). In half of the sections, the instructor showed our social
Procedure. Experiment 4 took place online. After consenting to be in the study, norms video in the first section meeting (social norms condition). In the other half
participants were randomly assigned to either the social norms condition or the of the sections, the instructor added a short pro-diversity statement to the syllabus
control condition. All participants were told that they would be watching a short that was distributed in paper format during the first section meeting (control
video and completing a series of tasks and questions as part of research on media condition). Both conditions involved adding pro-diversity material to the course
consumption, memory and social attitudes. Those in the social norms condition to reduce expectancy effects. The pro-diversity statement briefly mentioned the
then watched the same social norms video used in experiment 3. Those in the university’s commitment to diversity and inclusive excellence (see full text in the
control condition watched a neutral video on Wisconsin’s cranberry production Supplementary Information). Students in the social norms condition also received
(Supplementary Information). Afterwards, participants did a short memory filler an email from the university’s Deputy Vice Chancellor for Diversity and Inclusion
task (they saw a group of 16 words for 1 min followed by 1 min to write down all in week 7 of the semester. The email reported some positive findings from the
the words they could recall) and then completed all of the outcome measures. university’s most recent climate survey (suggesting that most students are strongly
committed to diversity) and encouraged students to continue working toward an
Experiment 5. Participants. We recruited 682 individuals ranging from 18 to inclusive social climate. Students in the control condition did not receive an email.
67 years of age. We did not record the national origin of the participants and We obtained grade information from the registrar once grades were finalized.
thus nationality was not an exclusion criterion. Because the manipulation in this
experiment occurred on the first day of the semester, only those present for the first Reporting Summary. Further information on research design is available in the
class session were included in the analysis (n = 665). An additional 30 participants Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.
had to be excluded for various reasons (for example, no condition information,
too many responses missing), yielding a total of 635 participants included in the Data availability
analyses. Of these participants, 358 identified as female (and five as a non-binary Due to Institutional Review Board restrictions, the data are not publicly available.
gender identity), 538 were Caucasian (non-Hispanic) and 532 identified as Christian However, the data are stored on a secure university server and are available upon
or having no religion. A total of 184 students were classified as ‘marginalized’. request (contact markus.brauer@wisc.edu).
Among marginalized students, 67 were part of an ethnic minority but not of a
religious minority, 73 were part of a religious minority but not of an ethnic minority Code availability
and 44 were part of both an ethnic and a religious minority. All participants were
As for data availability, all R code files can also be provided upon request. All other
students at a large Midwestern university from 25 different academic courses who
study materials are included in the Supplementary Information.
received extra credit in their respective courses for completing the online survey.
Received: 3 October 2018; Accepted: 21 May 2020;
Outcome measures. Many of the same measures from previous experiments were
used, including allophilia, attitudes toward minorities, perceptions of peer norms, Published: xx xx xxxx
NatuRE HuMaN BEHaviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Nature HumaN BeHaviour Articles
References 31. Kaiser, C. R. et al. Presumed fair: ironic effects of organizational diversity
1. Black, R. et al. The effect of environmental change on human migration. structures. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 104, 504–519 (2013).
Glob. Environ. Change 21, S3–S11 (2011). 32. Campbell, M. R. & Brauer, M. Incorporating social marketing insights into
2. Colby, S. L. & Ortman, J. M. Projections of the Size and Composition of the US prejudice research: advancing theory and demonstrating real-world
Population: 2014 to 2060 (US Census Bureau, 2015). applications. Perspect. Psychol. Sci. 15, 608–629 (2020).
3. Jaekyung, J. L. Racial and ethnic achievement gap trends: reversing the 33. Cohen, J. A power primer. Psychol. Bull. 112, 155–159 (1992).
progress toward equity? Educ. Res. 31, 3–12 (2002). 34. Kirk, R. E. Experimental Design: Procedures for the Behavioral Sciences
4. Strayhorn, T. L. College Students’ Sense of Belonging: A Key to Educational (SAGE, 2013).
Success for All Students (Routledge, 2012). 35. Cumming, G. The new statistics: why and how. Psychol. Sci. 25, 7–29 (2014).
5. Walton, G. M. & Cohen, G. L. A question of belonging: race, social fit, and 36. Campbell, M. R. & Brauer, M. Is discrimination widespread? Testing
achievement. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 92, 82–96 (2007). assumptions about bias on a university campus. Preprint at PsyArXiv
6. Zumbrunn, S., McKim, C., Buhs, E. & Hawley, L. R. Support, belonging, https://psyarxiv.com/evp8b/ (2020).
motivation, and engagement in the college classroom: a mixed method study. 37. Cialdini, R. B. Crafting normative messages to protect the environment.
Instr. Sci. 42, 661–684 (2014). Curr. Dir. Psychol. Sci. 12, 105–109 (2003).
7. Hausmann, L. R. M., Schofield, J. W. & Woods, R. L. Sense of belonging as a 38. Blodorn, A., Major, B. & Kaiser, C. Perceived discrimination and poor health:
predictor of intentions to persist among African American and White accounting for self-blame complicates a well-established relationship.
first-year college students. Res. High. Educ. 48, 803–839 (2007). Soc. Sci. Med. 153, 27–34 (2016).
8. Kalev, A., Dobbin, F. & Kelly, E. Best practices or best guesses? Assessing the 39. Bates, D., Kliegl, R., Vasishth, S. & Baayen, R. H. Parsimonious mixed
efficacy of corporate affirmative action and diversity policies. Am. Sociol. Rev. models. Preprint at arXiv https://arxiv.org/abs/1506.04967v2 (2015).
71, 589–617 (2006). 40. Matuschek, H., Kliegl, R., Vasishth, S., Baayen, R. H. & Bates, D. Balancing type
9. Kulik, C. T., Pepper, M. B., Roberson, L. & Parker, S. K. The rich get richer: I error and power in linear mixed models. J. Mem. Lang. 94, 305–315 (2017).
predicting participation in voluntary diversity training. J. Organ. Behav. 28, 41. Wasserstein, R. L., Schirm, A. L. & Lazar, N. A. Moving to a world beyond
753–769 (2007). “p < .05.”. Am. Stat. 73, 1–19 (2019).
10. Lai, C. K. et al. Reducing implicit racial preferences: II. Intervention 42. Sparkman, G. & Walton, G. M. Dynamic norms promote sustainable
effectiveness across time. J. Exp. Psychol. 145, 1001–1016 (2016). behavior, even if it is counternormative. Psychol. Sci. 28, 1663–1674 (2017).
11. Forscher, P. S. et al. A meta-analysis of procedures to change implicit 43. Gerber, A. & Rogers, T. Descriptive social norms and motivation to vote:
measures. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 117, 522–559 (2019). everybody’s voting and so should you. J. Politics 71, 1–14 (2009).
12. Paluck, E. L. & Green, D. P. Prejudice reduction: what works? A review and 44. McConahay, J. B. in Prejudice, Discrimination, and Racism (eds Dovidio, J. F.
assessment of research and practice. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 60, 339–367 (2009). & Gaertner, S. L.) 91–125. (Academic Press, 1986).
13. Sechrist, G. B. & Stangor, C. Perceived consensus influences intergroup 45. Plant, E. A. & Devine, P. G. Internal and external motivation to respond
behavior and stereotype accessibility. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 80, 645–654 (2001). without prejudice. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 75, 811–832 (1998).
14. McDonald, R. I. & Crandall, C. S. Social norms and social influence. 46. Blanchard, F. A., Lilly, T. & Vaughn, L. A. Reducing the expression of racial
Curr. Opin. Behav. Sci. 3, 147–151 (2015). prejudice. Psychol. Sci. 2, 101–105 (1991).
15. Perkins, H. W. & Berkowitz, A. D. Perceiving the community norms of 47. Waghorn, G., Chant, D. & King, R. Classifying socially-valued role
alcohol use among students: some research implications for campus alcohol functioning among community residents with psychiatric disorders.
education programming. Int. J. Addict. 21, 961–976 (1986). Am. J. Psychiatr. Rehab. 10, 185–221 (2007).
16. Gavac, S., Murrar, S. & Brauer, M. in Social Psychology: How Other 48. Er-rafiy, A. & Brauer, M. Modifying perceived variability: four laboratory and
People Influence our Thoughts and Actions (ed. Summers, R.) 333–360 filed experiments show the effectiveness of a ready-to-be-used prejudice
(ABC-CLIO, 2015). intervention. J. Appl. Soc. Psychol. 43, 840–853 (2013).
17. Cialdini, R. B., Reno, R. R. & Kallgren, C. A. A focus theory of normative 49. S. Alfieri, S. & Marta, E. Positive attitudes toward the outgroup: adaptation
conduct: recycling the concept of norms to reduce littering in public places. and validation of the Allophilia scale. Test. Psychom. Methodol. Appl. Psychol.
J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 58, 1015–1026 (1990). 18, 99–116 (2011).
18. Tankard, M. E. & Paluck, E. L. Norm perception as a vehicle for social 50. Williams, D. R., Neighbors, H. W. & Jackson, J. S. Racial/ethnic discrimination
change. Soc. Issues Policy Rev. 10, 181–211 (2016). and health: findings from community studies. Am. J. Public Health 93,
19. Miller, D. T. & Prentice, D. A. Changing norms to change behavior. Annu. 200–208 (2003).
Rev. Psychol. 67, 339–361 (2016).
20. Jones, S. C., Andrews, K. & Francis, K. (2017). Combining social norms acknowledgements
and social marketing to address underage drinking: development and We are grateful to the university instructors who allowed us to test our intervention in
process evaluation of a whole-of-community intervention. PLoS ONE 12, their classrooms. We thank J. Schwakopf, who played an important role coordinating this
1–14 (2017). research and recruiting instructors to participate. We also thank G. Walton for his feedback
21. Perkins, H. W. & Craig, D. W. A successful social norms campaign to on earlier versions of this manuscript. This research was partially supported by the Office
reduce alcohol misuse among college student-athletes. J. Stud. Alcohol 67, of the Vice Provost and Chief Diversity Officer and grant no. 150 PRJ73DX by the College
880–889 (2006). of Letters & Sciences (both University of Wisconsin-Madison). The video was created with
22. Haines, M. P., Barker, G. P. & Rice, R. in The Social Norms Approach to the help of M. Mederson. The funders had no role in study conceptualization and design,
Preventing School and College Age Substance Abuse: A Handbook for Educators, data collection and analysis, decision to publish or preparation of the manuscript.
Counselors, and Clinicians (ed. Perkins, W.) 235–244 (John Wiley, 2003).
23. Goldstein, N. J., Cialdini, R. B. & Griskevicius, V. A room with a viewpoint: author contributions
using social norms to motivate environmental conservation in hotels. M.B. and S.M. jointly conceived the research and decided on the stimulus material and
J. Consum. Res. 35, 472–482 (2008). outcome measures. S.M. created the first drafts of the poster and video and collected data
24. Allcott, H. & Rogers, T. The short-run and long-run effects of behavioral for experiments 1–4. M.C. collected data for experiments 5 and 6. All authors contributed
interventions: experimental evidence from energy conservation. Am. Econ. to the analyses of the data. All authors participated in the writing and revision of the paper.
Rev. 104, 3003–3037 (2014).
25. Bernedo, M., Ferraro, P. J. & Price, M. The persistent impacts of norm-based Competing interests
messaging and their implications for water conservation. J. Consum. Policy
The authors declare no competing interests.
37, 437–452 (2014).
26. Stangor, C., Sechrist, G. B. & Jost, J. T. Changing racial beliefs by providing
consensus information. Pers. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 27, 486–496 (2001). additional information
27. Blanchard, F. A., Crandall, C. S., Brigham, J. C. & Vaughn, L. A. Condemning Extended data is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-020-0899-5.
and condoning racism: a social context approach to interracial settings.
Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/
J. Appl. Psychol. 79, 993–997 (1994).
s41562-020-0899-5.
28. Crandall, C. S., Eshleman, A. & O’Brien, L. Social norms and the expression
and suppression of prejudice: the struggle for internalization. J. Pers. Soc. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to M.B.
Psychol. 82, 359–378 (2002). Peer review information Primary Handling Editors: Mary Elizabeth Sutherland;
29. Legault, L., Gutsell, J. N. & Inzlicht, M. Ironic effects of antiprejudice Aisha Bradshaw.
messages: how motivational interventions can reduce (but also increase)
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
prejudice. Psychol. Sci. 22, 1472–1477 (2011).
30. Paluck, E. L., Shepherd, H. & Aronow, P. M. Changing climates of conflict: a Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
social network experiment in 56 schools. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 113, published maps and institutional affiliations.
566–571 (2016). © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2020
NatuRE HuMaN BEHaviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
AArrttiicclleess NNaattuurree HHuummaaNN BBeeHHaavviioouurr
Extended Data Fig. 1 | Effect size estimates and the results of the internal meta-analysis for Experiments 1–5. Points represent standardized mean
difference effect size estimates. The lines around the points represent the 95% confidence intervals. The overall effect of the social norms manipulations
was .33, indicating that the inclusive climate score of students in the social norms conditions was on average .33 standard deviation units higher than that
of students in the control conditions.
NatuRE HuMaN BEHaviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NNaattuurree HHuummaaNN BBeeHHaavviioouurr AArrttiicclleess
Extended Data Fig. 2 | Means and standard deviations broken down by condition, as well as inferential statistics for the outcome variables assessed in
Experiment 1. (a) IMS = Internal Motivation to Respond without Prejudice, EMS = External Motivation to Respond without Prejudice Note: All variables
have been recoded so that higher values express greater Inclusive Climate. “(R)” denotes scales that have been inverted from their original scoring to fit
this standard. “95% CI” refers to the 95% confidence interval for the effect.
NatuRE HuMaN BEHaviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
AArrttiicclleess NNaattuurree HHuummaaNN BBeeHHaavviioouurr
Extended Data Fig. 3 | Means and standard deviations broken down by condition, as well as inferential statistics for the outcome variables assessed in
Experiment 2. Note: “95% CI” refers to the 95% confidence interval for the effect.
NatuRE HuMaN BEHaviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NNaattuurree HHuummaaNN BBeeHHaavviioouurr AArrttiicclleess
Extended Data Fig. 4 | Means and standard deviations broken down by condition, as well as inferential statistics for the outcome variables assessed in
Experiment 3. Note: “95% CI” refers to the 95% confidence interval for the effect.
NatuRE HuMaN BEHaviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
AArrttiicclleess NNaattuurree HHuummaaNN BBeeHHaavviioouurr
Extended Data Fig. 5 | Means and standard deviations broken down by condition, as well as inferential statistics for the outcome variables assessed in
Experiment 4. Note: “95% CI” refers to the 95% confidence interval for the effect.
NatuRE HuMaN BEHaviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NNaattuurree HHuummaaNN BBeeHHaavviioouurr AArrttiicclleess
Extended Data Fig. 6 | Mediation analyses conducted in Experiments 4 and 5. the effect of the social norms video is mediated by participants’
perceptions of peer norms. Note: The confidence intervals were computed with 1,000 bootstrapped samples. “95% CI” refers to the 95% confidence
interval for the effect.
NatuRE HuMaN BEHaviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
AArrttiicclleess NNaattuurree HHuummaaNN BBeeHHaavviioouurr
Extended Data Fig. 7 | Means and standard deviations broken down by condition, as well as inferential statistics for the entire sample (both privileged
and marginalized students) in Experiment 5. Note: “Omnibus test” is the two-degree of freedom F test for the condition variable. The “Bias versus
Control” and “Social Norms versus Control” columns show the inferential statistics obtained with dummy codes representing these two comparisons. All
scales are scored such that higher values indicate more positivity/inclusiveness. “(R)” denotes scales that have been inverted from their original scoring to
fit this standard.
NatuRE HuMaN BEHaviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NNaattuurree HHuummaaNN BBeeHHaavviioouurr AArrttiicclleess
Extended Data Fig. 8 | Means and standard deviations broken down by condition, as well as inferential statistics for students from marginalized groups
only in Experiment 5. Note: “Omnibus test” is the two degree of freedom F test for the condition variable. The “Bias versus Control” and “Social Norms
versus Control” columns show the inferential statistics obtained with dummy codes representing these two comparisons. All scales are scored such that
higher values indicate more positivity/inclusiveness. “(R)” denotes scales that have been inverted from their original scoring to fit this standard.
NatuRE HuMaN BEHaviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
AArrttiicclleess NNaattuurree HHuummaaNN BBeeHHaavviioouurr
Extended Data Fig. 9 | Parameter estimates and inferential statistics for the entire sample (privileged and marginalized students) in Experiment 5 when
accounting for the non-independence due to classroom. Note: We estimated a linear mixed-effects model in which we regressed the outcome variable
on the two dummy codes (see Experiment 5 Results) and included a by-classroom random intercept. These results should be interpreted with caution,
because 9 (out of 51, that is, 18%) classrooms had 2 or fewer respondents and 19 (37%) had 5 or fewer respondents, leading to substantial volatility in the
classroom means (and thus relatively large standard errors of the parameter estimates). With error degrees of freedom around 40, the inferential tests are
underpowered. All scales are scored such that higher values indicate more positivity/inclusiveness. “(R)” denotes scales that have been inverted from their
original scoring to fit this standard.
NatuRE HuMaN BEHaviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NNaattuurree HHuummaaNN BBeeHHaavviioouurr AArrttiicclleess
Extended Data Fig. 10 | Parameter estimates and inferential statistics for students from marginalized groups only in Experiment 5 when accounting
for the non-independence due to classroom. Note: We estimated a linear mixed-effects model in which we regressed the outcome variable on the two
dummy codes (see Experiment 5 Results) and included a by-classroom random intercept. These results should be interpreted with caution, because
17 (out of 41, that is, 41%) classrooms with data for students from marginalized groups had 2 or fewer respondents and 28 (68%) had 5 or fewer
respondents, leading to substantial volatility in the classroom means (and thus relatively large standard errors of the parameter estimates). All scales
are scored such that higher values indicate more positivity/inclusiveness. “(R)” denotes scales that have been inverted from their original scoring to fit
this standard.
NatuRE HuMaN BEHaviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
1
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Corresponding author(s): Markus Brauer
Last updated by author(s): Feb 27, 2020
Reporting Summary
Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency
in reporting. For further information on Nature Research policies, see Authors & Referees and the Editorial Policy Checklist.
Statistics
For all statistical analyses, confirm that the following items are present in the figure legend, table legend, main text, or Methods section.
n/a Confirmed
The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
A statement on whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided
Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.
A description of all covariates tested
A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
A full description of the statistical parameters including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient)
AND variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)
For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted
Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.
For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated
Our web collection on statistics for biologists contains articles on many of the points above.
Software and code
Policy information about availability of computer code
Data collection Qualtrics
Data analysis R
For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors/reviewers.
We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Research guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.
Data
Policy information about availability of data
All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable:
- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets
- A list of figures that have associated raw data
- A description of any restrictions on data availability
Due to IRB restrictions, the data are not publicly available. However, the data are stored on a secure university server and are available upon request (contact
markus.brauer@wisc.edu).
Field-specific reporting
Please select the one below that is the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.
Life sciences Behavioural & social sciences Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences
2
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/documents/nr-reporting-summary-flat.pdf
Behavioural & social sciences study design
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
Study description Randomized controlled trials. One experiment was conducted online, one in the lab, and four in the field.
Research sample Participants were undergraduates at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Full demographic information is provided in the paper. The
sample is not perfectly representative, but quite representative, given that we recruited instructors from a wide variety of areas and the
students in their classes were not necessarily majors in that field. The goal was to test our hypothesis in a setting in which we could do
random assignment to conditions, and the university setting was ideal for that. Finally, our goals was to see if our social norms
intervention causes a more inclusive climate among students and helps students from marginalized groups succeed in college, so we
opted for students as participants.
Sampling strategy For the online experiment and the laboratory experiment we conducted an a priori power analyses and recruited participants
accordingly. For the field experiments, we recruited as many instructors as possible for the semester in which the study was conducted.
We provide a post-hoc power analysis in the paper.
Data collection All data for Experiments 1-5 were collected on-line through Qualtrics. No experimenter was present when participants completed the
Qualtrics survey in the lab in Experiment 1. We obtained grades from the registrar in Experiment 6.
Timing All experiments were conducted in the same semester. Data collection for this project started in 2014 and ended in 2019.
Data exclusions We excluded participants who were foreign nationals because the social norms information we provided in our interventions was not
relevant for them. Some participants were excluded because they had missing values or the condition information could not be retrieved
at the time they completed the outcome survey at the end of the semester. No other participants were excluded. All data exclusions are
reported in the paper.
Non-participation Since all data were collected in a single session, no participants dropped out.
Randomization All Experiments reported in the paper were randomized controlled trials. Randomization occurred either at the individual level
(Experiments 1 and 4) or at the classroom level (all other Experiments).
Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods
We require information from authors about some types of materials, experimental systems and methods used in many studies. Here, indicate whether each material,
system or method listed is relevant to your study. If you are not sure if a list item applies to your research, read the appropriate section before selecting a response.
Materials & experimental systems Methods
n/a Involved in the study n/a Involved in the study
Antibodies ChIP-seq
Eukaryotic cell lines Flow cytometry
Palaeontology MRI-based neuroimaging
Animals and other organisms
Human research participants
Clinical data
Human research participants
Policy information about studies involving human research participants
Population characteristics See above
Recruitment Participants in Experiments 1 and 4 were recruited through the Department of Psychology's SONA subject pool. They received
partial course credit. The instructors in Experiments 2, 3, 5, and 6 were recruited through email. They received no compensation.
Ethics oversight The University of Wisconsin's IRB approved the study protocol
Note that full information on the approval of the study protocol must also be provided in the manuscript.