Articles
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-019-0651-1
Asymmetrical genetic attributions for prosocial
versus antisocial behaviour
Matthew S. Lebowitz 1*, Kathryn Tabb2 and Paul S. Appelbaum1
Genetic explanations of human behaviour are increasingly common. While genetic attributions for behaviour are often con-
sidered relevant for assessing blameworthiness, it has not yet been established whether judgements about blameworthiness
can themselves impact genetic attributions. Across six studies, participants read about individuals engaging in prosocial or
antisocial behaviour, and rated the extent to which they believed that genetics played a role in causing the behaviour. Antisocial
behaviour was consistently rated as less genetically influenced than prosocial behaviour. This was true regardless of whether
genetic explanations were explicitly provided or refuted. Mediation analyses suggested that this asymmetry may stem from
people’s motivating desire to hold wrongdoers responsible for their actions. These findings suggest that those who seek to
study or make use of genetic explanations’ influence on evaluations of, for example, antisocial behaviour should consider
whether such explanations are accepted in the first place, given the possibility of motivated causal reasoning.
A
ttributing human behaviours and characteristics to genetic doing good or evil) or as moral patients (recipients of good or evil)19.
causes can influence how people perceive and evaluate those It has been suggested that an inverse relationship exists between the
behaviours and characteristics1. However, the literature sug- two perceptions—a phenomenon known as moral typecasting20.
gests that the effects of genetic explanations may depend, in part, on According to this formulation, blame can be reduced by portraying
what sort of behaviours or characteristics are being explained2. For a perpetrator as a victim of harm, that is, as a moral patient rather
stigmatized health conditions, genetic attributions are consistently than a moral agent21. Unlike some environmental explanations
linked to decreased perceptions of affected individuals as blame- for misconduct, which can compellingly portray the wrongdoer
worthy for their disease or disability3–5. That is, conceptualizing as a victim of harm (such as childhood trauma or abuse), recent
conditions such as obesity and mental disorders as stemming from research has suggested that genetic explanations are not perceived
genetic and other biological causes can reduce the extent to which as casting a perpetrator as a victim, or moral patient19. These find-
individuals are held responsible for them3–5. This may be because ings may explain why genetic explanations do not always reduce
attributing a person’s behaviour to genetic causes can cast him or perceptions of blame.
her as having diminished self-control, insofar as genetic explana- Here we explore another possible reason why genetic explana-
tions can be interpreted as implying that someone’s actions are tions might be relatively ineffective at reducing perceptions of
determined rather than free6,7. Substantial evidence suggests that blame for antisocial behaviour. We do so by investigating whether
people view agency and the freedom to do otherwise as a prereq- people are less open to adopting genetic explanations for some types
uisite to holding others responsible for their behaviour, on the pre- of behaviour than for others. In particular, we explore the question
sumption that people can only be blamed for intentional actions8,9. of whether people are differentially receptive to genetic explana-
However, the results have not been as straightforward in studies tions for bad acts (operationalized here as antisocial behaviours)
assessing the application of this logic to judgements about antiso- versus good acts (prosocial behaviours). If people are more resistant
cial behaviours, such as crime and other types of wrongdoing. At to believing genetic explanations for wrongdoing in the first place,
first glance, this is surprising. In a growing number of countries, such an asymmetry could illuminate why genetic explanations for
purported evidence for the presence of biological predispositions misdeeds generally fail to secure more lenient treatment for wrong-
toward antisocial behaviour has been introduced on behalf of defen- doers—such explanations are simply rejected out of hand before
dants in pursuit of reduced sentences10–12. But while some evidence decisions about desert are made.
has suggested that biomedical (including genetic) explanations for Wide-ranging evidence has shown that the evaluative valence
criminal behaviour can lead defendants to be seen as less respon- of an event—that is, whether it is seen as good or bad—affects
sible for their misdeeds, and therefore treated more leniently13, the how and to what extent people will reason about its causes: negative
findings have been quite mixed14. Indeed, in most cases genetic events tend to elicit more causal reasoning than positive ones22,23.
explanations for criminal and other antisocial behaviour have been Additionally, there is ample evidence that people’s willingness to
found to have no effect on decisions about how to punish criminals accept genetic and other biological explanations for the behav-
and wrongdoers15–18. iours and characteristics of others often depends on factors beyond
Why might genetic explanations fail to consistently reduce blame the intrinsic quality of the explanations themselves, includ-
for antisocial behaviour? One answer to this question that has been ing aspects of the perceivers’ own social identities and whether
posited in the literature rests on the notion that morality is dyadic they view the genetic explanations as consistent with their pre-
in nature, with people perceived as either moral agents (capable of existing social and political commitments24–28. Although to our
1Center for Research on Ethical, Legal and Social Implications of Psychiatric, Neurologic and Behavioral Genetics, Department of Psychiatry,
Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York, NY, USA. 2Philosophy Program, Bard College, Annandale-on Hudson, NY, USA.
*e-mail: msl2207@cumc.columbia.edu
NATure HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NATure HuMAN BeHAviour
knowledge no research has examined how the moral valence of a order. A sentence describing how each protagonist responded to the
behaviour affects its likelihood of being attributed to genetic causes, situation was systematically varied to depict either prosocial behav-
a variety of studies have uncovered other kinds of intuitions and iour in both vignettes (prosocial condition) or antisocial behav-
judgements about behaviour that can be influenced significantly by iour in both vignettes (antisocial condition) (Table 1). Participants
moral considerations29–31. rated their genetic attributions for each protagonist’s behaviour
One well-established example is that people attribute more (see Methods for more detail). We analysed these genetic attribu-
agency, intentionality and control to actions that have negative con- tion ratings using a univariate ANOVA with condition (prosocial
sequences than to those with positive consequences32–36. Relatedly, versus antisocial) as a between-subjects factor and vignette as a
people are more inclined to attribute negative events (rather than within-subjects factor (Fig. 1a). The key finding was a significant
positive events) to the agency of others37. Moreover, learning about main effect of condition, F(1, 249) = 19.47, P < 0.001, d = 0.56,
or experiencing the immoral behaviour of others causes people 95% confidence interval (CI) = (0.37, 0.75): participants gave sig-
to endorse greater belief in free will, apparently in an effort to nificantly higher genetic attribution ratings for prosocial behav-
justify holding wrongdoers responsible for their actions38. This iour (M = 3.15, 95% CI = (2.88, 3.43), SD = 1.58) than for antisocial
may be an example of ‘blame validation processing’, which refers behaviour (M = 2.29, 95% CI = (2.02, 2.56), SD = 1.52). There was
to a ‘proclivity to favour blame versus nonblame explanations for also a main effect of vignette, F(1, 249) = 10.11, P = 0.002, d = 0.21,
rm
harmful events and to de-emphasize mitigating circumstances’39. In 95% CI = (0.03, 0.38), which emerged because genetic attribu-
light of lay assumptions that genetic explanations for a behaviour tions were stronger on average for Tom’s behaviour (M = 2.83, 95%
render it less under the actor’s control6,7, genetic attributions may CI = (2.62, 3.04), SD = 1.72) than for Jane’s behaviour (M = 2.62,
be an example of a ‘nonblame explanation’ that, according to the 95% CI = (2.42, 2.83), SD = 1.65). However, there was no significant
‘blame validation’ view, would tend to be disfavoured in the case of vignette × condition interaction, F(1, 249) = 0.13, P = 0.723, mean-
antisocial acts39. ing that the effect of condition did not significantly differ across the
Another explanation that has been offered for asymmetries in two vignettes. The data from study one are presented as a box-and-
intuitions about morally good versus morally bad behaviours is the whisker plot in Supplementary Fig. 1.
notion that people generally assume that “deep inside every indi-
vidual there is a ‘true self’ calling him or her to behave in ways that Study two. Having demonstrated a difference in genetic attribu-
are morally virtuous”40. In other words, people generally assume tions for prosocial and antisocial behaviours in study one, we were
that the essence of every person is inherently good41. Because DNA interested in exploring whether this difference could be eliminated
is often seen as representing the essence of a person1, this ‘true self’ by supplying participants with information about the role (or
view might predict that people would be resistant to the idea of lack thereof) of genes in causing the behaviours described. Thus,
genes causing antisocial behaviour, because this would imply that a we used the same vignettes as in study one, but in study two we
person could have a ‘bad essence’, whereas the true self is assumed varied whether the protagonist had been found to be genetically
by default to be morally good. predisposed to the type of behaviour exhibited (genetic explana-
Based on the above-described motivations predicted by both the tion, n = 126) or to lack such a genetic predisposition (no genetic
‘true self’ and ‘blame validation’ views, we hypothesized that people explanation, n = 124) (see Methods and Table 2). Participants’
would more readily attribute prosocial (good) behaviour to genetic genetic attribution ratings (Fig. 1b) were again analysed using a
causes than they would antisocial (bad) behaviour. We reasoned univariate ANOVA, this time with two between-subjects factors—
that these motivations could help explain the often-reported but condition (prosocial versus antisocial) and explanation (genetic
counterintuitive lack of effect of genetic attributions for wrongdo- explanation versus no genetic explanation)—and one within-sub-
ing. The present research used six vignette experiments to test this jects factor (vignette: Jane versus Tom). As in study one, findings
hypothesis. Study one asked people to estimate the causal role of were consistent with our hypothesis: participants in the prosocial
genes in two instances of either prosocial or antisocial behaviours. condition provided higher genetic attribution ratings (M = 2.55,
Study two tested whether differences in genetic attributions for 95% CI = (2.29, 2.82), SD = 1.48) than did participants in the anti-
prosocial and antisocial behaviours could be eliminated by giving social condition (M = 2.18, 95% CI = (1.93, 2.44), SD = 1.45), F(1,
participants explicit information about the role (or lack thereof) of 246) = 4.48, P = 0.035, d = 0.25, 95% CI = (0.07, 0.43). There was also
genes in causing the behaviours described. Study three expanded a significant main effect of explanation, F(1, 246) = 50.20, P < 0.001,
on the findings of studies one and two by using a broader range of d = 0.90, 95% CI = (0.73, 1.06): participants exposed to the genetic
prosocial and antisocial behaviours, as well as by providing different explanation provided stronger genetic attribution ratings (M = 2.96,
sorts of explanations regarding the role of genes in causing them. 95% CI = (2.69, 3.24), SD = 1.57) than those exposed to no genetic
Study four tested possible mediators of the asymmetry in genetic explanation (M = 1.76, 95% CI = (1.57, 1,95), SD = 1.08). However,
attributions for anti- and prosocial behaviour. Study five examined there was no significant explanation × condition interaction, F(1,
whether the asymmetry in genetic attributions between prosocial 246) = 0.21, P = 0.651, meaning that the type of explanatory infor-
and antisocial actions would occur in response to descriptions of mation provided did not significantly moderate the asymmetry
general patterns of behaviour, rather than only in response to poten- in genetic attributions between prosocial and antisocial behav-
tially idiosyncratic accounts of specific behaviours. Finally, study iour. There was also no significant main effect of vignette, F(1,
six examined whether such an asymmetry would emerge when 246) = 1.59, P = 0.209, and no significant vignette × condition (F(1,
the antisocial behaviours described in the experimental stimuli 246) = 2.71, P = 0.101), vignette × explanation (F(1, 246) = 0.04,
were violent crimes, such as those judged in the courtrooms where P = 0.846), or vignette × condition × explanation (F(1, 246) = 1.27,
genetic evidence is increasingly brought to bear. P = 0.261) interactions. The data from study two are presented as a
box-and-whisker plot in Supplementary Fig. 2.
results
Study one. We began by examining whether people are differen- Study three. To examine the boundary conditions of the effects
tially likely to perceive genetic causes for prosocial versus antisocial documented in studies one and two, study three used vignettes
behaviours. In study one, participants (see Methods) were ran- describing a wider range of behaviours and provided participants
domly assigned to either a prosocial condition (n = 126) or an anti- with more potent information about the role (or lack thereof) of
social condition (n = 125). They were presented with two vignettes genes in the behaviours described. Participants (see Methods) read
(featuring protagonists named ‘Jane’ and ‘Tom’) in a randomized about a woman named Jane encountering one of six situations and
NATure HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NATure HuMAN BeHAviour Articles
4.00
3.50
3.00
2.50
2.00
1.50
1.00
Study one
behaving in either an antisocial or prosocial manner, depending on significant explanation × condition (F(1, 585) = 0.69, P = 0.408),
the condition to which they had been assigned (see ‘Study three’, condition × situation (F(5, 585) = 1.16, P = 0.330), explanation × sit-
‘Stimuli and procedures’ in Methods for more detail). Participants uation (F(5, 585) = 1.41, P = 0.218), or situation × condition × expla-
were also randomly assigned either to receive a genetic explanation nation (F(5, 585) = 0.42, P = 0.832) interactions, meaning that the
(designed to be more forceful and compelling than the one used in effect of condition (prosocial or antisocial) was not significantly
study two, as described in Methods) or no genetic explanation of moderated by the situation or explanation to which a participant
Jane’s behaviour. We analysed genetic attributions for Jane’s behav- was assigned. The data from study three are presented as a box-and-
iour using a 6 (situation) × 2 (condition: antisocial versus prosocial) whisker plot in Supplementary Fig. 3.
× 2 (explanation: genetic explanation versus no genetic explana-
tion) ANOVA. This revealed a significant main effect of condi- Study four. In order to evaluate the ‘blame validation’ and ‘true self’
tion, with prosocial behaviour (n = 305, M = 3.31, 95% CI = (3.09, accounts described earlier as potential explanations for the find-
3.53), SD = 1.96) attributed significantly more strongly to genetic ings of studies one to three, study four (n = 608; see Methods, ‘Study
causes than was antisocial behaviour (n = 304, M = 3.04, 95% four’, ‘Participants’) examined two psychological phenomena that
CI = (2.82, 3.25), SD = 1.92), F(1, 585) = 5.71, P = 0.017, d = 0.14, could possibly be mediating people’s tendency to endorse genetic
95% CI = (−0.01, 0.29) (Fig. 2a). There was also a significant main explanations less readily for antisocial behaviour than for prosocial
effect of explanation, F(1, 585) = 573.27, P < 0.001, d = 1.94, 95% behaviour. In particular, we tested whether the difference in genetic
CI = (1.83, 2.05); again, the genetic explanation yielded significantly attributions for antisocial and prosocial behaviour was consistent
greater genetic attributions (n = 305, M = 4.52, 95% CI = (4.35, 4.69), with mediation by differences in ascriptions of responsibility (as
SD = 1.54) than the lack of a genetic explanation (n = 304, M = 1.82, would be predicted by the ‘blame validation’ view) and/or by differ-
95% CI = (1.68, 1.96), SD = 1.23). However, there was no main ences in judgements of the extent to which the behaviour reflected
effect of situation, F(5, 585) = 0.84, P = 0.519, and there were no who the actor truly was (as would be predicted by the ‘true self’
)elacs
7–1
a
no
detar(
gnitar
noitubirtta
citeneg
naeM
a
4.00
Prosocial behavior
Antisocial behavior
3.50
3.00
2.50
2.00
1.50
1.00
Genetic explanation No genetic explanation
Study two
)elacs
7–1
a
no
detar(
gnitar
noitubirtta
citeneg
naeM
b
Prosocial behavior
Antisocial behavior
Fig. 1 | Mean genetic attribution ratings in studies one and two, collapsed across vignettes. a, Study one. b, Study two. After reading two vignettes about
either prosocial or antisocial behaviour, participants rated how much of a role they believed genetics had played in causing it, on a scale from ‘1 (No role or
a very minor role)’ to ‘7 (A very major role).’ Genetic attribution ratings were higher for prosocial behaviour than for antisocial behaviour in both study one,
n = 251, F(1, 249) = 19.47, P < 0.001, d = 0.56, 95% CI = (0.37, 0.75), and study two, n = 250, F(1, 246) = 4.48, P = 0.035, d = 0.25, 95% CI = (0.07, 0.43). In
study two, this was true regardless of whether or not participants were given a genetic explanation for the behaviour they read about. Error bars represent
± 1 standard error (SE).
NATure HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NATure HuMAN BeHAviour
a b
5.00
4.50
4.00
3.50
3.00
2.50
2.00
1.50
1.00
Study four
view). Study four was identical to study three, except that there was behaviour (n = 303, M = 6.44, 95% CI = (6.33, 6.54), SD = 0.96) than
no manipulation of the presence or absence of a genetic explana- for prosocial behaviour (n = 305, M = 6.20, 95% CI = (6.09, 6.31),
tion, and participants rated Jane’s level of responsibility for behav- SD = 0.98), F(1, 596) = 8.85, P = 0.003, d = 0.25, 95% CI = (0.17,
iour and the extent to which her behaviour reflected ‘who she truly 0.33). Like genetic attributions, responsibility ratings showed no sig-
is,’ in addition to rating their genetic attributions (see Methods, nificant effect of situation, F(5, 596) = 0.77, P = 0.570, and no signif-
‘Study four’, ‘Stimuli and procedures’). We initially analysed the icant situation × condition interaction, F(5, 596) = 0.53, P = 0.752.
data from study four using a 6 (situation) × 2 (condition: antisocial Unlike for genetic attribution and responsibility ratings, there
versus prosocial) ANOVA. This revealed a main effect of condition was no significant difference in ‘true self’ ratings between the
on genetic attribution ratings, replicating the results of studies one antisocial (M = 6.28, 95% CI = (6.17, 6.39), SD = 0.99) and proso-
to three: genetic attributions were significantly weaker for antiso- cial (M = 6.35, 95% CI = (6.26, 6.45), SD = 0.85) conditions, F(1,
cial behaviour (M = 3.00, 95% CI = (2.82, 3.18), SD = 1.56) than for 596) = 1.03, P = 0.31. Once again, there was no significant effect
prosocial behaviour (M = 3.72, 95% CI = (3.54, 3.90), SD = 1.63), of situation, F(5, 596) = 1.60, P = 0.158, and no significant situa-
F(1, 596) = 31.02, P < 0.001, d = 0.45, 95% CI = (0.33, 0.58) tion × condition interaction, F(5, 596) = 1.12, P = 0.349.
(Fig. 2b). There was no significant effect of situation, F(5, 596) = 1.04, We evaluated the two mediation hypotheses using the PROCESS
P = 0.394, and no significant situation × condition interaction, F(5, procedure (version 3.2) for SPSS with 5,000 bootstrap samples42.
596) = 0.38, P = 0.862, meaning that the asymmetry in genetic attri- Figure 3 illustrates the results of this analysis. In particular, there
butions did not differ significantly between vignette versions. was a significant indirect effect of condition on genetic attributions
There was also a significant effect of condition on responsibil- through responsibility ratings (unstandardized B = 0.06, 95% per-
ity ratings; participants rated Jane as more responsible for antisocial centile bootstrap CI (0.01, 0.11)), consistent with the notion that
)elacs
7–1
a
no
detar(
gnitar
noitubirtta
citeneg
naeM
5.00
Prosocial behavior
Antisocial behavior
4.50
4.00
3.50
3.00
2.50
2.00
1.50
1.00
Genetic explanation No genetic
explanation
Study three
)elacs
7–1
a
no
detar(
gnitar
noitubirtta
citeneg
naeM
Prosocial behavior
Antisocial behavior
Fig. 2 | Mean genetic attribution ratings in studies three and four, collapsed across vignettes. a, Study three. b, Study four. After reading one of six
vignettes about either prosocial or antisocial behaviour, participants rated how much of a role they believed genetics had played in causing the behaviour,
on a scale from ‘1 (No role or a very minor role)’ to ‘7 (A very major role).’ Genetic attribution ratings were higher for prosocial behaviour than for antisocial
behaviour in both study three, n = 609, F(1, 585) = 5.71, P = 0.017, d = 0.14, 95% CI = (−0.01, 0.29), and study four, n = 608, F(1, 596) = 31.02, P < 0.001,
d = 0.45, 95% CI = (0.33, 0.58). In study three, this was true regardless of whether or not participants were given a genetic explanation for the behaviour
they read about. Error bars represent ± 1 SE.
NATure HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NATure HuMAN BeHAviour Articles
B =
–0.24,
S E =
0.08, t =
–0.299,
P <
0.001
Resp rao tn ins gibility B = –0.24,
SE
= 0.08,
t = –3.11,
P = 0.002
Prosocial
Genetic
(vs antisocial) Direct effect: B = 0.67, SE = 0.13, t = 8.89, P < 0.001 attributions
behavior
B
=
0.07,
SE
=
0.07,
t
=
0.98,
P =
0.326
Tr ru ae
ti
ns gelf
B
=
–0.001,
SE
=
0.08, t
=
–0.01,
P
=
0.995
Indirect effect through responsibility ratings: B = 0.06, SE = 0.03 (95% percentile bootstrap CI [0.01, 0.11])
Indirect effect through true self ratings: B < 0.0001, SE = 0.01 (95% percentile bootstrap CI [–0.02, 0.02])
Fig. 3 | Bootstrap mediation analyses in study four. After reading one of six vignettes describing a woman named Jane engaging in either prosocial or
antisocial behaviour, participants rated how much of a role they believed genetics had played in causing Jane’s behaviour, on a scale from ‘1 (No role or a
very minor role)’ to ‘7 (A very major role).’ They also rated how responsible they considered Jane to be for her behaviour and provide a ‘true self’ rating of
the extent to which Jane’s behaviour reflected ‘who she truly is’ — both rated on a scale from ‘1 (Not at all)’ to ‘7 (Very much).’ Mediation models were
tested using the PROCESS procedure (version 3.2) for SPSS with 5,000 bootstrap samples42. There was a significant indirect effect of condition on genetic
attributions through responsibility ratings, but the indirect effect through ‘true self’ ratings was not significant. Regression coefficients are unstandardized.
participants’ motivation to hold Jane responsible for harmful behav- 0.67). Notably, the mean of 3.61 in the prosocial condition neared
iour mediated their tendency to rate her behaviour as less geneti- the scale midpoint of 4, which may suggest that, in general, people
cally influenced when she acted antisocially than when she acted do not consider genetic attributions to be implausible as explana-
prosocially. However, the indirect effect through ‘true self’ ratings tions for prosocial behaviour. By contrast, the mean in the antisocial
was not significant (unstandardized B < 0.0001, 95% percentile condition was 2.90, well below the midpoint and significantly lower
bootstrap CI (−0.02, 0.02)), suggesting that the extent to which than for the prosocial condition.
participants considered Jane’s pattern of behaviour to reflect who
she truly was did not mediate their differential willingness to make Study six. The results of studies one to five consistently found an
genetic attributions for her prosocial and antisocial behaviour. The asymmetry in which people were less willing to endorse genetic
data from study four are presented as a box-and-whisker plot in causes for antisocial (as opposed to prosocial) behaviour. Study six
Supplementary Fig. 4. aimed to investigate whether this asymmetry would emerge when
the antisocial behaviours that participants were judging involved
Study five. Study five investigated whether the same asymmetry serious criminal acts. This is an important question because much
found in the earlier studies for prosocial and antisocial behaviours of the previous research that has observed no significant effects of
would occur in response to broad descriptions of a person’s behav- genetic explanations on the punishment deemed appropriate for
iour, rather than just potentially idiosyncratic vignettes describing wrongdoing focused on criminal behaviour15–18. The courtroom
specific actions. This approach also allowed us to attain a more is also the most prominent real-life circumstance in which people
careful degree of experimental control, by writing the prosocial and are asked to evaluate the relevance of genetic causes to responsibil-
antisocial versions of the stimuli to more closely parallel each other. ity and desert. If people are relatively unwilling to ascribe criminal
Participants were randomly assigned to be told that Jane was gen- behaviour to genetic causes, this could provide a plausible account
erally either ‘kind, generous, and caring’ (prosocial condition) or of why genetic explanations often do not seem to have significant
‘mean, selfish, and uncaring’ (antisocial condition) (see Methods for effects on punishment in such contexts. However, while studies one
more detail). to five suggest that people may be relatively unwilling to attribute
As in studies one to four, participants in the antisocial condi- antisocial behaviour in general to genetic causes, most of the actions
tion provided significantly lower genetic attribution ratings for used as examples of antisocial behaviour in these studies did not
Jane’s tendencies (M = 2.90, 95% CI = (2.64, 3.16), SD = 1.49) than rise to the level of serious criminality, leaving the real-world appli-
did those in the prosocial condition (M = 3.61, 95% CI = (3.36, cability of the findings (for example, to criminal cases) somewhat
3.85), SD = 1.41), t(258) = 3.93, P < 0.001, d = 0.49, 95% CI = (0.32, in doubt. Thus, study six used violent crimes for its examples of
NATure HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NATure HuMAN BeHAviour
antisocial behaviour, instead of the milder, less extreme examples of
Table 1 | experimental manipulation used in study one
antisocial behaviour used in studies one to five.
Participants were randomly assigned to read about one of two vignette version ‘Jane’ ‘Tom’
characters, Michael or Nick, either rescuing another person from
Antisocial condition Rather than approaching the Instead of
being the victim of a violent crime (prosocial condition), or com- man and shaking him by the coming to the
mitting a violent crime (criminal condition) (see Methods for shoulder to wake him up and defense of the
more detail). Replicating the asymmetry observed in studies one to make sure that he was OK, younger student,
five, participants in the criminal condition provided significantly Jane took the man’s cup of Tom joined in
lower genetic attribution ratings for the behaviour they read about money and left him lying in with some taunts
(M = 3.00, 95% CI = (2.80, 3.20), SD = 1.91) than did those in the the parking lot. of his own.
prosocial condition (M = 3.42, 95% CI = (3.20, 3.63), SD = 1.97), Prosocial condition Rather than taking the man’s Instead of joining
F(1, 682) = 7.74, P = 0.006, d = 0.21, 95% CI = (0.06, 0.36). cup of money and leaving in with some
There was also a significant main effect of character (Michael him lying in the parking lot, taunts of his own,
versus Nick), F(1, 682) = 4.13, P = 0.043, d = 0.15, 95% CI = (0.003, Jane approached the man and Tom came to the
0.30). This effect emerged because overall, across the different types shook him by the shoulder to defense of the
of behaviour (criminal and prosocial), participants provided greater wake him up and make sure younger student.
genetic attributions for Michael’s behaviour (n = 343, M = 3.35, that he was OK.
95% CI = (3.15, 3.55), SD = 1.88) than for Nick’s (n = 343, M = 3.05,
95% CI = (2.84, 3.27), SD = 2.01). However, there was no signifi-
cant character × behaviour interaction (F(1, 682) = 1.73, P = 0.189), responsibility ratings mediated the difference (between prosocial
meaning that the effect of behaviour (criminal versus prosocial) did and antisocial behaviour) in genetic attributions was small, suggest-
not differ significantly depending on the character to which a par- ing that other mediators are also in play. Moreover, the variable we
ticipant was assigned. used to assess participants’ motivation to hold people responsible
for their behaviour simply asked participants to rate how respon-
Discussion sible they judged people to be, rather than assessing blame or
The primary finding of the present research is that people make desire to punish per se. We chose to use the item we did because it
weaker genetic attributions for antisocial behaviour than for proso- allowed us to use the same measure for both prosocial and antiso-
cial behaviour. Although the magnitude of this effect generally fell cial behaviour, but other measures could clarify the question further
in the small-to-medium range (by conventional effect-size defini- (see Supplementary Note 1 for further discussion). Additionally,
tions), it was replicated across six studies using a range of stimuli our mediation analyses were correlational, and we did not explic-
that described a variety of prosocial and antisocial behaviours. The itly manipulate blame, so our data’s support for the blame valida-
asymmetry was present when participants were only given descrip- tion account is only preliminary. Elucidating a specific mechanistic
tions of behaviour and asked to rate how much of a role genetics account of why people reject genetic explanations in some situations
played in causing it, without being told anything about the actor’s more than others was not our primary goal, but future research
genetic predisposition; and it persisted even when participants were could examine the mechanisms behind the asymmetry with differ-
told explicitly whether the individual in question was genetically pre- ent methods to further explore this intriguing question.
disposed to the type of behaviour exhibited, suggesting that people Our analyses suggest that participants’ ‘true self’ ratings in study
may remain relatively reluctant to accept even explicit ascriptions of four did not significantly mediate their lesser willingness to attri-
antisocial behaviour to genetics. The asymmetry was present across bute antisocial behaviour to genetic causes (as compared to proso-
a variety of prosocial and antisocial behaviours, including when the cial behaviour), but it is notable that ‘true self’ ratings tended to be
antisocial behaviours in question were violent and criminal, sug- quite high for both types of behaviour (with means above six on
gesting a degree of generalizability. The relative resistance to genetic a seven-point scale). This may be seen as somewhat surprising in
explanations for antisocial behaviours demonstrated across these light of previous research suggesting that people tend to assume that
studies might help to explain findings from previous studies that the true self is morally virtuous41. Perhaps participants interpreted
indicate that genetic evidence often fails to influence the punish- the rating scale differently depending on the type of behaviour they
ments deemed appropriate for criminal wrongdoing15–18. read about. That is, participants in the prosocial condition may
In the present study, the asymmetry was not moderated statis- have provided high ratings because prosocial behaviour seemed
tically by which vignette a participant viewed, despite our use of consistent with the notion of a morally virtuous true self. At the
a wide range of stimuli across the different studies. Moreover, we same time, those in the antisocial condition may have considered
observed this asymmetry when participants were only provided their high ratings as providing further justification or validation of
with general characterizations of a person’s broad tendencies that their responsibility judgements (that is, their ascriptions of blame)
used careful experimental control to maximize the parallels between by conceptualizing the antisocial behaviour as stemming from the
the prosocial and antisocial stimuli, and were not told about any perpetrator’s deep-seated nature.
specific behaviours. Our findings add to the substantial body of existing evidence
The present research also considered two possible explanations suggesting that factors beyond the inherent quality of biological
for the observed asymmetry. The results of our mediation analyses explanations for behaviour can influence people’s likelihood of
in study four were consistent with the ‘blame validation’ account, endorsing them24–28. The findings have specific real-world implica-
and not with the ‘true self’ account. The blame validation view tions, particularly for situations in which genetic explanations for
would suggest that people see genetic explanations as deflecting antisocial behaviour are deployed strategically, such as when genetic
moral responsibility for behaviour, and therefore disfavour them in evidence about a defendant is introduced in court as a means of
the case of antisocial behaviour, out of a desire to maintain the abil- seeking more lenient sentencing. If people are generally resistant
ity to assign blame. Our data suggest that this sort of motivation to genetic explanations for antisocial behaviour—including crime,
for rejecting genetic explanations for antisocial behaviour is more as we observed in study six—judges and jurors may be unlikely to
likely than one predicated on resistance to the notion that people’s be swayed by such evidence. Indeed, this resistance might help to
genetic ‘essences’ or true selves could ever predispose them towards explain why providing genetic explanations for misdeeds often fails
morally bad behaviour. However, the indirect effect through which to affect judgements about criminal culpability and punishment in
NATure HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NATure HuMAN BeHAviour Articles
Table 2 | experimental manipulation of genetic versus no
genetic explanation used in study two
vignette version ‘Jane’ ‘Tom’
Genetic explanation It turns out Jane It turns out Tom carries
carries a combination a combination of
of genes that can genes that can make
make behaviour like behaviour like his
her response to the response during the
homeless man more bullying incident more
likely. likely.
No genetic explanation It turns out Jane does It turns out Tom does
not carry a combination not carry a combination
of genes that can of genes that can make
make behaviour like behaviour like his
her response to the response during the
homeless man more bullying incident more
likely. likely. Fig. 4 | image used in the genetic explanation in study three. When
participants of study three read about either prosocial or antisocial
behaviour, some were randomly assigned to be given a genetic explanation
the ways we might expect14, as well as the finding that Americans for the behaviour. This explanation, designed to be more forceful and
tend to disfavour genetic explanations for violent behaviour, as compelling than the text-only one used in study two, stated, ‘Scientists
compared to environmental and choice-based explanations43. have found that people can have genes that lead them to behave this way.
The present findings may also have implications for other exper- Here is a graphic that illustrates the area of the genome where these genes
imental research seeking to measure the impact of genetic explana- are found.’ This image, which actually shows polymorphic simple sequence
tions for morally significant behaviours on downstream variables, repeat markers from several individuals (with alleles for one marker from
such as ascriptions of blame and praise or judgements about one individual circled in red), was then displayed. Image reproduced with
punishment and reward. In particular, any time genetic explana- permission from ref. 18, Oxford Univ. Press.
tions for undesirable behaviour are found not to have an effect on
such downstream variables, particularly in the case of antisocial
behaviour17,18, researchers would be wise to consider the possibil- environmental or biological, would yield the same kind of asym-
ity that people simply did not accept the genetic explanations in metries observed in the present research.
the first place. Studies that attempt to experimentally manipulate Future research could also examine whether the asymmetry we
people’s causal attributions for behaviour through the use of genetic report here could be observed using other measures of genetic attri-
explanations should consider employing ‘manipulation checks’ to bution, such as by gauging genetic attributions on a comparative
measure whether such explanations are effectively impacting par- scale that considers genetic explanations as ‘one end’ of the scale
ticipants’ beliefs about the influence of genes, especially in cases of and environmental or psychosocial explanations as the other. All
antisocial behaviour. of the present studies used a single measure of genetic attribu-
Our findings raise a number of important questions for future tions that assessed them non-comparatively, which allowed us to
research. First, it is unclear how unique genetic explanations are in assess genetic attributions alone without introducing the possibil-
being endorsed more strongly in cases of prosocial behaviour than ity of other competing explanations or suggesting to participants
cases of antisocial behaviour. Future research could examine whether that rejecting genetic attributions was akin to embracing another
a similar pattern would emerge for other kinds of explanations, by type of attribution. Researchers could also consider using differ-
assessing what other potential ‘nonblame explanations’39 might be ent methods of gauging responsibility/blame and ‘true self’ beliefs
afforded less weight in attempts to explain antisocial (as opposed to rather than the scales used in the present research, which have the
prosocial) behaviour. These could include various explanations for potential limitation of being single-item measures.
behaviour that appear to deflect responsibility away from the actor— Additionally, future studies could investigate whether certain
such as attempts to link criminality to early childhood trauma or individual-difference variables might moderate or interact with
socioeconomic deprivation, or attributions of antisocial behaviour the asymmetry documented here. For example, individuals with
to neurobiological factors or acquired medical problems44. greater dispositional tendencies toward punitiveness (or those who
Insofar as genes are viewed as constitutive of human character work in the criminal justice system) might be especially resistant
and behaviour1, it may be that they are seen as uniquely or unusu- to genetic attributions for antisocial behaviour, while perhaps those
ally exculpatory, and that causes not associated with people’s inner with expertise in behavioural genetics would show less motivation
essences would not yield the same asymmetry, or would yield it toward blame validation. Finally, future research could examine
less strongly. A recent meta-analysis suggests that neurobiological whether the asymmetry we observed in the endorsement of genetic
explanations (at least in the context of mental disorders) may not explanations is unique to comparisons of prosocial and antisocial
be seen as nonblame explanations to the same extent that genetic behaviour, or whether there is a more general willingness to make
explanations are45, which would suggest that people would be less genetic attributions for positively valenced phenotypes (for exam-
resistant to neurobiological explanations of antisocial behaviour. As ple, physical attractiveness) than for negatively valenced ones (for
for environmental explanations, some research suggests that they example, ugliness).
may reduce blame for wrongdoing more powerfully than genetic When taken together, our results suggest that people’s interpre-
explanations—which might suggest that people are less resistant to tations and evaluations of findings in behavioural genetics may
environmental explanations than to genetic explanations in such depend not only on the scientific merit of the evidence, but also on
cases19. However, more research is needed to establish this con- the moral valence of the behaviours in question. This kind of moti-
clusively. It remains to be definitively determined whether other vated reasoning about empirical information can pose obstacles
kinds of explanations for behaviour besides genetic ones, be they to scientific literacy46, underscoring the importance of identifying
NATure HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NATure HuMAN BeHAviour
exactly what motivations are affecting intuitions about behavioural Participants were further randomly assigned either to receive a genetic explanation
genetics and precisely what impact biological explanations are hav- or no genetic explanation of Jane’s behaviour.
The genetic explanation used in study three was intended to be more
ing on people’s thinking.
forceful and compelling than the one used in study two. To this end, the genetic
explanation included an image (Fig. 4), used in previous research18, purporting to
Methods illustrate the location in the genome of genes that had been shown to cause the type
All procedures for all studies were administered using Qualtrics.com data of behaviour exhibited by Jane. It also stated, ‘According to recent testing, Jane has
collection software and were approved by the Institutional Review Board of the these genes. In other words, Jane’s genetic makeup—the DNA that she inherited
New York State Psychiatric Institute, indicating compliance with ethical guidelines. from her parents—leads her to behave the way she does in situations like these.’
In all studies, participants indicated their informed consent to participate via Participants who were assigned to receive no genetic explanation, by contrast, were
an online form. Qualtrics settings were used to build random assignment of not shown this image and were told, ‘According to recent testing, Jane does not
participants to experimental conditions into the study procedures, and because have any genes that are known to lead people to behave this way. In other words,
this process was computerized and participants completed the studies online, there is no evidence that Jane’s genetic makeup—the DNA that she inherited from
performing the data collection blind to condition was not a concern. her parents—leads her to behave the way she does in situations like these.’
After reading their assigned vignette and explanation, participants were
Studies one and two. Studies one and two used similar methods. asked, ‘How much of a role do you think genetics have played in Jane’s patterns
of behaviour that you just read about?’ and provided their responses on the same
Participants. In study one, participants were US adults (n = 251, 45.8% male, 54.2% scale used in studies one and two. See Supplementary Tables 2 and 3 for the full
female, age range 19–73 years, M = 34.70 years, SD = 10.31) recruited online using stimuli used in study three.
Amazon.com’s Mechanical Turk (MTurk) platform47, which allows participants
to complete short tasks in exchange for payment. Participants who completed the Study four. For study four (which explored mediation models), although it had
study were provided with a ‘completion code,’ which they entered into the MTurk fewer conditions than study three (because it did not involve randomly assigning
system to receive a $1 payment. The sample size was chosen based on a pilot study participants to a genetic or no genetic explanation), we wished to be conservative
using the same methods (n = 100) that yielded a difference in genetic attributions with our sample size because we did not have a clear a priori estimate of effect size
between prosocial and antisocial behaviour with an effect size of d = 0.36, which for our measures of the potential mediator variables. Therefore, we again recruited
requires a minimum sample size of 246 to be detected with 80% power. For study participants via MTurk, aiming to obtain a sample similar in size to the one used
two, we recruited a sample of 250 US adults (42.8% male, 57.2% female) using for study three.
MTurk, based on the same considerations used to determine the sample size for
study one (participants in studies two to six were not asked to report their ages; Participants. Participants were 608 US adults (39.1% male, 60.5% female, 0.4%
those in studies two to five were recruited and compensated in the same manner as other gender or preferring not to answer).
participants in study one).
Stimuli and procedures. The stimuli used in study four were the same as those
Stimuli and procedures. The vignettes used for studies one and two were largely used in study three, except that participants were not randomized to receive a
identical. One described Tom, a 13-year-old student who happened upon a genetic explanation or no genetic explanation for Jane’s behaviour. Thus, the
bullying incident in the hallway of his school; the other described Jane, a 30-year- study employed a 6 (situation) × 2 (condition: antisocial versus prosocial) fully
old woman who came across an unconscious homeless man lying in a parking lot randomized, between-subjects design. After participants read their assigned
in her neighbourhood. So that all participants would be exposed to mentions of vignette, they were posed two new questions before being asked to rate their genetic
all of the same behaviours, these sentences took the format ‘Instead of [prosocial attributions for Jane’s behaviour using the same scale employed in study three. One
behaviour], Jane/Tom [antisocial behaviour]’ in the antisocial condition, and was a responsibility rating, for which they were asked ‘To what extent to do you
vice versa in the prosocial condition (see Table 1 for text of experimental believe Jane is responsible for her patterns of behaviour that you just read about?’
manipulation). In study one, other than this experimental manipulation, and provided their responses on a scale from ‘1 (Not at all)’ to ‘7 (Very much).’
participants in both conditions read identical vignettes. In study two, several The other, a ‘true self’ rating, asked ‘To what extent do you think Jane’s patterns of
sentences were added to the end of each vignette, explaining that the target behaviour that you just read about reflect who she truly is?’ with participants again
individual had recently undergone genetic testing, and the final sentence of each providing their responses on a scale from ‘1 (Not at all)’ to ‘7 (Very much).’ The
vignette (Table 2) was randomly assigned to state either that the individual was genetic attribution rating appeared below the two mediator ratings in the onscreen
genetically predisposed to exhibit the type of behaviour described in the vignette procedures, as measuring mediators before measuring outcome variables has
(genetic explanation, n = 126) or lacked such a genetic predisposition (no genetic been advocated as the preferred temporal sequence for mediation analyses48. See
explanation, n = 124). Supplementary Table 2 for the full stimuli used in study four.
In both studies one and two, after reading each vignette, participants were
asked, ‘How much of a role do you think genetics played in Tom/Jane’s behaviour Study five. The methods for study five attempted to address some potential
in the story you just read?’ and provided their responses on a scale from ‘1 (No limitations of the methods used in studies one to four. In particular, in studies
role or a very minor role)’ to ‘7 (A very major role).’ At the end of each study, one to four, the prosocial and antisocial behaviours about which participants read
participants were asked basic demographic questions and were debriefed as to the took the form of vignettes that we created for the purpose of this research. Because
fictitious nature of the vignettes. the stimuli were not pretested and might be seen as somewhat idiosyncratic,
Full stimuli for studies one and two are reproduced in Supplementary Table 1. it is possible that they did not manipulate the prosocial/antisocial distinction
as intended, that precise experimental control was not achieved or additional
Study three. Participants. Study three used a 6 × 2 × 2 between-subjects design, variables were manipulated in unforeseen ways. While this appears unlikely given
yielding a total of 24 groups. As such, we calculated that a total sample of at least the consistent results of studies one to four, across which a variety of stimuli were
n= 505 would be required for 80% power to detect an effect with the magnitude of used, the possibility cannot be ruled out. Furthermore, because the vignettes in
the difference in genetic attributions between prosocial and antisocial behaviour studies one to four described specific behaviours, it is possible that the asymmetry
observed in study two. Given that study three used novel stimuli, we reasoned that observed so far occurs for the specific behaviours described in these vignettes but
an even larger sample size might be necessary. Thus, participants in study three not more widely. By contrast, study five used broad descriptions of ‘Jane’ to depict
were 609 US adults (66.2% female, 33.3% male, 0.5% other gender or no response) her as either prosocial or antisocial.
recruited via MTurk.
Participants. Because study five had only two between-subjects conditions, like
Stimuli and procedures. Participants were randomly assigned to read one of study one, we aimed to recruit a sample similar in size to the one used for study
six vignettes, each of which described a woman named Jane finding herself one. Participants were 260 adults recruited via MTurk (36.5% male, 62.7% female,
in one of six different situations. Depending on the condition (that is, prosocial 0.8% other gender or preferring not to answer).
or antisocial) to which they had been assigned, participants read about Jane
acting either prosocially or antisocially in their assigned situation. Here, Stimuli and procedures. Participants in the prosocial condition (n = 130) were
participants were not told about the behaviour that Jane did not perform (as they told, ‘Jane has a strong tendency to be kind, generous, and caring toward others.
were in studies one and two), because we wished to rule out the possibility that She often goes out of her way to treat people well and help them.’ By contrast,
the asymmetry would only emerge when both behaviours were mentioned and those in the antisocial condition (n = 130) were told, ‘Jane has a strong tendency
the individual explicitly was said to have engaged in one but not the other. All to be mean, selfish, and uncaring toward others. She often goes out of her way to
participants were told that the behaviour they had read about was ‘consistent with mistreat people and take advantage of them.’
how Jane usually behaves.’ This information was included because we reasoned Participants were given no other information about Jane and were asked, ‘How
that participants might have difficulty attributing one specific behaviour to much of a role do you think genetics play in Jane’s behaviour?’; they provided their
Jane’s genetic makeup, but might find a genetic explanation for Jane’s actions responses on the same scale used in studies one to four. See Supplementary Table 4
more plausible if they were said to be part of a consistent pattern of behaviour. for the full stimuli used in study five.
NATure HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NATure HuMAN BeHAviour Articles
Study six. Study six, testing whether the asymmetry would occur when serious 9. Sarkissian, H. et al. Is belief in free will a cultural universal? Mind Lang. 25,
criminal behaviour was compared with strongly prosocial actions, used completely 346–358 (2010).
novel vignettes that had not been employed as stimuli in the previous studies, 10. McSwiggan, S., Elger, B. & Appelbaum, P. S. The forensic use of behavioral
so we aimed to be more conservative in specifying our sample size, choosing to genetics in criminal proceedings: case of the MAOA-L genotype. Int. J. Law
recruit a larger number of participants per condition than for studies one to five. Psychiatry 50, 17–23 (2017).
We also chose to use a different recruitment method than the one used for studies 11. Appelbaum, P. S. The double helix takes the witness stand: behavioral and
one to five, to enhance the external validity of the findings by examining whether neuropsychiatric genetics in court. Neuron 82, 946–949 (2014).
the same pattern of results would emerge in a non-MTurk sample. 12. Denno, D. W. Revisiting the legal link between genetics and crime. Law
Contemp. Probl. 69, 209–257 (2006).
Participants. Participants in study six were recruited by Qualtrics, which offers 13. Aspinwall, L. G., Brown, T. R. & Tabery, J. The double-edged sword: does
participant recruitment services for a fee, in addition to providing the online data- biomechanism increase or decrease judges’ sentencing of psychopaths?
collection software used for all of the present research. Qualtrics assembled a panel Science 337, 846–849 (2012).
of 686 adult members of the US population to complete the study procedures in 14. Scurich, N. & Appelbaum, P. S. Behavioural genetics in criminal court. Nat.
the form of an online survey. These participants were 43.9% male, 55.7% female, Hum. Behav. 1, 772–774 (2017).
and 0.4% unknown or unspecified gender. They received compensation equivalent 15. Fuss, J., Dressing, H. & Briken, P. Neurogenetic evidence in the courtroom:
to approximately US$6.40 (consistent with standard pay rates used by Qualtrics a randomised controlled trial with German judges. J. Med. Genet. 52,
Panels) via Qualtrics Panels’ e-reward system, in which individuals can choose 730–737 (2015).
whether to receive their compensation in the form of a gift card, a voucher for 16. Appelbaum, P. S. & Scurich, N. Impact of behavioral genetic evidence on the
free goods/services (for example, free movie tickets), or points that can be pooled adjudication of criminal behavior. J. Am. Acad. Psychiatry Law Online 42,
across surveys and then exchanged for a larger reward (for example, a more 91–100 (2014).
valuable gift card). 17. Appelbaum, P. S., Scurich, N. & Raad, R. Effects of behavioral genetic
evidence on perceptions of criminal responsibility and appropriate
Stimuli and procedures. Study six used a 2 (character: Michael versus Nick) × 2 punishment. Psychol. Public Policy Law 21, 134–144 (2015).
(condition: criminal versus prosocial) fully between-subjects design. Participants 18. Scurich, N. & Appelbaum, P. S. The blunt-edged sword: genetic explanations
assigned to the prosocial condition read a vignette describing an incident in which of misbehavior neither mitigate nor aggravate punishment. J. Law Biosci. 3,
their assigned character rescued another person from falling victim to a violent 140–157 (2016).
crime, whereas those in the criminal condition read a vignette describing an 19. Robbins, P. & Litton, P. Crime, punishment, and causation: the effect of
incident in which their assigned character was the perpetrator of a violent crime. etiological information on the perception of moral agency. Psychol., Public
The specifics of the crime in question and the events described in the vignette Policy, Law 24, 118–127 (2018).
varied depending on the character to which the participant had been assigned. 20. Gray, K. & Wegner, D. M. Moral typecasting: divergent perceptions of moral
Similar to studies three and four, in which participants were told that the agents and moral patients. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 96, 505–520 (2009).
behaviour they had read about was ‘consistent with how Jane usually behaves,’ 21. Gray, K. & Wegner, D. M. To escape blame, don’t be a hero—be a victim.
participants in study six were told that Michael/Nick had ‘a long history of J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 47, 516–519 (2011).
consistently behaving the way he did during this incident.’ As in studies three and 22. Taylor, S. E. Asymmetrical effects of positive and negative events: the
four, this information was included because we reasoned that a genetic explanation mobilization-minimization hypothesis. Psychol. Bull. 110, 67–85 (1991).
might befit a pattern of behaviour more readily than one specific action. After 23. Wong, P. T. P. & Weiner, B. When people ask “why” questions, and the
reading their assigned vignette, participants were asked, ‘How much of a role heuristics of attributional search. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 40, 650–663 (1981).
do you think genetics have played in Michael/Nick’s behaviour?’ and rated their 24. Morin-Chassé, A., Suhay, E. & Jayaratne, T. E. Discord over DNA: ideological
answers on the same scale used in the earlier studies. See Supplementary Table 5 responses to scientific communication about genes and race. J. Race Ethn.
for the full stimuli used in study six. Polit. 2, 260–299 (2017).
25. Garretson, J. & Suhay, E. Scientific communication about biological
Data analysis. Data analysis for all studies was performed using SPSS Statistics influences on homosexuality and the politics of gay rights. Political Res. Q.
Version 25. Two-tailed tests were used for analyses. Data distribution was assumed 69, 17–29 (2015).
to be normal, but this was not formally tested. No standalone custom code was 26. Scurich, N. & Shniderman, A. The selective allure of neuroscientific
produced to perform the data analyses. Data analysis was not performed blind to explanations. PloS One 9, e107529 (2014).
the conditions of the experiments. No participants were excluded from analyses. 27. Suhay, E. & Jayaratne, T. E. Does biology justify ideology? The politics of
genetic attribution. Public Opin. Q. 77, 497–521 (2013).
Reporting Summary. Further information on research design is available in the 28. Christensen, K. D., Jayaratne, T., Roberts, J., Kardia, S. & Petty, E.
Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article. Understandings of basic genetics in the United States: results from a national
survey of black and white men and women. Public Health Genom. 13,
Data availability 467–476 (2010).
29. Knobe, J. Person as scientist, person as moralist. Behav. Brain Sci. 33,
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the
315–329 (2010).
corresponding author upon request.
30. Ditto, P. H., Pizarro, D. A. & Tannenbaum, D. Motivated moral reasoning.
Psychol. Learn Motiv 50, 307–338 (2009).
Received: 25 July 2018; Accepted: 7 June 2019;
31. Liu, B. S. & Ditto, P. H. What dilemma? Moral evaluation shapes factual
Published: xx xx xxxx
belief. Soc. Psychol. Personal. Sci. 4, 316–323 (2012).
32. Clark, C. J., Chen, E. E. & Ditto, P. H. Moral coherence processes:
references constructing culpability and consequences. Curr. Opin. Psychol. 6,
1. Dar-Nimrod, I. & Heine, S. J. Genetic essentialism: on the deceptive 123–128 (2015).
determinism of DNA. Psychol. Bull. 137, 800–818 (2011). 33. Knobe, J. Intentional action and side effects in ordinary language. Analysis 63,
2. Tabb, K., Lebowitz, M. S. & Appelbaum, P. S. Behavioral genetics and 190–194 (2003).
attributions of moral responsibility. Behav. Genet. 49, 128–135 (2019). 34. Hamlin, J. K. & Baron, A. S. Agency attribution in infancy: evidence for a
3. Kvaale, E. P., Haslam, N. & Gottdiener, W. H. The ‘side effects’ of negativity bias. PloS One 9, e96112 (2014).
medicalization: a meta-analytic review of how biogenetic explanations affect 35. Knobe, J. Intentional action in folk psychology: an experimental investigation.
stigma. Clin. Psychol. Rev. 33, 782–794 (2013). Philos. Psychol. 16, 309–324 (2003).
4. Haslam, N. & Kvaale, E. P. Biogenetic explanations of mental disorder: the 36. Leslie, A. M., Knobe, J. & Cohen, A. Acting intentionally and the
mixed-blessings model. Curr. Dir. Psychol. Sci. 24, 399–404 (2015). side-effect effect: theory of mind and moral judgment. Psychol. Sci. 17,
5. Hoyt, C. L., Burnette, J. L., Auster-Gussman, L., Blodorn, A. & Major, B. The 421–427 (2006).
obesity stigma asymmetry model: the indirect and divergent effects of 37. Morewedge, C. K. Negativity bias in attribution of external agency. J. Exp.
blame and changeability beliefs on antifat prejudice. Stigma Health 2, Psychol.: Gen. 138, 535–545 (2009).
53–65 (2017). 38. Clark, C. J. et al. Free to punish: a motivated account of free will belief. J.
6. Lebowitz, M. S. & Appelbaum, P. S. Beneficial and detrimental effects of Personal. Soc. Psychol. 106, 501–513 (2014).
genetic explanations for addiction. Int. J. Soc. Psychiatry 63, 717–723 (2017). 39. Alicke, M. D. Culpable control and the psychology of blame. Psychol. Bull.
7. Cheung, B. Y. & Heine, S. J. The double-edged sword of genetic accounts of 126, 556–574 (2000).
criminality: causal attributions from genetic ascriptions affect legal decision 40. Newman, G. E., De Freitas, J. & Knobe, J. Beliefs about the true self explain
making. Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 41, 1723–1738 (2015). asymmetries based on moral judgment. Cogn. Sci. 39, 96–125 (2015).
8. Gray, K., Young, L. & Waytz, A. Mind perception is the essence of morality. 41. Strohminger, N., Knobe, J. & Newman, G. The true self: a psychological
Psychol. Inq. 23, 101–124 (2012). concept distinct from the self. Perspect. Psychol. Sci. 12, 551–560 (2017).
NATure HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NATure HuMAN BeHAviour
42. Hayes, A. F. Introduction to Mediation, Moderation, and Conditional Process RM1HG007257. The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis,
Analysis: A Regression-Based Approach (Guilford, 2013). decision to publish or preparation of the manuscript.
43. Jayaratne, T. E. et al. The perennial debate: nature, nurture, or choice? Black
and white Americans’ explanations for individual differences. Rev. Gen. Author contributions
Psychol. 13, 24–33 (2009).
M.S.L., K.T. and P.S.A. contributed to the conception and design of the experiments.
44. Burns, J. M. & Swerdlow, R. H. Right orbitofrontal tumor with pedophilia
M.S.L. collected and analysed the data. M.S.L. wrote an initial draft of the paper. All
symptom and constructional apraxia sign. Arch. Neurol. 60, 437–440 (2003).
authors participated in editing the paper to create the final version.
45. Loughman, A. & Haslam, N. Neuroscientific explanations and the stigma of
mental disorder: a meta-analytic study. Cogn. Res.: Princ. Implic. 3, 43 (2018).
Competing interests
46. Sinatra, G. M., Kienhues, D. & Hofer, B. K. Addressing challenges to public
understanding of science: epistemic cognition, motivated reasoning, and The authors declare no competing interests.
conceptual change. Educ. Psychol. 49, 123–138 (2014).
47. Buhrmester, M., Kwang, T. & Gosling, S. D. Amazon’s mechanical turk:
Additional information
a new source of inexpensive, yet high-quality, data?. Perspect. Psychol. Sci. 6,
3–5 (2011). Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/
48. Kenny, D. A., Kashy, D. A. & Bolger, N. in The Handbook of Social Psychology s41562-019-0651-1.
4th edn (eds Gilbert, D. T., Fiske, S. T. & Lindzey, G.) 233–265(Oxford Univ. Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Press, 1998).
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to M.S.L.
Peer review information: Primary Handling Editor: Mary Elizabeth Sutherland
Acknowledgements
Publisher’s note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
This work was funded by a grant from the Program on Genetics and Human Agency of
published maps and institutional affiliations.
the John D. Templeton Foundation. M.S.L. also received support from National Institutes
of Health grant K99HG010084. Additional support for P.S.A. came from NIH grant © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2019
NATure HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
1
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Corresponding author(s): Matthew Lebowitz
Last updated by author(s): May 28, 2019
Reporting Summary
Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency
in reporting. For further information on Nature Research policies, see Authors & Referees and the Editorial Policy Checklist.
Statistics
For all statistical analyses, confirm that the following items are present in the figure legend, table legend, main text, or Methods section.
n/a Confirmed
The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
A statement on whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided
Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.
A description of all covariates tested
A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
A full description of the statistical parameters including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient)
AND variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)
For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted
Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.
For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated
Our web collection on statistics for biologists contains articles on many of the points above.
Software and code
Policy information about availability of computer code
Data collection Participants were recruited using Amazon Mechanical Turk for Studies 1-5 , and through Qualtrics Panels (Qualtrics Research Services) for
Study 6 .
Data analysis Data were analyzed using SPSS. No custom code was used for data analysis.
For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors/reviewers.
We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Research guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.
Data
Policy information about availability of data
All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable:
- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets
- A list of figures that have associated raw data
- A description of any restrictions on data availability
The data that support the findings of this research are available from the corresponding author upon request.
Field-specific reporting
Please select the one below that is the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.
Life sciences Behavioural & social sciences Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences
2
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/documents/nr-reporting-summary-flat.pdf
Behavioural & social sciences study design
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
Study description Six randomized quantitative experiments.
Research sample All studies included male and female American adults (>18 years of age), residing within the United States. Participants were recruited
using Amazon Mechanical Turk for Studies 1-5, and through Qualtrics Panels (Qualtrics Research Services) for Study 6 .
Sampling strategy All studies aimed to achieve a minimum power of .80, based on effect size estimates drawn from pilot studies or from studies reported
earlier in the manuscript. In some cases, larger samples were recruited to be conservative (e.g., when new variables or stimulia were
introduced). Samples were drawn from pre-existing online respondent pools (i.e., they were convenience samples, although the methods
used involved randomized experiments). More detail is reported in the text.
Data collection Data collection for all studies was conducted online using Qualtrics.com survey software. Investigators were blinded to group allocation
during data collection in the sense that randomization to experimental conditions was done automatically by the computerized data-
collection software. Participants participated in the research online, using their own devices (no experimenter present).
Timing Data collection for Studies 1-4 took place in July of 2017. Data collection for Study 5 took place in April of 2018. Data collection for Study
6 took place in March of 2019.
Data exclusions No data were excluded from analysis.
Non-participation Some participants may have looked at the online study procedures and decided not to participate, but no participants contacted the
experimenters to withdraw from any of the studies or to state their unwillingness to participate.
Randomization We used online data collection software from Qualtrics.com, which randomly assigned participants to conditions automatically.
Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods
We require information from authors about some types of materials, experimental systems and methods used in many studies. Here, indicate whether each material,
system or method listed is relevant to your study. If you are not sure if a list item applies to your research, read the appropriate section before selecting a response.
Materials & experimental systems Methods
n/a Involved in the study n/a Involved in the study
Antibodies ChIP-seq
Eukaryotic cell lines Flow cytometry
Palaeontology MRI-based neuroimaging
Animals and other organisms
Human research participants
Clinical data
Human research participants
Policy information about studies involving human research participants
Population characteristics See above.
Recruitment As stated above, samples were drawn from pre-existing online respondent pools (i.e., they were convenience samples). The
methods used involved randomized experiments, so selection bias is not likely to threaten the validity of the results.
Ethics oversight Procedures for all studies were approved by the Institutional Review Board of the New York State Psychiatric Institute.
Note that full information on the approval of the study protocol must also be provided in the manuscript.