Articles
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-019-0795-z
What we can learn from five naturalistic field
experiments that failed to shift commuter
behaviour
Ariella S. Kristal 1* and Ashley V. Whillans 2
Across five field experiments with employees of a large organization (n = 68,915), we examined whether standard behavioural
interventions (‘nudges’) successfully reduced single-occupancy vehicle commutes. In Studies 1 and 2, we sent letters and emails
with nudges designed to increase carpooling. These interventions failed to increase carpool sign-up or usage. In Studies 3a and
4, we examined the efficacy of other well-established behavioural interventions: non-cash incentives and personalized travel
plans. Again, we found no positive effect of these interventions. Across studies, effect sizes ranged from Cohen’s d = −0.01
to d = 0.05. Equivalence testing, using study-specific smallest effect sizes of interest, revealed that the treatment effects
observed in four out of five of our experiments were statistically equivalent to zero (P < 0.04). The failure of these well-pow-
ered experiments designed to nudge commuting behaviour highlights both the difficulty of changing commuter behaviour and
the importance of publishing null results to build cumulative knowledge about how to encourage sustainable travel.
T
wenty-four per cent of global energy-related CO emissions >200 ‘nudge units’ were operating in governments and institu-
2
result from transportation1. Drastic reductions in emissions tions globally16.
must take place in the current decade to avoid expensive and While there is a large body of research that seeks to uncover the
potentially catastrophic climatic events2. A primary source of emis- barriers of sustainable travel, it is largely situated within the trans-
sions within the control of individual decision makers (versus cor- portation literature and does not typically measure behaviour (the
porate actors) is the use of single-occupancy vehicles (SOV). main outcome of nudge studies). Indeed, most previous research
Most individuals commute to work every day: US workers spend has relied primarily on cross-sectional, self-reported correlational
an average of 200 h per year commuting3, while UK workers spend surveys and qualitative focus groups17–19. To overcome the limita-
an average of 250 h (Lloyds Bank, unpublished data). Seventy-six tions of previous research, and to capitalize on growing interest
per cent of Americans drive alone to work in their car4. from policy makers, we designed several large-scale field experi-
Correlational studies find that car commuters have significantly ments to test whether behaviourally informed interventions could
higher levels of self-reported stress compared to rail commuters in encourage sustainable commuting behaviours—such as registering
Canada5, and report lower levels of life satisfaction in the USA6. In for a carpool platform or taking the bus to work rather than driving.
fact, research from the UK has demonstrated that driving to work is Across five experiments involving 68,915 employees, we tested
associated with an increased risk of developing high blood pressure the impact of well-researched behavioural interventions shown to
and having a higher body mass index7, putting citizens at increased be effective in other contexts, including reducing friction costs, peer
risk for cardiovascular death8. testimonials, loss framing and small financial incentives14,15 (see
To reduce congestion, pollution and potentially increase citizens’ details below). Our outcomes of interest included any shift away
health, it is critical to encourage individuals to engage in alternative from driving alone, such as carpooling, taking public transport or
forms of commuting, such as carpooling or taking transit. Due to active commuting (that is, biking or walking). Because we worked
far-reaching success in other policy domains, ‘nudges’ have gained with a large employer, we could study employees who would not
attention as a potential lever to reduce the use of SOVs and encour- otherwise select into commuter behaviour studies or seek out infor-
age alternative forms of transportation9,10. mation about sustainable commuting options. Employees did not
Nudges are modifications to the decision-making environ- know that they were in a study or that their behaviour was being
ment that are non-coercive, easy to avoid and do not substantially recorded, which is a critical feature of our experiments because
change economic incentives11. The most widely cited definition people often act differently when they know that their behaviour
explicitly states that “to count as a mere nudge, the intervention is being monitored20. Our paper therefore seeks to contribute to
must be easy and cheap to avoid”11. Common examples include the literature by providing robust evidence for various behavioural
information provision12, asking people to come up with specific interventions that are often recommended but seldom experimen-
plans13 and simplifying or making it easier for people to perform tally tested.
a desired behaviour14. Nudges are considered a cost-effective In Study 1 (n = 54,887), we tested the efficacy of sending behav-
policy tool and are effective at shaping a diverse range of behav- iourally informed letters on carpooling behaviour. Employees were
iours including tax compliance, energy reduction, vaccination randomly assigned to one of four conditions. In the control condi-
attainment and retirement planning (see ref. 15 for cost-effective- tion, employees did not receive a letter. In the first treatment condi-
ness calculations). Attesting to their widespread use, as of 2018, tion, employees received a standard letter containing information
1Organizational Behavior Unit, Harvard Business School, Boston, MA, USA. 2Negotiation, Organizations, and Markets Unit, Harvard Business School,
Boston, MA, USA. *e-mail: akristal@hbs.edu
NAture HumAN BeHAViour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles Nature HumaN BeHaviour
about a carpooling service previously offered by their workplace. of the surplus cash that they would have to spend on something
In the second treatment condition, employees received a letter else27. Since people are unlikely spontaneously to recognize the
designed to reduce friction costs. In the third treatment condition, costs of driving alone, we hypothesized that providing this infor-
this letter included two testimonials. We tested the efficacy of these mation would increase employees’ interest in carpooling. Building
interventions based on research showing that they shifted behav- on previous transportation and decision-making research, Study 2
iour in other domains. provides a test of whether providing matches and reminding peo-
Reducing friction costs—or making services easier to use—can ple of the opportunity costs of failing to carpool would encourage
encourage follow-through14. For example, in one experiment, peo- employees to become more active in a ride-sharing service they
ple were 22% more likely to fill out a form to pay their taxes on time had already joined.
when they received a mailer directing them to a website where they In Study 3a (n = 7,564) we attempted to increase the use of pub-
could immediately complete the relevant paperwork21. Thus, in the lic transportation, as measured by discounted travel product pur-
current study, our second treatment condition prominently featured chases, by offering a free bus trial. Previous studies have shown the
the link to a form where employees could register to carpool. effectiveness of free bus trials for increasing ridership; however,
Peer testimonials can also improve pro-environmental attitudes. these studies suffer from numerous methodological limitations.
In one experiment, people’s intentions to engage in pro-environ- For example, one randomized experiment tested the impact of a
mental behaviour (that is, buying greener products) increased after 1-month free trial in Kyoto, Japan. In this experiment, the free bus
reading a peer testimonial (versus no peer endorsement) because trial increased ridership by 20%; however, this study involved only
the message was seen as more trustworthy22. Peer testimonials 43 people who self-selected to participate28. Another randomized
also send a signal about descriptive norms by showing that peers experiment, conducted in Copenhagen, Denmark with 1,000 driv-
engage in the focal behaviour, increasing uptake23. Building on this ers, found that free 1-month trials increased bus ridership during
research, our third treatment condition prominently featured peer the month from 5 to 10%. This self-reported behaviour change did
testimonials. In this condition, we included pictures of peers. This not persist after the intervention period29.
decision was based on research showing that social information Self-reported data are subject to reporting biases such as
presented alongside images is more effective than social informa- demand effects. When people are asked to report on socially desir-
tion presented on its own24. able behaviours, like sustainable commuting, they often report on
As described above, there is extant experimental research show- what they believe the question-asker wants to hear—especially if
ing that psychologically informed direct mailings can shift behav- they are rewarded for this behaviour. This is problematic, because
iours with positive externalities (for example, tax repayment)21. recipients of free bus trials could be motivated to lie about bus
Nevertheless, we found limited evidence examining the effective- ridership. Study 3a does not suffer from the limitations of (1) low
ness of reducing friction costs and peer testimonials on increasing statistical power, (2) selection bias or (3) demand effects due to
carpooling behaviour among employees of a large organization. reliance on self-reported commuting behaviour. Our randomized
Thus, Study 1 provides a valuable road test of several ideas shown controlled trial is highly powered, includes all eligible employees
to be effective at encouraging behaviours with positive externalities (versus employees who self-selected into the study) and examines
in diverse contexts. actual behaviour (versus self-reported behaviour). Thus, it provides
In Study 2 (n = 871), we tested two other behaviourally informed a valuable contribution to the current literature.
interventions designed to increase carpooling behaviour for employ- In Study 3b (n = 4,732), we followed up with participants in
ees already registered for the carpooling service: personalized rec- the treatment group from Study 3a who did not take advantage of
ommendations and opportunity cost reminders. Specifically, we the free bus trial. In this follow-up study, we wanted to encourage
tested a control email against two treatment emails. The first treat- employees to become frequent bus users (as measured by discounted
ment email featured ‘carpool matches’ and the second treatment travel product purchases). We randomly assigned these employees
email featured matches and an opportunity cost reminder. In the to receive either a control or a treatment email.
match condition, participants were provided with personalized rec- In the treatment email, we emphasized the amount of money
ommendations about potential carpool matches (employees who that employees had missed out on by not using the free bus pass
lived nearby and with whom they could share a ride). that they were offered. This intervention builds on the psychology
We made this decision based on pilot data and empirical litera- of loss aversion, which shows that people respond more power-
ture. Before launching these experiments, an external firm surveyed fully to losses than to equivalent gains30. Loss-aversion interven-
employees on behalf of our partner organization (see Methods). In tions have been shown to effectively shape other behaviours (for
this survey, thousands of employees reported that they would car- example, registering to become an organ donor21 and reducing use
pool if they could find a ‘match’ with another employee with a simi- of plastic bags31).
lar shift schedule and commute. While the carpool system already Lastly, in Study 4 (n = 1,095), we tested the impact of personal-
provided matches, this intervention highlighted these matches in an ized travel plans (PTPs) on reducing SOV behaviour as measured
email, ensuring that employees did not have to log into the system by self-reported commuting behaviour. We corroborated these
to search for them. There is also a large body of research showing self-report measures with observed behavioural measures, includ-
that consumers desire carpooling matching services. It is worth not- ing carpool registrations and discounted travel product purchases.
ing that a significant amount of this literature is dedicated to the These PTPs provided tailored information to each employee about
matching algorithms themselves as opposed to the uptake of the routes, transit schedules, travel discounts and carpool matches that
matches once they are provided (see ref. 25). best suited their needs.
In the ‘match and opportunity cost’ reminder condition, we We included this intervention to clarify the otherwise mixed lit-
highlighted the financial benefits of carpooling. We made this erature examining whether and how PTPs and informational inter-
decision based on large-scale survey research showing that peo- ventions can encourage sustainable travel17,32,33. In a recent review of
ple do not carpool in part because they underestimate the finan- the success of PTPs in eight UK regions, researchers found that PTPs
cial costs of driving alone26. We also made this decision based on reduced SOV use by 11%. However, this report relied entirely on
judgement and decision-making research showing that people do self-reported outcomes and quasi-experimental designs34. An addi-
not spontaneously recognize opportunity costs. When deciding tional meta-analysis of 17 studies (only six of which were random-
between two similar goods, individuals are more likely to choose a ized controlled trials) found reductions in SOV use ranging from
less expensive consumer good when they are explicitly reminded 1 to 14.7%. Only six of the studies included in this meta-analysis
NAture HumAN BeHAViour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Nature HumaN BeHaviour Articles
reached statistical significance35. Previous PTP studies—includ- t = 4.2628, P < 0.001, d = 0.055, 95% confidence interval (CI)
(17,614)
ing those reported in the above meta-analysis—typically used [0.04, 0.07]). We collapsed across the three treatment conditions,
crude self-reported outcome measures and were evaluated by the since there were no differences across them. For further details about
companies providing the PTP (resulting in a potential conflict of these condition-specific analyses, see Supplementary Information.
interest)34. Our study, which includes more than one thousand par- In raw numbers, 33 employees who received a letter signed up for
ticipants and a mix of self-report and behavioural outcomes, pro- the carpooling system (out of 14,987). In contrast, 20 individuals
vides a reliable test of the impact of PTPs on commuting behaviour. who did not receive a letter signed up for the system (out of 39,900).
As a result, this study could help to clarify the mixed literature on Only seven employees from this study became active members
the benefits of PTPs. (who activated their carpooling registration and became eligible to
To summarize, across studies, we tested several behaviourally use the benefits available for carpoolers, such as priority parking
informed interventions in distinctive ways. In Study 1, we provided and emergency rides home). Four of seven newly active members
a test of whether and how behaviourally informed letters increased were in the control condition.
carpooling behaviour. In Study 2, we examined whether matching Study 2. Carpooling activation. Employees who were registered
and opportunity cost reminders encouraged inactive members of to the carpooling system but who were not active members (that is,
a carpool service to ride together to work. In Study 3a, we provided did not declare that they were part of an active carpool and were
a large, robust experimental test examining whether free bus trials not receiving carpooling benefits) were sent one of three emails
increased regular ridership. In Study 3b, we followed up with par- (n = 871). All emails included a link where employees could log
ticipants who did not use the free bus trial, and we conducted an into the carpooling system and find potential carpool partners.
experiment examining whether loss framing could motivate non- About one-third of employees in each treatment group opened
compliant actors to shift their commuting behaviour. In Study 4, the email. Email open-rates did not differ between conditions
we attempted to clarify the mixed findings on the benefits of PTPs (control, 30.53%, matching email, 35.82%, matching and oppor-
by implementing a large field experiment that examined both self- tunity cost email, 28.55%; F = 0.859, P = 0.424, η2 = 0.002,
(2, 997)
reported and actual commuting behaviour. Together, these studies 95% CI [−0.003, 0.01]). The percentage of employees who clicked
address whether, when and how behaviourally informed interven- the link did not differ between conditions (control, 9.15%, match-
tions reduce SOV use. See Table 1 for additional study details. ing email, 9.97%, matching and opportunity cost email, 9.63%; F
(2,
We conducted these studies at an airport outside a major = 0.064, P = 0.939, η2 = 0.00, 95% CI [−0.002, 0.006]). The effec-
997)
European city of over 75,000 employees. Forty-nine per cent of tiveness of the two matching emails compared to the control email
employees reported commuting by SOV, as indicated by a report approximated zero (t = 0.324, P = 0.746, d = 0.00, 95% CI [−0.15,
(599)
commissioned by the employer from an external research firm. 0.15]). We collapsed across the two treatment conditions because
Most SOV commuters (61%, or approximately 22,000 employees) there were no differences between them. For further details about
reported they would consider carpooling, and 41% of SOV drivers condition-specific analyses, see Supplementary Information. Only
expressed finding a match as a key barrier. The airport’s infrastruc- one employee from this study became an active carpooler.
ture made it an ideal location: it was very well connected to subway, Study 3a. Free bus trial. Employees who were not bus users, and
rail and bus infrastructure, there was a pre-existing carpool service who lived along bus routes, were randomly assigned to one of two
that used an algorithm to match employees with colleagues with conditions. Employees in the first condition received a letter that
similar commutes, and carpoolers had access to a 24/7 emergency told them about bus routes near them, as well as how to purchase
ride home and priority parking. discounted transit cards through their employer. Employees in the
second condition received the same letter, along with vouchers for a
results 7-d free bus trial. While 103 (out of 7,330) individuals in the treat-
We retrospectively calculated that we had 80% power to detect ment group used at least one of their free trial vouchers, we were
effect sizes ranging from Cohen’s d = 0.03 to d = 0.19 across studies. unable to detect a statistically significant difference (even for small
We report these effect sizes using d, which is a measure of the stan- effects; see Supplementary Table 2 for further details) between con-
dardized difference between means. Despite high statistical power ditions in the purchase of subsidized transit cards, and the effect size
to detect small effects, we failed to detect any significant shifts in was negligible (control, 1.30%, treatment, 1.12%, t = −0.684,
(4,608)
commuter behaviour due to our behaviourally informed messages P = 0.494, d = −0.01, 95% CI [−0.06, 0.03]).
or small incentives. See Fig. 1 for a visualization of the effect sizes Study 3b. Follow-up feedback for bus trial. Recipients of the
observed across studies. free bus trial and who did not take advantage of the trial (that is,
We also conducted two one-sided tests (TOST) to test whether those who did not use any of the free vouchers during the trial
the treatment effects were equivalent to zero36. In this context, there week) were randomly assigned to one of two conditions. Half were
is no consensus on what constitutes a meaningful smallest effect randomly assigned to a control group, who received no follow-up
size of interest (see Supplementary Information for more details). letter. The other half were randomly assigned to receive a letter
Consistent with ref. 37, we used a minimum detectable effect size of that highlighted the cost of the free trial that they had missed
80% power for our equivalence test. Using this method, we found out on, along with information about how they could still take
significant results using TOST for four of the five studies (Studies advantage of discounted travel. The experimental (loss aversion)
2–4). Thus, the observed treatment effects in these four studies were follow-up letter had no impact on the purchase of transit cards,
statistically equivalent to zero and thereby reject effects as large or and the effect size was negligible (1.03% in the control, 0.96%
larger than those we consider meaningful (P < 0.04, for all P values in the treatment, t = −0.258, P = 0.797, d = −0.01, 95% CI
(4,707)
(see Supplementary Table 2)). We now proceed to document the [−0.06, 0.05]).
results for each study separately. When reporting t-tests, we use Study 4. Personalized travel plan. We provided employees
two-sided tests. Data distribution was assumed to be normal, but with travel plans that included personalized information about
this was not formally tested. potential carpooling matches, bus/train routes and times, tran-
Study 1. Carpooling recruitment. Employees were randomly sit pass discounts and bike routes. We also provided employees
assigned to receive a letter or no letter. Those who received a let- with the option of signing up for a one-on-one session with the
ter received one of three behaviourally informed letters. Employees airport commuter team (21 employees signed up). The primary
who received a letter were more likely to register for the carpool- outcome measure was the difference in the number of SOV trips
ing system than those who did not (0.22% compared with 0.05%, taken across conditions (compared to a baseline survey). Although
NAture HumAN BeHAViour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles Nature HumaN BeHaviour
Table 1 | Summary of interventions
Study Psychological barriers Psychologically informed Hypotheses interventions tested in
addressed intervention strategies this paper
1. Increasing • Lack of awareness of • Make savings salient and • Mailing letters that inform Sending letters to increase
registration the carpooling scheme, of disclose costs14 employees of the airport carpooling carpooling registration:
for carpool potential carpool matches • Minimize anticipated regret by service and that also address • Control (no letter)
service and of the cost savings of emphasizing access to emergency psychological barriers, such as • Standard letter
carpooling (versus driving ride in case of unexpected minimizing anticipated regret, • Call to action letter
alone) circumstances requiring more reducing registration friction costs and • Testimonial letter
• Anticipated regret in case flexible mobility60 providing testimonials from peers, will
of emergency or unexpected • Testimonials addressing increase registration for the service
personal event (for example, perceived barriers and correcting and ultimately increase carpooling
sick child needing to be misinformation23 compared to letters that do not
picked up from school) • Make desired action easy and address these psychological barriers.
• High friction costs reduce friction cost14 • Sending letters that address two
associated with registering • Testimonial photographs24 key psychological barriers shown
• Lack of awareness of • Messenger effects (message to prevent carpooling—lack of
peers engaging in carpooling delivered by peers in addition to awareness and misinformation about
behaviour corporate messaging)22 the prevalence of potential matches—
would increase carpooling compared
to sending no letters (that is, taking no
additional action).
2. Increasing • Misinformation about • Highlight opportunity costs27 • Providing registered carpool Sending emails to
carpool prevalence of potential members with specific potential registered carpoolers
use among matches matches would reduce friction costs to actively carpool (as
employees • Lack of awareness of associated with finding a match and measured by registration
already opportunity costs of driving becoming an active carpool member. of the carpool unit, to
registered for alone • Highlighting the opportunity cost access priority pass):
the carpooling of driving alone to work, along with • Control email
service providing matches, would further • Matching email
increase carpooling as compared to • Matching email and
other standard behaviourally informed opportunity cost made
messages. salient
3. Increasing • Negative perceptions of • Free trial to help overcome • Providing a 1-week free trial to test Offering a 1-week free
the number public transit negative perceptions and reduce whether using the bus will increase bus trial to increase bus
of employees • Ambiguity aversion uncertainty28 registration for heavily discounted use (as measured by
who travel by • Status quo bias • Highlight monetary equivalence travel products and ultimately increase discounted travel pass
bus of the incentive27 bus use as compared to not receiving purchases):
• Exploit loss aversion30 the free trial. • Letter with route and
• Following up with those who did not discount information
use the free trial, we hypothesized • Letter and offer of a
that promoting the heavily discounted 1-week free trial
travel products and employing a loss Sending follow-up letters
frame could increase take-up for the to those who did not
discounted products and ultimately partake in the free bus trial
increase bus use as compared to to increase bus use:
providing no follow-up information. • Control (no follow-up
letter)
• Follow-up letter
4. Reducing the • Lack of information • Provide personalized Providing tailored information about Emailing a PTP with
number of SOV • Perceived high search costs information17,32,33 various alternative modes of travel, tailored journey information
trips through • Include information on travel potential carpooling matches, and information about
delivery of a discounts discounted products and other benefits discounted travel products:
personalized all in one place (a personalized travel • Control (no PTP)
travel plan plan) could reduce the amount of SOV • PTP
trips employees take when commuting
to work.
self-reporting is not without risk of measurement error, the partici- (range 0–5). We found no effect of delivering a PTP on commut-
pants in this trial had no incentive to be untruthful. Furthermore, ing behaviour (n = 1,095). Specifically, the effect size for the change
we cross-validated these self-report measures with objective sec- in the number of days driven in the previous 5 d was negligible
ondary measures, including the number of people who registered (β = 0.00, d.f. = 840, P = 0.992, d = 0.01, 95% CI [−0.13, 0.14]). We
for the carpooling system and the number who purchased dis- triangulated self-reported measures with observed behaviours, and
counted transit passes. The first outcome measure was the number found no differences between the two conditions in terms of car-
of days in the past 5 d when an individual drove an SOV to work pool registration rates or transit pass purchases.
NAture HumAN BeHAViour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Nature HumaN BeHaviour Articles
Standardized mean Because employees reported strong intentions to carpool,
Study n difference (95% CI) we expected them to act on their intentions to reduce their SOV
behaviour when they were provided with information or matches
1 54,887 0.05 (0.04, 0.07) designed to make this behaviour simpler. Our results—and in par-
ticular the results of Studies 1 and 3—contrast this prediction. For
2 871 0.00 (–0.15, 0.15)
example, when we notified employees of the first step of carpooling
3a 7,330 –0.01 (–0.06, 0.03) (registration), less than 1% of contacted employees signed up for
3b 4,732 –0.01 (–0.06, 0.05) the carpooling service (Study 1). Employees stated that they would
be more likely to take use public transport if they had discounted
4 1,095 0.01 (–0.13, 0.14)
travel. Nonetheless, less than 1.5% of the employees that we con-
tacted shifted their behaviour when given a free bus trial or notified
of subsidized bus passes (Study 3).
–0.2 –0.1 0 0.1 0.2
Thus, increasing self-efficiency through information and mak-
Standardized mean difference
ing it easier for people to follow through on their intentions might
not be enough to increase carpooling. This could be because peo-
Fig. 1 | Forest plot illustrating negligible effects of the five studies by
ple’s stated barriers and future plans about their commuting behav-
showing the standardized effect size (Cohen’s d) and 95% Ci associated
iours may not reflect their true intentions. Future research should
with each sample. The size of each square is determined by the sample
target other barriers that prevent employees from carpooling and
size: Study 1 (n = 54,887, d = 0.05, 95% CI [0.04, 0.07]); Study 2 (n = 871,
which they might be more reticent to admit on self-report surveys,
d = 0.00, 95% CI [−0.15, 0.15]); Study 3a (n = 7,330, d = −0.01, 95% CI
such as hesitation to talk with an employee they do not know42 or
[−0.06, 0.03]); Study 3b (n = 4,732, d = −0.01, 95% CI [−0.06, 0.05]);
having a strong positive emotional connection to their car43. The
Study 4 (n = 1,095, d = 0.01, 95% CI [−0.13, 0.14]).
ingrained nature of driving, and the fact that driving is connected to
perceptions of autonomy44, status and power45, could make it very
Discussion difficult to change.
We tested a series of nudges, ranging from simple framing interven- Second, our studies suggest that, in some contexts, more heavy-
tions to more resource-intensive, non-coercive and easily avoidable handed interventions—such as congestion charges, parking bans,
interventions—such as signing up for an in-person meeting with public transportation infrastructure investment and other man-
the commuting team to discuss personalized travel plans. Across dates—may be necessary to achieve a significant shift in commut-
studies, we found no evidence that these nudges shifted commuter ing behaviour. Similar arguments have been made in discussions
behaviour. In Study 1, we tested a letter and email campaign to about lowering smoking rates46 and carbon emissions47. When
increase carpooling and, through our interventions, we signifi- heavy-handed approaches are used, the best correlational research
cantly increased the proportion of employees who registered for suggests that such approaches are also effective at reducing the level
an employer-provided carpooling service; however, the effect size of driving48–50. For example, dynamic tolling, road pricing and con-
was small38. Moreover, this increase in registrations had no impact gestion charges, as well as enhancing the quality of public trans-
on the objective behaviours we were trying to shift. Although we portation, are linked to lower rates of SOV driving behaviour and
sent 15,000 letters, only 33 employees registered for the carpool ser- reduced pollution (see Beland and Brent, unpublished manuscript,
vice. One month later, three employees who received a letter were for a review).
active carpoolers. In Study 2, we tested the efficacy of an email cam- When considering the use of nudges versus more heavy-handed
paign designed to encourage inactive registered carpooling users interventions, based on our studies, there is a specific contextual
to become active members. Once again, this intervention had no factor worth noting, which is a key limitation of this work. In this
meaningful impact. In Studies 3a and 3b, with a different popula- organization, a parking space, worth thousands of dollars a year,
tion, we tested the impact of a 1-week free bus trial. We observed no was provided to employees for free. Thus, nudges might be more
improvement in registration for discounted bus passes. In Study 4, likely to succeed when employees bear the full costs of parking.
we evaluated the impact of personalized travel plans on SOV use. Consistent with this argument, there are initial (non-experimental)
PTPs did not reduce the number of times people reported driving studies showing that personalized travel plans are more likely to
on their own to work, even when these plans were offered alongside shift commuting behaviour when free parking is taken away51.
a one-on-one intensive travel planning meeting. Finally, our failure to shift behaviour sheds light on settings
From our studies there are three inferences we can make that where nudges could be more or less likely to succeed. Recent lit-
are derived from our specific context, but that can generalize more erature15 suggests that nudges are cost efficient in most domains,
broadly to the use of behaviourally informed interventions to such as a US$100 return per dollar spent on increasing retirement
reduce SOV use. savings52 compared with a US$1.24 return per dollar spend on US
First, our studies suggest that people do not always reveal their tax incentives53, or an increase of 1.53 students enrolled in uni-
true intentions or barriers to sustainable commuting. Across our versity per US$1,000 spent, compared to a negligible increase due
studies, we provided participants with information that should have to tax credits54,55. Nevertheless, this previous research considered
increased their ability to follow through with their self-reported only a limited number of domains, specifically those where the
intentions of engaging in more sustainable commuting behaviour target behaviour was consistent with an individual’s self-interest
(because they revealed that this information would probably shift (for example, saving for their own retirement) and where the
their behaviour as part of the employee travel survey, and during nudge helped the individual perform a one-off beneficial action
several interviews we conducted before undertaking this research). from which they directly reaped the benefits over months and
Based on the central tenets of the theory of planned behaviour, we years (for example, the decision to enroll in a retirement savings
expected this information to change employee behaviour39. This plan). As a result, these efficiencies might not be true across all
highly cited theory suggests that behaviour change is made up of policy domains. Energy reduction shares important properties
three ingredients: information, intentions and self-efficacy. This with sustainable travel (for example, changing behaviour to miti-
theory has been used to explain when, whether and how people gate climate change or decrease energy demand). While social
engage in common environmental behaviours such as using public comparison letters12 have been shown to be more cost effective
transportation and recycling40,41. than discounts, incentives or education56, a recent paper finds that
NAture HumAN BeHAViour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles Nature HumaN BeHaviour
many of the energy savings for this nudge persisted even after Study 3a: Free bus trial—participants. We included employees who lived near a
the original occupants moved, indicating that much of the energy bus route, did not live with another employee and were not registered bus users,
leaving a sample of 7,564.
reduction was not achieved by changing habitual behaviour but
rather through a one-off capital improvement to the home57. Procedure. Our pilot survey revealed that the main self-reported barriers to
Similarly, our research shows that it is very difficult to change taking public transportation were the lack of nearby services and the fact that
commuting behaviour—which is a habitual, daily action. Building taking public transportation often took longer than driving. We used this
on these findings, we believe that more research should be opportunity to advertise new transit routes to employees living in communities
where these new services were being introduced. Based on the survey data,
directed toward examining the efficacy of interventions designed
we tested a free bus trial to provide employees who had never taken the bus
to shift behaviour through major purchases (for example, elec- with the opportunity to experience the benefits. We sent letters to all eligible
tric cars) or restructuring of work schedules (for example, work- employees, informing them of the bus services in their area, the low cost of
ing from home once per week), as opposed to shifting habitual commuting by bus, the amount of money they would save by registering for a
discounted travel pass and the convenience of the bus. Our sample comprised
actions (for example, turning off lights before leaving the house
employees living in two different towns with new bus routes. The prices
or carpooling to work).
between towns varied (based on distance from the airport). Thus, when
Nudge theory is a new and growing field, and the interven- we randomized, we stratified by town. Half of those who received the letter
tions used in nudge studies often have direct policy implications. also received 1 week’s worth of free bus tickets that were to be used during a
Publishing null results, or the results of studies with limited suc- specified free-trial week. We collected individual-level data on who used the
cess58,59, is necessary to ensure that policy makers do not waste free ticket. One month later, we collected condition-level data on registration for
a transit pass.
time and money pursuing solutions to pressing challenges that are
unlikely to yield favourable outcomes. Our research is concerned The economics of transit passes. Transit passes are discounted travel tickets that
with a collective action problem that requires people to change a employees are eligible to purchase. These passes significantly reduce the
habitual (versus one-time) behaviour. Our results suggest that price of travel on certain forms of public transportation. For example, a round-trip
ticket on one of the bus services is US$8 per day whereas a discounted
nudges may be less effective in shifting habitual behaviours in gen-
transit pass is US$32 per month (the regular transit pass for non-employees
eral and commuting behaviour in particular.
is US$112 per month). If an individual intends to take the bus more than
4 d in 1 month, it is economically advantageous to buy the transit pass. For the
methods other services advertised in the trial, a round-trip ticket is US$22 per day
Our research complies with all relevant ethical regulations. The Behavioural whereas the discounted transit pass is US$117 per month (the regular
Insights Team provided ethical guidelines, reviewed a protocol and approved the transit pass for non-employees is US$130 per month). If an individual
study. Informed consent was waived by the Behavioural Insights Team’s ethics intends to take the bus more more than 5 d in 1 month, it is advantageous to buy
review committee, because it was deemed no more than minimal risk and was also the transit pass.
agreed to by the field site partner. Data collection and analysis were not performed
blind to the conditions of the experiments. Demographic information was not Study 3b: Follow-up feedback for bus trial: participants. A total of
collected from the participants in these studies. 103 individuals participated in the free trial. Thus, the remaining employees in the
treatment condition for Study 3a were included in the subsequent trial (n = 4,936).
Sample characteristics. Every 5 years, a third-party market research firm is
hired by our partner organization to collect data on employee travel behaviours Procedure. Half of the employees who received the free trial and did not take
and attitudes. In the survey conducted 1 year before our partnership started, advantage of it were sent a follow-up letter that emphasized the amount of money
most employees reported that their commutes were <45 min (59%), but 24% of that each had ‘lost’ by not participating in the free bus trial. This letter displayed
employees had commutes >1 h. the benefits of registering for a discounted transit pass. One month later, we linked
registration to condition assignment.
Study 1: Carpooling recruitment. The organization had a sizeable number of
members registered to their carpool system (8,000) and active carpoolers (2,000). Study 4: Personalized travel plan: participants. All employees who were based
These large numbers increased the probability that employees who signed up or at the airport’s administrative headquarters were asked by senior leaders to fill out
used the carpooling platform would successfully find a match. a travel survey in January 2016. Our sample included employees who commuted
to work by SOV at least 1 d in the month before completing the survey. The final
Participants. To determine our sample for Study 1, we excluded all employees who eligible sample for this study was 1,095.
lived in the city centre, as well as those who lived along commuter rail and bus
routes. We also excluded addresses with multiple employees because they could Procedure. All eligible participants were sent an email from the airport’s
be informally carpooling, making it hard to isolate treatment effects. After these commuter team with a PDF attachment of their PTP. The PTP included
exclusions, we were left with a sample of 54,931 employees. Our budget allowed us to information of potential carpooling matches, public transportation routes and
send only 15,000 letters to airport employees. Thus, we randomly assigned 15,000 of cycling routes that individuals could take to work. It included travel discounts for
the 54,931 eligible employees into one of four conditions: a no-action control group, which employees were eligible, along with the estimated travel time and cost for
a standard letter that addressed perceived barriers to carpooling, the same letter that each option. These emails included the option for interested individuals to sign
highlighted the registration link, and the standard letter with peer testimonials. up for a one-on-one personalized travel plan session. One month after the last
commuter plan session was administered, we sent a follow-up survey (similar to
Procedure. We mailed letters to the 15,000 individuals in the treatment group. The the original) to examine how commuting behaviour had changed (specifically to
first letter provided information about the benefits of carpooling. The next letter detect a reduction in SOV use).
was identical, but also included a call to action asking employees to register for the
carpooling service. The final condition consisted of information identical to that Reporting Summary. Further information on research design is available in the
in the first letter, but also featured testimonials and photographs of two employees Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.
who successful found matches and who reported saving hundreds of dollars per
year via carpooling. Two months later, we checked the records from the employers’ Data availability
online carpooling service to assess whether individuals from the treatment and Coarsened data and modified materials are available at https://osf.io/39rja/.
control groups had registered for the carpooling service. We excluded 44 employees Data and materials have been modified to protect the identity of the partner
who registered for the programme between the time we assigned participants to organization and its employees. Additional materials that do not violate these
conditions and when the letters were sent. privacy concerns can be provided on request by the authors.
Study 2: Carpooling activation. We randomly assigned 928 registered, but
Code availability
inactive, members of the carpooling service to one of three conditions: control,
All analyses reported in this study used the statistical software R (v.3.6.1). All R files
matching (with details of up to three matches based on location and shift times)
are available publicly at https://osf.io/39rja/.
and matching and opportunity cost salience.
Procedure. We emailed participants and measured the number of participants who Received: 24 May 2019; Accepted: 21 November 2019;
registered for a carpool service 4 weeks later. Published: xx xx xxxx
NAture HumAN BeHAViour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Nature HumaN BeHaviour Articles
references 31. Homonoff, T. Can small incentives have large effects? The impact of taxes
1. Teter, J., Cazzola, P. & Petropoulos, A. Transport: Tracking Clean Energy versus bonuses on disposable bag use. Am. Econ. J. Econ. Policy 10,
Progress https://www.iea.org/tcep/transport (2018). 177–210 (2018).
2. IPCC. Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5 °C (eds Masson-Delmotte, 32. van Essen, M., Thomas, T., van Berkum, E. & Chorus, C. From user
V. et al.) (WMO, 2018). equilibrium to system optimum: a literature review on the role of travel
3. US Census Bureau. Average One-Way Commuting Time by Metropolitan Areas information, bounded rationality and non-selfish behaviour at the network
https://www.census.gov/library/visualizations/interactive/travel-time.html and individual levels. Transp. Rev. 36, 527–548 (2016).
(2017). 33. Lyons, G. The role of information in decision-making with regard to travel.
4. US Census Bureau. American Community Survey 1-Year Estimate https:// IEE Intell. Transp. Syst. 153, 199 (2006).
factfinder.census.gov/faces/tableservices/jsf/pages/productview. 34. Chatterjee, K. A comparative evaluation of large-scale personal travel
xhtml?src=bkmk (2017). planning projects in England. Transp. Policy 16, 293–305 (2009).
5. Hilbrecht, M., Smale, B. & Mock, S. Highway to health? Commute time and 35. Macmillan, A., Hosking, J., Connor, L., Bullen, J. & Ameratunga, C. S.
well-being among Canadian adults. World Leis. J. 56, 151–163 (2014). A Cochrane systematic review of the effectiveness of organisational travel plans:
6. Hoehner, C., Barlow, C., Allen, P. & Schootman, M. Commuting distance, improving the evidence base for transport decisions. Transp. Policy 29,
cardiorespiratory fitness, and metabolic risk. Am. J. Prev. Med. 42, 249–256 (2013).
571–578 (2012). 36. Lakens, D., Scheel, A. & Isager, P. Equivalence testing for psychological
7. Martin, A., Panter, J., Suhrcke, M. & Ogilvie, D. Impact of changes in research: a tutorial. Adv. Methods Pract. Psychol. Sci. 1, 259–269 (2018).
mode of travel to work on changes in body mass index: evidence from the 37. Lakens, D. Equivalence tests. Soc. Psychol. Pers. Sci. 8, 355–362 (2017).
British Household Panel Survey. J. Epidemiol. Community Health 69, 38. Funder, D. & Ozer, D. Evaluating effect size in psychological research: sense
753–761 (2015). and nonsense. Adv. Methods Pract. Psychol. Sci. 2, 156–168 (2019).
8. Nieuwenhuijsen, M. Influence of urban and transport planning and 39. Ajzen, I. From Intentions to actions: a theory of planned behavior. in Action
the city environment on cardiovascular disease. Nat. Rev. Cardiol. 15, Control (eds Kuhl, J. and Beckmann, J.) 11–39 (Springer, 1985).
432–438 (2018). 40. Heath, Y. & Gifford, R. Extending the theory of planned behavior: predicting
9. Ly, K., Sati, S. & Singer, E. A Behavioural Lens on Transportation Systems: The the use of public transportation. J. Appl. Soc. Psychol. 32, 2154–2189 (2002).
Psychology of Commuter Behaviour and Transportation Choices Research 41. Cheung, S., Chan, D. & Wong, Z. Reexamining the theory of planned
Report Series: Behavioural Economics in Action (Rotman School of behavior in understanding wastepaper recycling. Environ. Behav. 31,
Management, University of Toronto, 2017). 587–612 (1999).
10. Applying Behavioural Insights to Transportation Demand Management (Alta 42. Epley, N. & Schroeder, J. Mistakenly seeking solitude. J. Exp. Psychol. Gen.
Planning and Design and the Behavioural Insights Team, 2018). 143, 1980–1999 (2014).
11. Thaler, R. & Sunstein, C. Improving Decisions about Health, Wealth, and 43. Zhao, Z. & Zhao, J. Car pride and its behavioral implications: an exploration
Happiness (Yale Univ. Press, 2008). in Shanghai. Transportation https://doi.org/10.1007/s11116-018-9917-0 (2018).
12. Allcott, H. Social norms and energy conservation. J. Public Econ. 95, 44. Hagman, O. Mobilizing meanings of mobility: car users’ constructions of the
1082–1095 (2011). goods and bads of car use. Transp. Res. D 8, 1–9 (2003).
13. Milkman, K., Beshears, J., Choi, J., Laibson, D. & Madrian, B. Using 45. Steg, L. Car use: lust and must. Instrumental, symbolic and affective motives
implementation intentions prompts to enhance influenza vaccination rates. for car use. Transp. Res. A 39, 147–162 (2005).
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 108, 10415–10420 (2011). 46. Oliver, A. Nudging, shoving, and budging: behavioral economic – informed
14. Sunstein, C. Nudging: A very short guide. J. Consum. Policy 37, policy. Public Admin. 93, 700–714 (2015).
583–588 (2014). 47. Furman, J. Applying behavioral sciences in the service of four major
15. Benartzi, S. et al. Should governments invest more in nudging? Psychol. Sci. economic problems. Behav. Sci. Pol. 2, 1–9 (2016).
28, 1041–1055 (2017). 48. Wilson, R. Estimating the travel and parking demand effects of employer-
16. Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. Behavioural paid parking. Reg. Sci. Urban Econ. 22, 133–145 (1992).
Insights http://www.oecd.org/gov/regulatory-policy/behavioural-insights.htm 49. Washbrook, K., Haider, W. & Jaccard, M. Estimating commuter mode choice:
(2019). a discrete choice analysis of the impact of road pricing and parking charges.
17. Kenyon, S. & Lyons, G. The value of integrated multimodal traveller Transportation 33, 621–639 (2006).
information and its potential contribution to modal change. Transp. Res. F 6, 50. Zahabi, S., Miranda-Moreno, L., Patterson, Z. & Barla, P. Evaluating the
1–21 (2003). effects of land use and strategies for parking and transit supply on mode
18. Simma, A. & Axhausen, K. Structures of commitment in mode use: a choice of downtown commuters. J. Transp. Land Use 5, 103–119 (2012).
comparison of Switzerland, Germany and Great Britain. Transp. Policy 8, 51. Bartle, C. & Avineri, E. Personalised travel plans in the workplace: a case
279–288 (2001). study. Proc. Inst. Civ. Eng. Munic. Eng. 167, 183–190 (2014).
19. Van Exel, N. & Rietveld, P. Could you also have made this trip by another 52. Carroll, G., Choi, J., Laibson, D., Madrian, B. & Metrick, A. Optimal defaults
mode? An investigation of perceived travel possibilities of car and train and active decisions. Q. J. Econ. 124, 1639–1674 (2009).
travellers on the main travel corridors to the city of Amsterdam, The 53. Duflo, E., Gale, W., Liebman, J., Orszag, P. & Saez, E. Savings incentives for
Netherlands. Transp. Res. A 43, 374–385 (2009). low- and moderate-income families in the United States: why is the saver’s
20. Levitt, S. & List, J. Viewpoint: on the generalizability of lab behaviour to the credit not more effective? J. Eur. Econ. Assoc. 5, 647–661 (2007).
field. Can. J. Econ. 40, 347–370 (2007). 54. B. Long in College Choices: The Economics of Where to Go, When to Go, and
21. Service, O. et al. EAST: Four Simple Ways to Apply Behavioral Insights (The How to Pay for It (ed. Hoxby, C. M.) 101–168 (Univ. of Chicago Press, 2004).
Behavioural Insights Team, 2014). 55. Bulman, G. & Hoxby, C. The returns to the federal tax credits for higher
22. Elgaaied-Gambier, L., Monnot, E. & Reniou, F. Using descriptive norm education. Tax. Policy Econ. 29, 13–88 (2015).
appeals effectively to promote green behavior. J. Bus. Res. 82, 179–191 (2018). 56. Arimura, T., Li, S., Newell, R. & Palmer, K. Cost-effectiveness of electricity
23. Chorus, C., Molin, E. & Van Wee, B. Use and effects of Advanced Traveller energy efficiency programs. Energy J. 33, 63–99 (2012).
Information Services (ATIS): a review of the literature. Transp. Rev. 26, 57. Brandon, A. et al. Do the effects of social nudges persist? Theory and evidence
127–149 (2006). from 38 natural field experiments. NBER Working Paper No. 23277 https://
www.nber.org/papers/w23277 (NBER, 2017).
24. Bertrand, M., Karlan, D., Mullainathan, S., Shafir, E. & Zinman, J. What’s
58. Munafò, M. & Neill, J. Null is beautiful: on the importance of publishing null
advertising content worth? Evidence from a consumer credit marketing field
results. J. Psychopharmacol. 30, 585–585 (2016).
experiment. Q. J. Econ. 125, 263–305 (2010).
59. Goodchild, L. & Hilten, V. Why it’s time to publish research ‘failures’.
25. Xia, J., Curtin, K., Li, W. & Zhao, Y. A new model for a carpool matching
Publishing bias favors positive results; now there’s a movement to change
service. PLoS One 10, e0129257 (2015).
that. Elsevier Connect https://www.elsevier.com/connect/scientists-we-want-
26. One-in-three U.S. drivers cannot pay for an unexpected car repair bill. AAA
your-negative-results-too (5 May 2015).
NewsRoom https://newsroom.aaa.com/2017/04/one-three-u-s-drivers-cannot-
60. Chorus, C. G. A new model of random regret minimization. Eur. J. Transp.
pay-unexpected-car-repair-bill (2017).
Infrastruct. Res. 10, 181–196 (2010).
27. Frederick, S., Novemsky, N., Wang, J., Dhar, R. & Nowlis, S. Opportunity cost
neglect. J. Consum. Res. 36, 553–561 (2009).
28. Fujii, S. & Kitamura, R. What does a one-month free bus ticket do to habitual Acknowledgements
drivers? An experimental analysis of habit and attitude change. Transportation This project received public funding while one of the researchers was employed at
30, 81–95 (2003). the Behavioral Insights Team, but the authors have not received any funding for the
29. Thøgersen, J. Promoting public transport as a subscription service: effects of a writing and publication of this research. We thank the Behavioral Insights Team for
free month travel card. Transp. Policy 16, 335–343 (2009). their support in writing this paper. Specifically, we thank M. Sanders and L. Costa.
30. Kahneman, D. & Tversky, A. Prospect theory: an analysis of decision under The funders provided input into the design of the study but had no role in data collection
risk. Econometrica 47, 263 (1979). and analysis, decision to publish or preparation of this manuscript. We also thank
NAture HumAN BeHAViour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles Nature HumaN BeHaviour
S. O’Flaherty and H. Dystrka for their input, and D. Hagmann, J. Roberts and J. Zlatev. Additional information
for their comments on earlier drafts of this manuscript. Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41562-019-0795-z.
Author contributions
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to A.S.K.
Data collection and analysis was performed by A.S.K. A.S.K. drafted the original
Peer review information Primary handling editor: Aisha Bradshaw
manuscript. A.V.W. provided critical revisions. Both of the authors approved the final
version of the manuscript for submission. Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
Competing interests published maps and institutional affiliations.
The authors declare no competing interests. © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2019
NAture HumAN BeHAViour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
1
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Corresponding author(s): Ariella Kristal
Last updated by author(s): Nov 19, 2019
Reporting Summary
Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency
in reporting. For further information on Nature Research policies, see Authors & Referees and the Editorial Policy Checklist.
Statistics
For all statistical analyses, confirm that the following items are present in the figure legend, table legend, main text, or Methods section.
n/a Confirmed
The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
A statement on whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided
Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.
A description of all covariates tested
A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
A full description of the statistical parameters including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient)
AND variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)
For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted
Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.
For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated
Our web collection on statistics for biologists contains articles on many of the points above.
Software and code
Policy information about availability of computer code
Data collection Survey Monkey
Data analysis R
For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors/reviewers.
We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Research guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.
Data
Policy information about availability of data
All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable:
- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets
- A list of figures that have associated raw data
- A description of any restrictions on data availability
Coarsened data, R code, and modified materials are available at https://osf.io/39rja/. Data and materials have been modified to protect the identity of the partner
organization and its employees. Additional materials that do not violate these privacy concerns can be provided upon request of the authors.
Field-specific reporting
Please select the one below that is the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.
Life sciences Behavioural & social sciences Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences
2
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/documents/nr-reporting-summary-flat.pdf
Behavioural & social sciences study design
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
Study description The study includes five different randomized controlled trials and is a quantitative study.
Research sample Our field site was an airport with over 75,000 employees outside of a major European city. Our sample were employees of this airport.
Forty-nine percent of employees reported commuting by Single Occupancy Vehicles (SOVs) at the time of the study, as indicated by a
report commissioned by the employer from an external research firm. The report also suggested that 61% of SOV commuters
(approximately 22,000 employees) reported they would consider carpooling, and 41% of SOV drivers stated they would if they could find
someone with a similar commute (which translates to 15,000 potential carpool registrants). The site’s infrastructure made it an ideal
location for our study: 1) the airport was highly connected to frequent subway, train, and bus infrastructure, 2) there was a pre-existing
carpool service that used an algorithm to match employees with colleagues with similar commutes, and 3) carpoolers had access to a
24-7 emergency ride home and priority parking.
Sampling strategy For each study we created criteria for inclusion, and the study included all eligible participants. Overall, the decision to use a sample of
this airport employees was a convenience decision.
Data collection Most data was collected using administrative data collected by the employer. There was one study (study 4) where a survey was emailed
by the employer to employees before and after the intervention, and was complemented with administrative data.
Timing Data collection began in March 2015 and ended in November 2015
Data exclusions The only participants who were excluded from the analysis are those who should have been excluded before the study began (e.g.
already registered carpoolers or commuters who already had bus passes before our trials began, but after we received the initial data for
randomization).
Non-participation No participants dropped out/declined to participate.
Randomization Participants were randomly allocated into conditions.
Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods
We require information from authors about some types of materials, experimental systems and methods used in many studies. Here, indicate whether each material,
system or method listed is relevant to your study. If you are not sure if a list item applies to your research, read the appropriate section before selecting a response.
Materials & experimental systems Methods
n/a Involved in the study n/a Involved in the study
Antibodies ChIP-seq
Eukaryotic cell lines Flow cytometry
Palaeontology MRI-based neuroimaging
Animals and other organisms
Human research participants
Clinical data
Human research participants
Policy information about studies involving human research participants
Population characteristics See above.
Recruitment Because we did not actively recruit, but rather included all eligible employees in our sample, our study has a lower risk of
selection-bias. For Study 1 we included all employees who did not live along major public transportation routes and were not
registered carpoolers. For Study 2 we included all registered but non-active carpoolers who had their addresses in the system.
For Study 3a we included all employees who lived along the two bus routes included in our study. For Study 3b we used all
employees in Study 3a who did not use the free trial. Finally, for Study 4, we used all employees working in a specific
headquarters building. Here we only included employees who filled out the survey, so there may be selection issues; however,
the survey was promoted by the executives and response rate was over 70%.
Ethics oversight The Behavioural Insights Team
Note that full information on the approval of the study protocol must also be provided in the manuscript.