Articles
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-019-0647-x
The connection between moral positions and
moral arguments drives opinion change
Pontus Strimling 1,2*, Irina Vartanova1, Fredrik Jansson 2,3 and Kimmo Eriksson2,3
Liberals and conservatives often take opposing positions on moral issues. But what makes a moral position liberal or conserva-
tive? Why does public opinion tend to become more liberal over time? And why does public opinion change especially fast on
certain issues, such as gay rights? We offer an explanation based on how different positions connect with different kinds of
moral arguments. Based on a formal model of opinion dynamics, we predicted that positions better connected to harm and fair-
ness arguments will be more popular among liberals and will become more popular over time among liberals and conservatives.
Finally, the speed of this trend will be faster the better the position connects to harm and fairness arguments. These predictions
all held with high accuracy in 44 years of polling on moral opinions. The model explains the connection between ideology and
moral opinions, and generates precise predictions for future opinion change.
O
pinions on moral issues1, that is, non-economic political We propose that moral arguments could provide the missing mech-
issues, such as the death penalty, gun rights, abortion, gay anism, because (1) ideology is related to which moral arguments
rights and civil rights, have an effect on how we vote2 and people think of as relevant, and (2) different positions are supported
whom we associate with, and are therefore central to political dis- by different moral arguments, so moral arguments could drive
course. In the United States, many moral opinions are predicted by moral opinion in a certain direction.
self-reported ideology, which can be liberal, moderate or conserva- For the first claim, we draw on the moral foundations theory12.
tive3. But these labels are not sufficient to answer the fundamental According to this theory, there are many possible arguments for
question of why they are able to predict opinions across a wide range judging an act as moral or immoral, but they all fall into a small
of issues. For a given moral issue, what is it about the positions that set of broad moral foundations: harm, fairness, loyalty, authority
makes one of them liberal and the other conservative? To properly and purity. The latter three are known as binding foundations12.
address this question, we must also account for the fact that opin- Research on how individuals rely on different moral foundations
ions on moral issues are not stable. In fact, on many issues, there are has revealed that only conservatives tend to see binding founda-
strong trends across the globe. For example, public opinion on gay tions as very relevant, whereas both conservatives and liberals tend
rights has moved towards increased acceptance in most countries to think that the harm and fairness foundations are very relevant for
where data are available3, sometimes at a very high pace4. Slower their moral judgements12,13.
cross-national trends can be found for issues such as euthanasia5 and The second claim above, that different issue positions are sup-
gender equality4. In the United States, there has been a consistent ported by different moral arguments, is the core part of our theory.
general trend over 40 years towards more liberal opinions on moral It is intuitively easy to see that not all types of arguments are appli-
issues, with the exception of abortion and the death penalty5. The cable to all positions. For instance, straight couples have a right to
overarching aim of this paper is to propose and test a theory that marry, and it therefore fits with the notion of fairness to use fair-
simultaneously explains what makes a moral position liberal or con- ness as an argument for giving gay couples the same right. Fairness
servative, why public opinion becomes more liberal in general, and does not apply as an argument against that right, and indeed those
why it moves fast on certain issues but slowly, or not at all, on others. who argue against same-sex marriage do it on other grounds, for
To account for the observed consistency and generality of the instance, by claiming that it will undermine the definition of mar-
moral opinion trends, we need to look beyond explanations that are riage or that it is against their religious beliefs14.
specific to a time or place, such as social movements6, media7,8 or The first aim of this paper is to provide empirical evidence that
critical moments in a country’s political history7. While we certainly people, despite disagreeing on an issue, largely agree on which argu-
need to take such factors into account to fully understand specific ments support each position on the issue. To accomplish this aim,
details of the change in public opinion, we believe there must exist we conducted a survey that measures which arguments based on
a more general mechanism behind the dynamics of public opin- moral foundations (arguments listed in Table 1) people connect
ion that creates and upholds the link between ideology and issue with positions on 74 moral issues taken from the General Social
positions. One clue is that trends tend to be stronger in highly edu- Survey (GSS)15.
cated, prosperous countries9. This has led researchers to propose a The second aim of this paper is to theoretically examine which
connection with personality traits for which development may be trends and ideological differences in moral opinions should be
resource dependent, such as openness10 and religiosity11. However, expected, given how issue positions connect with different moral
to explain why opinions move fast for some issues and slow, or not foundations. There has been previous work on the statistical
at all, for others, we need a causal mechanism explicitly connecting link between individuals’ reliance on moral foundations and their
personality traits with individuals’ opinions on specific moral issues. opinions on specific moral issues16, but they do not account for the
1Institute for Futures Studies, Stockholm, Sweden. 2Centre for Cultural Evolution, Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden. 3School of Education, Culture
and Communication, Mälardalen University, Västerås, Sweden. *e-mail: pontusstrimling@gmail.com
NaTurE HumaN BEHaVIour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles Nature HumaN BeHaviour
fact that opinions change over time, whereas moral foundations are
Table 1 | a list of moral foundation arguments
assumed to be reasonably stable. Here, we investigate time depen-
dence directly by constructing a formal model of public opinion moral foundations arguments
dynamics. The model is based on the assumption that individuals
Harm Someone suffers emotionally
are swayed only by arguments based on moral foundations that they
Someone cares for someone weak or vulnerable
think are relevant. Specifically, liberals are assumed to be persuaded
more by harm and fairness arguments, whereas conservatives can be Someone is cruel
swayed by all arguments. In line with this assumption, recent empir- Fairness Some people are treated differently from others
ical work has shown that the moral foundation content of presented
Someone acts unfairly
arguments has different effects on the opinions of liberals and con-
Someone is denied his or her rights
servatives17–19, that more people are persuaded by harm than purity
arguments20 and that the extent to which an individual relies on the Loyalty Someone’s action shows love for his or her country
harm foundation affects their likelihood of being swayed by harm Someone does something to betray his or her
arguments21. Our model shows that this individual-level mechanism group
creates a cultural population dynamic that would account not only Someone shows a lack of loyalty
for a systematic difference in opinions between liberals and conser-
Authority Someone shows a lack of respect for authority
vatives but also for a systematic change in public opinion over time.
Someone conforms to the traditions of society
This change is driven by how a position on an issue connects with
arguments based on harm and fairness foundations, whereas con- An action causes chaos or disorder
nections with binding foundations should not matter. Purity Someone violates standards of purity and decency
The model leads to three specific predictions. First, on any
Someone does something disgusting
issue, the liberal position should tend to be the position that has
Someone acts in a way that God would approve of
the harm–fairness connection advantage, that is, the strongest con-
nection to harm and fairness arguments. This is our answer to the
question on what it is about a position that makes it liberal. Second,
public opinion should trend towards positions with the harm–fair- In summary, the position itself was the main determinant of
ness connection advantage. This is our answer to the question on whether individuals found a specific argument applicable. On the
why moral opinions tend to become more liberal over time. Third, basis of the previous analyses, we conclude that it is meaningful to
the stronger the harm–fairness connection advantage a position calculate estimates for how well each of the 148 positions (2 posi-
has, the faster public opinion should move towards that position. tions on each of 74 issues) connects with each of the 5 moral foun-
This is our answer to the question on why opinion moves fast on dations. These estimates are reported in Supplementary Table 1.
some issues, but slow or not at all on other issues.
The third aim of this paper is to test these predictions on Deriving predictions from a formal model of opinion dynamics.
44 years of GSS15 data on public opinion for the above-mentioned Having measured the connection between moral foundations and
74 moral issues. issue positions, we next examined a formal model describing how
these connections interact with individual differences in moral
results foundation use. The model is a simplified version of a more gen-
Measures of connections between positions and arguments. Our eral model developed in our previous work22. It follows a modelling
first aim was to measure the connections between positions and tradition in cultural evolution research in which individuals change
supporting arguments for 74 moral issues (see ‘Selection of moral their behaviour as a direct consequence of interactions with other
issues’ and ‘Construction of moral arguments’ in the Methods sec- individuals23. It differs from another popular paradigm, based on
tion) and to establish that these are generally agreed on. We wanted game theory, for modelling how agents change opinions on how to
to know what determines which arguments individuals think sup- behave in a collective action situation24,25. Such models are made
port a given position. Is it what that position is, what the issue is, for situations in which the behaviours of agents are clearly associ-
what their opinion is, their ideology or their beliefs about how the ated with costs or benefits to other agents. This situation is typically
opinion has shifted in the population? Using a mixed-effect model, not the case for the moral issues that we consider here; for instance,
we found similar results for all moral foundations (Fig. 1 and see other individuals have little to gain or lose (in material terms) from
details in ‘Analysis of the general agreement on arguments’ in the an unacquainted gay couple marrying.
Methods section). Positions accounted for a substantial proportion In the formal model, we assume a population that is so large that
of the total variance with intra-class correlations (ICCs) ranging stochastic effects can be ignored. In this model population, each
from 0.10 to 0.27, whereas moral issues did not account for any sig- individual is either liberal or conservative. Liberals and conserva-
nificant proportion of the variance (ICC < 0.001). Thus, arguments tives in the model differ in the kinds of arguments by which they
connect specifically to positions and not to entire issues. Individual may be swayed. Whereas liberals can be swayed mainly by argu-
idiosyncrasies (that is, tendencies for some individuals to find certain ments based on harm and fairness, conservatives can be swayed
moral foundations generally more applicable) accounted for consid- by arguments based on any moral foundation. This is an idealized
erably smaller proportions of the total variance ICCs ranging from model that represents the moral foundations of extreme liberals and
0.06 to 0.08. Opinions and political ideology together accounted for extreme conservatives. In empirical studies of reliance on moral
no more than 0.02 of the variance. Thus, only to a very small extent foundations, most people fall in between, such that moderate liber-
did people seem to use their own opinion on an issue to determine als do not solely rely on harm and fairness, and moderate conserva-
what argument supports a position. To the extent that they did, tives rely somewhat more on harm and fairness than on the other
the tendency was that respondents chose harm and fairness argu- foundations12. For simplicity, we do not include such moderate
ments somewhat more often and binding arguments somewhat less types in the model, as they would simply end up between the two
often for positions they hold themselves (Supplementary Results 1). extremes; the overall predictions of the model would stay the same.
Finally, beliefs about public opinion change, when included in the The model population discusses an issue with two possible
model, increased the explained variance only negligibly (r2 increased positions: ‘for’ and ‘against’. There is an equal amount of arguments
by 0.01 or less) for all moral foundations. for both positions, but the for position is more strongly connected
NaTurE HumaN BEHaVIour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Nature HumaN BeHaviour Articles
Harm Fairness Loyalty Authority Purity
Position
Issue
Individual
Marginal r2
Opinion,
political ideology
and beliefs about
opinion change
0 0.15 0.30 0 0.15 0.30 0 0.15 0.30 0 0.15 0.30 0 0.15 0.30
Proportion of variance
Baseline model With beliefs about opinion change
Fig. 1 | Position is the main factor in the applicability of arguments. ICCs for random effects of position, issue, individual and marginal r2 for fixed effects
with bootstrap 95% CI are shown. The baseline model (dark) accounts for opinion and political ideology, whereas the extended model (light) also includes
their belief about public opinion change (see Supplementary Fig. 4 for separate regression coefficients). The sample size is 24,465 argument evaluations
in the baseline model and 14,492 in the full model. The group sizes are n iss = 74, n pos = 148, n ind = 409 in the baseline model and n ind = 219 in the model
including beliefs about opinion change.
to arguments based on harm and fairness. The model dynamics
1.00
proceed in discrete time steps. In each time step, two random indi-
viduals discuss an issue with each other, with one of them listen-
ing to the arguments for the other’s position. We allow for bias in
0.75
social interactions, such that liberals are more likely to interact
with other liberals and conservatives are more likely to interact
with other conservatives, but this bias does not affect the quali-
tative outcome. An individual holding one position may switch 0.50
when exposed to arguments from someone holding the opposite
position. The probability of switching depends on how well the
opposite position connects with the kind of arguments that can
0.25
sway that individual.
The point of the model is to show the logic by which the con-
nection between issue positions and moral foundations should
influence how public opinion changes. To make the logic as clear 0
as possible, the model is highly stylized. For instance, it does not 0 25 50 75 100
include mass media. The role of mass media is to enable a small Time
set of individuals to have a large audience. In the model, this effect
could be represented by introducing diversity among agents in how
likely people are to listen to them. Although we do not formally
treat this extension here, it follows from the underlying logic of the
model that the qualitative outcome would remain the same.
Our stylized model also assumes that people are equally likely to
be influenced by an argument regardless of how many times they
have heard that argument before, and that the population is fixed
rather than consisting of people who die and become replaced with
new individuals. In Supplementary Methods 1, we use simulations
to show that the model predictions are robust to relaxing these
assumptions. In brief, if people become less likely to be swayed by
an argument they ignored before, then public opinion may get stuck harm–fairness connection advantage being twice as large in model
in a mixed equilibrium, that is, stop moving before the advantaged A as in model B. The graphs illustrate the main predictions derived
position has completely taken over, in which case the harm–fairness in the Methods section: the proportion of the population holding
connection advantage would lose some predictive power the position with the harm–fairness connection advantage increases
(Supplementary Fig. 1). However, when the population changes over time, with liberal opinion moving first and conservative opin-
through births and deaths, such mixed equilibria are less likely to ion following, and the change rate is higher when the harm–fairness
occur (Supplementary Fig. 2). Thus, we focus on the predictions as connection advantage is greater.
they come out from our stylized model. See ‘Deriving predictions
from the model’ in the Methods section. Testing the predictions on GSS data. The predictions from the
Figure 2 depicts the resulting model dynamics for two specifi- model were tested against GSS data on public opinion on 74 moral
cations, model A and model B, which are identical except for the issues from 1972 to 2016, using our measures of harm–fairness
noitroporP
Liberals, model A
Conservatives, model A
Liberals, model B
Conservatives, model B
Fig. 2 | How liberal and conservative opinions move in the model. Liberal
and conservative opinion movement generated by the model for issues in
which there is a stronger (model A) or a weaker (model B) harm–fairness
connection advantage. Public opinion moves towards the advantaged
position on both issues, with liberals leading the trend and conservatives
following, and at a higher rate on issue A, in which the harm–fairness
connection advantage is stronger. The two models differ only in one
parameter, b a = 0.10 (model A) or b a = 0.35 (model B), and all other
parameters (s, b, L and L) were set to 0.5.
f l c
NaTurE HumaN BEHaVIour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles Nature HumaN BeHaviour
0.75 HF advantage > 0.2
HF advantage < 0.2
0.50
0.25
0
1980 2000 2020
Year
connection advantage (see ‘Estimation of the harm–fairness con- conservatives were extremely strongly correlated across 74 items,
nection advantage’ in the Methods section). These measures r(72) = 0.90, P < 0.001, 95% CI = 0.85–0.94.
and the estimates of opinion change rates from the GSS data (see To illustrate the general phenomenon, we split the 74 issues into 2
‘Estimation of opinion change rates’ in the Methods section) are groups depending on whether they had a harm–fairness connection
listed in Supplementary Table 1. advantage above and below the median (0.2). Figure 3a shows that
opinions on issues with a large harm–fairness connection advantage
Prediction one. On any issue, the liberal position should tend to be change much faster. We also averaged the trends for the 37 items with
the position that has the harm–fairness connection advantage. For a harm–fairness connection advantage above the median separately
64 out of 74 issues, the liberal position (the position with more sup- for liberals and conservatives. The result is presented in Fig. 3b, which
port from liberals (for details see ‘Coding issue positions as liberal shows that both liberals and conservatives have tended to move to
or conservative’ in the Methods section)) had the harm–fairness positions with a strong harm–fairness connection advantage. As these
advantage. This is a predictive accuracy of 86% (95% CI = 0.76–0.93, positions are all liberal positions (that is, they have stronger support
χ2(1) = 38.0, P < 0.001). The predictions fail more often when there among liberals than among conservatives), this supports prediction
is no clear harm–fairness connection advantage. For the issues in one, that both liberals and conservatives tend to move towards liberal
which the harm–fairness advantage is above the median, the liberal positions on moral issues. In Supplementary Fig. 3, we show that this
position is always the one with the advantage. general trend holds even if liberals and conservatives are further sub-
divided according to the full seven-point ideological scale.
Prediction two. Public opinion should trend towards positions with If our theory is correct, the same trend in moral opinions should
a harm–fairness connection advantage. Public opinion trended be observable across different levels of education (that is, the move-
towards the position with the harm–fairness advantage for 58 out ment towards positions with harm–fairness connection advantage
of 74 issues, an accuracy of 77% (95% CI = 0.66–0.86, χ2(1) = 20.6, should not be attributable to rising education levels). Indeed, as
P < 0.001). Similar results were obtained when looking only at trends shown in Fig. 3c, the moral opinion trends have the same direction
among liberals (86%, 95% CI = 0.76–0.93, χ2(1) = 38.0, P < 0.001) at all levels of education.
and trends among conservatives (76%, 95% CI = 0.64–0.85, Another implication of our model is that these changes of opin-
χ2(1) = 18.5, P < 0.001). The trends among liberals and ions should occur within individuals. That is, the directional trends
noitroporP
a
Ideology Education Birth cohorts
Liberals
0.75 0.75 C Ho igll he g se c hd oe og lree 0.75 11 99 56 00 −− 11 99 67 00
Conservatives Below high school 1940−1950
1930−1940
1920−1930
0.50 0.50 0.50
0.25 0.25 0.25
0 0 0
1980 2000 2020 1980 2000 2020 1980 2000 2020
Year Year Year
noitroporP noitroporP noitroporP
b c d
Fig. 3 | How opinion has changed towards positions that are more connected to harm and fairness arguments. In all graphs, the lines show the average
opinion trends modelled by logistic regressions. a, The opinion change rate is larger towards positions with a harm–fairness (HF) connection advantage
above the median (dark blue) than below the median (light blue). The 37 positions that have a strong advantage are, as previously noted, always the liberal
positions. b–d, For those 37 positions that have a stronger advantage, we find that both liberal and conservative opinions have become about 25 percentage
points more liberal over the past 40 years (b). Similar trends are observed across different levels of education (three categories: lower than high school,
high school and college degree (associate degrees or higher)) (c), and for the five birth cohorts that participated almost the whole period (d). With liberals,
highly educated and younger people moved ahead of the other individuals.
NaTurE HumaN BEHaVIour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Nature HumaN BeHaviour Articles
effect of harm–fairness advantage was robust with standardized
20 regression coefficient (β = 0.56, 95% CI = 0.34–0.77, t(71) = 5.1,
P < 0.001), whereas there was no positive effect of positions having
an advantage with respect to binding foundations (β = −0.24, 95%
10 CI = −0.46 to −0.03, t(71) = −2.3, P < 0.001).
We also addressed the fact that GSS items cannot necessarily be
regarded as independent; some of the items address the same type
of moral behaviour. For example, there are several items on women’s
0 right to abortions under different circumstances, such as poor eco-
nomic conditions, threats to the woman’s health or unwillingness to
have children. Such dependencies could inflate the statistical sig-
–10 nificance of the results. To achieve a more conservative test, we cat-
egorized the 74 items into 26 groups based on common themes, and
averaged the harm–fairness connection advantage within each item
group. We then used a hierarchical linear model with items nested
–0.50 –0.25 0 0.25 0.50 in groups to estimate the effect of advantage on public opinion
Harm−fairness connection advantage change. The relation remained solid with a regression coefficient
of 0.77, t(69.4, approximated with Satterthwaite’s method) = 9.6,
P < 0.001, bootstrap 95% CI = 0.61–0.92.
Discussion
This paper has tried to answer two questions: what makes certain
issue positions more popular among liberals than among conserva-
tives, and what makes certain issue positions become steadily more
popular over time while public opinion remains stable on other
issues. Our starting point was that there should be some underlying
characteristics of the issue positions themselves. Inspired by moral
foundations theory, we focused on how well each issue position con-
that we observe in the data should not be attributable only to later nects with arguments based on different moral foundations. To the-
birth cohorts possibly relying more on harm and fairness argu- oretically examine how these characteristics of issue positions may
ments. We examined this point by analysing, separately for each play a role in the dynamics of public opinion, we analysed a formal
birth cohort, the trend in public opinion towards positions with model in which we assumed that the likelihood that the agent would
a harm–fairness connection advantage. As illustrated in Fig. 3d, be influenced by an argument depended on how much that agent
every birth cohort exhibits a trend in the same direction. Note that relies on the corresponding moral foundation. Our model yielded
the figure also shows that later birth cohorts start ahead of earlier three predictions that turned out to be remarkably accurate when
cohorts. Thus, the overall trend in the population is attributable to tested against data on moral opinion trends in the United States.
change both within and between cohorts (as the extended model in Here, we discuss each of these and how our general theory expands
the Supplementary Methods 1 would predict). the current literature on moral opinions.
First, our measure of the harm–fairness connection advantage
Prediction three. The stronger the harm–fairness connection advan- predicted which side of an issue had more support from liberals.
tage that a position has, the faster the public opinion should move We are not aware of any previous theory in political psychology
towards that position. Figure 4 plots the opinion change rate against even attempting to make such a prediction. Thus, it seems that we
the harm–fairness connection advantage (or disadvantage) of the have an answer to a fundamental question: what is it about certain
default position for each of the 74 issues. This plot shows a remark- moral positions that makes them more common among liber-
ably strong correlation, r(72) = 0.72, P < 0.001, 95% CI = 0.59–0.82. als than among conservatives. Our answer is that they have more
In other words, harm–fairness connection advantage accounted for harm-based and fairness-based arguments speaking for them than
more than half (r2 = 0.52) of the total variance in opinion change against them.
rates across issues. Second, we found a general trend towards liberal positions on
Prediction three is our most fine-grained prediction and there- moral issues, which was roughly equally as strong among conserva-
fore provided the strongest test of our theory. Thus, we examined tives as among liberals (Fig. 3b). Thus, instead of becoming increas-
its robustness in several different ways. First, we tested the predic- ingly polarized, both groups seem to gradually shift opinions in the
tion on a subset of 50 issues that both independent coders judged as same (liberal) direction and at the same rate, with conservatives lag-
moral issues. The same strong correlation was observed on this set ging behind. This phenomenon was predicted by our model and it
of issues: r(48) = 0.73, P < 0.001, 95% CI = 0.57–0.84. increases our understanding of why issues are not more polarized in
Next, we studied opinion change separately among liberals and US politics26,27. Note that theories that assume that individuals’ moral
conservatives. The correlation between the default positions’ opin- opinions come directly out of their moral foundations16, rather than
ion change and their harm–fairness connection advantage was of through a cultural process within a person’s life, could not explain
similar strength in both subpopulations: r(72) = 0.74, P < 0.001, how each cohort increasingly adopts positions supported by a
95% CI = 0.61–0.83 among liberals; and r(72) = 0.66, P < 0.001, 95% harm–fairness connection advantage over time (Fig. 3d).
CI = 0.50–0.77 among conservatives. Third, we found that public opinion on a given issue tends to
An intriguing aspect of our theory is that public opinion change move at a rate related to how much better harm–fairness arguments
should be driven not by a better connection to moral foundations in connect with one position than with the opposing position. This
general, but specifically by a position’s advantage in connection to adds to the literature by offering an explanation for why gay rights,
harm and fairness. To test this aspect, we also calculated a measure of gender equality and racial equality are gaining support faster than
the binding foundations connection advantage of default positions opinions in favour of abortion rights, affirmative action and suicide,
and used both measures as independent predictors. The positive for which harm-and-fairness considerations are much less clear-cut.
egnahc
noinipo
cilbuP
Fig. 4 | The correlation between the harm–fairness connection advantage
and change in public opinion. The harm–fairness connection advantage
of an item is measured as the average proportion of responses in which
arguments based on harm and fairness were chosen in favour of the default
position minus the corresponding average for the opposing position. The
public opinion change is measured in percentage points per 10 years as the
average rate of increase of popular support for the default position. The
grey area indicates the 95% CI for the regression line: r2 = 0.53, n = 74.
NaTurE HumaN BEHaVIour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles Nature HumaN BeHaviour
Fig. 5 | Example of a question used to measure the connection between a position and moral foundation arguments. Each question is accompanied by a
randomized argument from each moral foundation. In the example, they are, from the top, loyalty, fairness, harm, authority and purity.
It is difficult to see how the strong and specific relation between difference between liberals and conservatives, has been shown to
liberalization and harm–fairness connection advantage could be hold in a large set of cultures30, there is reason to believe that the
explained by any theory that does not take the connection between predictions from the model would hold in other countries as well.
issue positions and moral foundations into account. However, the Apart from the individual differences in moral foundations, the
possibility of reverse causality should be considered. Could the countries would need to have free speech on the issues studied, as
change rate in public opinion on a given issue cause people to sys- this is our other underlying assumption. Whenever these conditions
tematically adjust their beliefs about what kinds of arguments sup- are met, which should be in large parts of the world, our theory pre-
port a given position? Although this possibility cannot be excluded dicts that moral opinion change will exhibit the same patterns as we
based on the available data, it seems to us to be extremely remote, have documented in the United States.
not least because the estimated effect of beliefs about opinion change Although liberalism does not have the same connotations across
on the likelihood to choose certain arguments was negligible. the globe, here, we shall use the term ‘liberal’ to refer to individuals
We now address some limitations of the work presented here, who think harm and fairness considerations are more relevant than
starting with some obvious limitations of our formal model of the binding foundations of loyalty, authority and purity (sometimes
public opinion change. This model is hyper-stylized and is not an the term ‘progressive’ is used). Cross-cultural studies of moral foun-
attempt at giving an accurate description of the actual process. The dations indicate that such individuals are found across a large set of
purpose of the model is to enable a theoretical examination of what countries. Their proportion of the population seems to increase with
population-level effects should be expected from the individual- education level31 and per capita gross domestic product32. These two
level mechanism that we propose. As long as this mechanism is at all factors have previously been linked to modernization theory33, which
an active force in the formation of public opinion, the model should states that a change in material circumstances can lead to changes in
be useful in producing qualitative predictions22. moral opinions. Specifically, increased prosperity and industrializa-
Our data on how moral positions connect with moral arguments tion are claimed to lead to post-materialistic values, that is, values
are limited by the instrument that we used. The 15 arguments that that do not emphasize tradition and stability. Modernization theory
we adapted from previous work do not cover all of the possible types is supported by data from 40 years of large cross-cultural surveys
of moral arguments. For instance, none of the harm arguments that demonstrating a correlation between moral opinions and material
we used speaks to risks of physical harm. This omission may have circumstances34. Conceptually, post-materialist values are similar to
caused under-estimation of how well harm arguments connect with the liberal downplaying of the binding foundations. In this light, our
certain positions (for example, gun restriction). It is also unlikely paper can be seen as providing the micro-level mechanism that con-
that the five moral foundations used here cover the complete set of nects a materialistically induced shift in moral foundations with the
moral arguments that impact liberals and conservatives differently28. tendency to develop more liberal moral opinions. While individuals’
Moreover, we did not use a fully representative sample. Thus, there fundamental values might be set early in life, our theory explains
should be scope for improvement of the measure of how issue posi- why their opinions will tend to continue to become more post-mate-
tions connect to moral foundations. Assuming that our theory is rialistic throughout their life (Fig. 3d).
correct, an improved measure should yield even more accurate pre- It is clear from our formal model that if the likelihood of encoun-
dictions of public opinion change. Another point to consider is that tering a liberal increases, then the rate of public opinion change
our model assumes that the connections between moral positions goes up as well. Thus, we would expect issues to change faster in
and moral arguments are constant over time. We have no historical countries with a larger proportion of liberals. If we connect this
data to test this assumption now, but future research should com- expectation with modernization theory, then we get the following
pare future measures with the measures that we have obtained here. causal chain. With prosperity comes individuals with a new set of
We conclude with a discussion of how our work contributes core values. Specifically, they rely less on binding moral founda-
to the larger literature on cultural diversity and cultural change. tions. These individuals then drive public opinion in their country
Our model illustrates that psychology can create culture29. As the towards moral opinions that are more grounded in consideration of
psychological phenomenon that we rely on, the moral foundation harm and fairness. Thus, we should expect countries with a longer
NaTurE HumaN BEHaVIour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Nature HumaN BeHaviour Articles
history of prosperity to have more liberal views on issues such as We aimed at having at least 150 responses for each of the 74 issues, and tested
homosexuality, which indeed seems to be the case35. Now suppose that the resulting measure is robust (see Supplementary Results 2).
that material circumstances would shift in the negative direction,
MTurk survey. To avoid participant fatigue, we did not require every participant to
leading to a resurgence of reliance on the binding moral founda-
complete the full survey. The 74 GSS items (reformulated into yes or no questions
tions. Would this reverse the change in moral opinion? Our theory
if needed) were presented in random order in separate questionnaires to the
says that it would not. A decline in the proportion of liberal indi- eligible MTurk respondents, who were invited to take as many as they wanted.
viduals would only slow down the speed with which public opinion Each questionnaire paid 5 cents and included a yes or no question from the GSS to
becomes more liberal on moral issues. The only thing that should be answered, followed by a set of five arguments, one from each moral foundation,
drawn at random from the list in Table 1. The option ‘some other reason’ was also
be able to reverse the trend is an exogenous increase in exposure
included. From this set, respondents were asked to choose every argument that
to arguments for the conservative position and/or suppression
constituted a reason for their answer to the GSS question (for an illustration of the
of liberal opinions. However, as the general trend in the world is task, see Fig. 5). Then, from the corresponding set of arguments for the opposing
towards increased education and gross domestic product per capita, position, respondents were asked to pick those that they expected to be chosen
we should typically expect the proportion of liberals to grow. The by someone who had given the opposite answer to the GSS question. Halfway
through data collection, we additionally began to ask participants to estimate how
world should therefore systematically change towards one in which
public opinion has changed over the past 40 years on the issues that they evaluated.
moral opinions are generally founded on harm and fairness con- The response options were ‘people have become much more likely to answer no’,
siderations. As new issues become the focus of debate, such as the ‘slightly more likely to answer no’, ‘public opinion has not changed’, ‘slightly more
rights of transsexual people, we predict that positions that are based likely to answer yes’ and ‘much more likely to answer yes’, coded from −2 to 2.
on considerations grounded in universally agreed-on moral foun- In total, we registered 13,017 responses, with the average respondent answering
30.8 questions. This amounted to 176 responses per each of the 74 GSS issues on
dations, such as harm and fairness, will over time come to dominate
average. As each response constitutes a data point, we present the demographics
in the population. with respect to responses rather than individuals. The mean age of respondents
per response was 34.9 years. The share of responses from female respondents was
methods 55.8%. The distribution with respect to political ideology was as follows: 6% of
Selection of moral issues. Since the early 1970s, the GSS has asked representative the responses came from libertarians, 37% from liberals, 22% from moderates and
samples of the American population questions about their opinions on numerous 35% from conservatives. Data on the opinion change item, which was included
issues15. From the GSS questionnaires, we selected items asking people to give their halfway through data collection, are available for a subset of 7,400 responses, with
moral opinion about right and wrong, with the additional criterion that the item demographics similar to the full set of responses.
had been included in at least seven waves of the GSS. When selecting moral issues,
we decided to not include economic issues, such as taxation, because arguments Analysis of the general agreement on arguments. To address the question of
on such issues are not confined to moral arguments, but also include economic whether there is general agreement on the extent to which various arguments
arguments (for example, what the effect is on economic growth). We also did not support a given position on a given issue, we fitted a mixed-effect model of the
include questions whose meaning depended on the current policies on beliefs form
about the effectiveness of policy, such as whether harsher sentences would lead
to less crime, because they are not moral but factual opinions. Two independent Pr(y iss,pos,i=1)=logit−1(β 0+β 1I iss,pos,i+β 2P i+αiss,pos+αiss+αi)
coders selected the issues. One coder had a wider interpretation and found 74
issues. The other coder had a narrower interpretation and found 51 issues, of which for each of the five moral foundations. Here, Pr(y iss,pos,i = 1) denotes the probability
50 were also included by the first coder. We decided to go with the more generous that individual i recognizes the applicability of a given argument to position pos
coder and used the 74 items. Our main result was also tested using the 50 issues on issue iss, I is an indicator variable that takes the value of 1 if individual i’s
iss,pos,i
that both coders agreed on. Both sets of issues are listed in Supplementary Table 1. opinion is in favour of position pos on issue iss (and otherwise takes the value of
0), and P is individual i’s political leaning (ranging from 1, extremely liberal, to 7,
i
Construction of moral arguments. For each of the five moral foundations (harm, extremely conservative; libertarians are excluded from this part of the analysis).
fairness, loyalty, authority and purity), we constructed three possible arguments The three terms denoted by α with subscripts represent mean zero normally
adapted from the relevance items on the Moral Foundations Questionnaire13. distributed random effects for positions, issues and individuals. For the subset of
The arguments are listed in Table 1. We also formulated an additional set of data that included beliefs about historical public opinion change, a corresponding
arguments for a recently proposed liberty foundation36 that were included in the term β3 B iss,pos,i was added to the mixed-effect model, with B iss,pos,i denoting
list of arguments. For simplicity, we exclude these arguments in the analysis and individual i’s belief about whether public opinion on issue iss has been moving
stick to the original moral foundations. The inclusion of these arguments does not towards position pos or away from that position.
qualitatively affect any of our reported results. Using the rptR package41, we estimated ICCs for binary outcomes, as proposed
by Nakagawa and Schielzeth42, which are the proportions of total variance
Participants. To measure which arguments support a given issue position, we between groups, for each of the three bases for grouping data; by position, issue
recruited respondents through Amazon Mechanical Turk (MTurk). Previous and individual (the terms αiss,pos, αiss and αi). We complemented the analysis with
studies showed that MTurk respondents are a source of high-quality data and vary marginal r2 (ref. 43), which quantifies the proportion of variance explained for
more in demographic characteristics than respondents recruited on social media the fixed effects to estimate the effect opinion and political ideology (I , P
iss,pos,i i
or at universities37–39. There are also limitations to the use of MTurk samples40. For and B ). Both statistics are expressed on the same scale and are therefore
iss,pos,i
instance, MTurk respondents tend to participate in many studies and thereby gain comparable. We base our conclusions on absolute values of accounted variance
experience with certain popular tasks. This issue should not matter for the unusual rather than on null hypotheses testing. A high ICC for position and low ICCs for
task used in our study. A more relevant limitation is that the population of MTurk issues and individuals, combined with a small r2 for opinions, political ideology
users has a greater proportion of liberals than the US population as a whole. To and beliefs about public opinion change, would indicate that there is agreement
obtain a more representative sample, we conducted an initial study in which 1,000 in the population that arguments are connected to specific positions. It is then
respondents were paid 5 cents (US) to answer questions about their gender, age, meaningful to estimate how well the arguments connect with each position by the
education, income, ethno-racial identity, country of origin, political views and proportion of responses that choose that argument as relevant for that position
political party affiliation. The options for political views were very liberal, liberal, (Supplementary Table 1).
slightly liberal, moderate/middle-of-the-road, slightly conservative, conservative,
very conservative, don’t know/not political, libertarian and other. For our main Estimation of the harm–fairness connection advantage. Each GSS item presents
study, we invited all 139 moderates, all 20 libertarians, all 186 (slightly to very) one position on an issue and asks whether the respondent agrees with that
conservative respondents and a random sample of 186 (slightly to very) liberal position. We shall refer to the position presented in the item as the default position
respondents. Out of the 531 invited workers, 423 responded to at least 1 issue. on the issue. For each default position, we calculated its harm–fairness connection
No statistical methods were used to predetermine sample sizes. To our knowledge, advantage (or disadvantage) using four values in Table 1, by taking the default
previous work has not quantified the argument support for moral positions so position’s average connection to harm and fairness minus the opposite position’s
there is no convention on how large the sample size should be to obtain a reliable average connection to harm and fairness. This measure can theoretically range
estimate. All participants provided informed consent. No ethical approval was from −1 to 1. A value of −1 represents the maximal disadvantage and is obtained
sought, as the Swedish Act concerning the Ethical Review of Research Involving when nobody thinks that harm or fairness apply as arguments for the default
Humans (2003:460) states that studies with adults using informed consent need position and everybody thinks that both harm and fairness apply as arguments for
approval only if they use a method intended to physically or mentally influence the opposite position. A value of 1 similarly represents the maximal advantage. The
a person or if they involve sensitive information that can be traced back to realized range was from −0.48 to 0.48. For instance, the item “Homosexual couples
individual people. should have the right to marry one another” had a relatively large harm–fairness
NaTurE HumaN BEHaVIour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles Nature HumaN BeHaviour
connection advantage of 0.40, reflecting the fact that arguments in favour of gay respondents, 1,992 on average in each wave, 56% females, with mean age of
marriage tend to be based on fairness, whereas arguments against gay marriage 46 years; however, only waves with available information were used to estimate
tend to be based on authority and purity. the rate of change for each issue. In addition, several items regarding racial
We checked the reliability of the measure in two ways. As a first check, we discrimination were asked of only non-blacks in the rounds 1972–1977; these time
calculated the harm–fairness connection advantage separately among liberals and points were excluded from the analysis of those items.
conservatives. These measures were strongly correlated (Pearson’s r(72) = 0.94, 95% Respondents expressed their approval or agreement with items on response
CI = 0.91–0.96, P < 0.001). As a second check, we calculated the harm–fairness scales that were most often binary (for 52 out of 74 items). For items with more than
connection advantage separately among those who favoured the default position two response options, we recoded them as binary by merging any refined categories
and those who favoured the opposite position. These two measures were also (for example ‘agree’ and ‘strongly agree’) and by omitting any neutral responses.
strongly correlated across items (r(72) = 0.85, 95% CI = 0.78–0.91, P < 0.001). Thus, For ease of interpretation, we estimated the rate of opinion change separately
consistent with our analysis of the general agreement on arguments, the measure of for each of the 74 GSS items with a linear model in percentage points per
harm–fairness connection advantage was not very sensitive to the sample on which 10 years. We control that the violation of the residuals normality assumption
we based it. does not affect the results, and the logit estimates of rate of change yield almost
identical results. When estimating the rate of change, we use weights provided
Deriving predictions from the model. We assume that there are arguments for by the GSS to adjust for underrepresentation of participants living in large
both sides, but that the ‘for’ position has a harm–fairness connection advantage. households and for lack of responses15.
We further assume that conservatives can be swayed equally easily by any kind The GSS asks respondents about their political ideology on a seven-point scale,
of argument. In our model, this is represented by conservatives having a constant which we recoded into liberal, conservative and other. Opinion change rates were
switching probability, denoted by s > 0, regardless of the direction of the switch. By also estimated separately among liberals and conservatives.
contrast, for liberals, the probability of switching to the for position is larger than
the probability of switching to the against position, denoted by b f > b a > 0, with the Coding issue positions as liberal or conservative. To determine which of
difference between b and b reflecting the size of the harm–fairness connection the two positions on each issue is the liberal position, we used all data on the
f a
advantage for the for position. corresponding item from all waves of the GSS in which it was included. The liberal
L denotes the probability that a liberal will encounter and listen to another position was defined as the position that was more common among liberals than
l
liberal; the probability that a liberal will instead listen to a conservative is the among conservatives in this data set.
complementary probability, 1 − L l. Similarly, L c denotes the probability that
a conservative will listen to a liberal, and 1 − L c is then the probability that a Reporting Summary. Further information on research design is available in the
conservative will listen to a conservative. We assume that these probabilities satisfy Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.
0 < L l, L c < 1.
l f,t and c f,t are the proportions holding the for position among liberals and Data availability
conservatives, respectively, at some time t. The initial proportions l and c are
f,0 f,0 The MTurk data are available at https://github.com/irinavrt/moralopinion. The
assumed to be greater than 0. The proportions among liberals and conservatives
GSS data are available at http://gss.norc.org.
that hold the against position are 1 − l f,t and 1 − c f,t, respectively.
The expected rate of change of l over a time step (denoted by a dot) is
f,t Code availability
obtained as the probability that a liberal who is against listens to someone who is
for, multiplied by the probability of switching to for, minus the probability that a All codes used to reproduce the results of this paper are available at https://github.
liberal who is for listens to someone who is against, multiplied by the probability of com/irinavrt/moralopinion.
switching to against and expressed as a formula:
Received: 28 May 2018; Accepted: 31 May 2019;
l ḟ ,t=(1−l f,t)(L ll f,t+(1−L l)c f,t)b f−l f,t(L l(1−l f,t)+(1−L l)(1−c f,t))b a (1) Published: xx xx xxxx
The expected rate of change of c f,t is similarly obtained. As the switching references
probability is the same in both directions, the formula simplifies to the following:
1. Hunter, J. D. Culture Wars: The Struggle to Control the Family, Art, Education,
c ḟ,t=sL c(l f,t−c f,t) (2)
2.
ALa nw so, la an bd
e
hP eo rl eit
,
i Scs
.,
i Rn oA dm dee nri ,c Ja
.
&(B a Ss ni yc
d
B eo r,o Jk
.
s M, 1
.
9 Th92 e) .
strength of issues: using
multiple measures to gauge preference stability, ideological constraint, and
Proposition 1. As long as c f,t is smaller than l f,t, the proportion c f,t of individuals who issue voting. Am. Polit. Sci. Rev. 102, 215–232 (2008).
are for among conservatives will continue to grow at a speed proportional to the 3. Treier, S. & Hillygus, D. S. The nature of political ideology in the
difference l f,t − c f,t. contemporary electorate. Public Opin. Q. 73, 679–703 (2009).
Proof of this proposition is evident from equation (2). 4. Inglehart, R. Culture Shift in Advanced Industrial Society (Princeton Univ.
Proposition 2. The proportion l f,t of individuals among liberals who are for will Press, 1990).
continue to grow as long as l f,t is not too close to one and not too much larger than 5. Mulligan, K., Grant, T. & Bennett, D. The dynamics of public opinion on
c f,t. In particular, l f,t will always grow when l f,t < c f,t. cultural policy issues in the US, 1972–2010. Polit. Behav. 35, 807–829 (2013).
Proof of this proposition follows from rewriting equation (1) as 6. Costain, A. N. & Majstorovic, S. Congress, social movements and public
opinion: multiple origins of women’s rights legislation. Polit. Res. Q. 47,
l ḟ ,t=(b f−b a)l f,t(1−l f,t)−(l f,t−c f,t)(1−L l)(b f(1−l f,t)+b al f,t) (3)
111–135 (1994).
7. Pollock, P. H. Issues, values, and critical moments—did ‘Magic’ Johnson
and deducing that this expression is greater than 0 whenever l f,t is not too close to transform public-opinion on AIDS? Am. J. Polit. Sci. 38, 426 (1994).
1, such that the first term is big, and l f,t is not too much larger than c f,t, such that the 8. Schram, W. E. The process and Effects of Mass Communication (University of
second term is small. Illinois Press, 1954).
Proposition 3. The proportion l f,t will never go below min(l f,0, c f,0) > 0, the 9. Inglehart, R. Modernization and Postmodernization: Cultural, Economic,
minimum of the two initial proportions. and Political Change in 43 Societies (Princeton University Press, 1997).
Proof of this is, according to propositions 1 and 2, at any given time, the 10. Kilburn, H. W. Personal values and public opinion. Soc. Sci. Q. 90,
proportion that is currently smallest will be growing. Thus, min(l f,t, c f,t) will always 868–885 (2009).
grow such that, in particular, l f,t will never go below min(l f,0, c f,0). 11. Hayes, B. C. Religious identification and moral attitudes: the British case.
Proposition 4. Increasing b f or decreasing b a (or any combination of the two) Br. J. Sociol. 46, 457–474 (1995).
increases the switching bias, b f − b a, and results in an increase in the rate of change 12. Graham, J., Haidt, J. & Nosek, B. A. Liberals and conservatives rely on
among liberals (l̇ ). different sets of moral foundations. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 96, 1029 (2009).
f,t
For proof, we need to check that the derivative of l̇ with respect to b 13. Haidt, J. & Graham, J. When morality opposes justice: conservatives
f,t f
is positive, and that the derivative of l̇ with respect to b is negative. These have moral intuitions that liberals may not recognize. Soc. Justice Res. 20,
f,t a
derivatives can be seen directly in equation (1) as the coefficients of b and b, 98–116 (2007).
f a
respectively. It is straightforward to verify that, under the assumption that all 14. Culhane, J. G. Uprooting the arguments against same-sex marriage. Cardozo
parameters lie between 0 and 1, the former coefficient is indeed positive and the Rev. 20, 1119 (1998).
latter coefficient is indeed negative. 15. Smith, T. W., Marsden, P. V., Hout, M. & Kim, J. General Social Surveys,
1972–2016 [Machine-readable data file] (National Opinion Research Center at
Estimation of opinion change rates. For each of the 74 GSS items, we used the University of Chicago, 2017).
distinct samples from each wave of the GSS in which it had been included (which 16. Koleva, S. P., Graham, J., Iyer, R., Ditto, P. H. & Haidt, J. Tracing the threads:
could span up to 40 years), to estimate the rate by which the popularity of the how five moral concerns (especially Purity) help explain culture war attitudes.
default position has changed over time. The total GSS sample includes 61,759 J. Res. Personal. 46, 184–194 (2012).
NaTurE HumaN BEHaVIour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Nature HumaN BeHaviour Articles
17. Day, M. V., Fiske, S. T., Downing, E. L. & Trail, T. E. Shifting liberal and 36. Iyer, R., Koleva, S., Graham, J., Ditto, P. & Haidt, J. Understanding libertarian
conservative attitudes using moral foundations theory. Pers. Soc. Psychol. Bull. morality: the psychological dispositions of self-identified libertarians. PloS
40, 1559–1573 (2014). One 7, e42366 (2012).
18. Feinberg, M. & Willer, R. The moral roots of environmental attitudes. Psychol. 37. Buhrmester, M., Kwang, T. & Gosling, S. D. Amazon’s Mechanical Turk: a
Sci. 24, 56–62 (2013). new source of inexpensive, yet high-quality, data? Perspect. Psychol. Sci. 6,
19. Feinberg, M. & Willer, R. From gulf to bridge: when do moral arguments 3–5 (2011).
facilitate political influence? Pers. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 41, 1665–1681 (2015). 38. Casler, K., Bickel, L. & Hackett, E. Separate but equal? A comparison of
20. Clifford, S. & Jerit, J. How words do the work of politics: moral foundations participants and data gathered via Amazon’s MTurk, social media, and
theory and the debate over stem cell research. J. Polit. 75, 659–671 (2013). face-to-face behavioral testing. Comput. Hum. Behav. 29, 2156–2160 (2013).
21. Clifford, S., Jerit, J., Rainey, C. & Motyl, M. Moral concerns and policy 39. Paolacci, G., Chandler, J. & Ipeirotis, P. G. Running experiments on Amazon
attitudes: investigating the influence of elite rhetoric. Polit. Commun. 32, Mechanical Turk. Judgm. Decis. Mak. 5, 411–419 (2010).
229–248 (2015). 40. Dance, A. News Feature: How online studies are transforming psychology
22. Eriksson, K. & Strimling, P. Group differences in broadness of values research. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 112, 14399–14401 (2015).
may drive dynamics of public opinion on moral issues. Math. Soc. Sci. 77, 41. Stoffel, M. A., Nakagawa, S. & Schielzeth, H. rptR: repeatability estimation
1–8 (2015). and variance decomposition by generalized linear mixed-effects models.
23. Strimling, P., de Barra, M. & Eriksson, K. Asymmetries in punishment Methods Ecol. Evol. 8, 1639–1644 (2017).
propensity may drive the civilizing process. Nat. Hum. Behav. 2, 148 (2018). 42. Nakagawa, S. & Schielzeth, H. Repeatability for Gaussian and non-Gaussian
24. Boyd, R., Gintis, H., Bowles, S. & Richerson, P. J. The evolution of altruistic data: a practical guide for biologists. Biol. Rev. 85, 935–956 (2010).
punishment. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 100, 3531–3535 (2003). 43. Nakagawa, S. & Schielzeth, H. A general and simple method for obtaining
25. Azar, O. H. Evolution of social norms with heterogeneous preferences: A R2 from generalized linear mixed-effects models. Methods Ecol. Evol. 4,
general model and an application to the academic review process. J. Econ. 133–142 (2013).
Behav. Organ. 65, 420–435 (2008).
26. Baldassarri, D. & Gelman, A. Partisans without constraint: political acknowledgements
polarization and trends in American public opinion. Am. J. Sociol. 114,
This research was supported by the Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation grants
408–446 (2008).
2015.0005 and 2017.0167. The funders had no role in study design, data collection and
27. Fiorina, M. P., Abrams, S. J. & Pope, J. C. Culture war? Myth of the Polarized
analysis, decision to publish or preparation of the manuscript.
America (Longman Pearson, 2005).
28. Graham, J. et al. Moral foundations theory: The pragmatic validity of
author contributions
moral pluralism. in Advances in Experimental Social Psychology 47,
55–130 (Elsevier, 2013). F.J. and P.S. designed the MTurk study and collected the data, which I.V. analysed. K.E.
29. Shweder, R. A. Thinking Through Cultures: Expeditions in Cultural Psychology. and P.S. designed and analysed the formal model. I.V. managed and analysed the GSS
(Harvard University Press, 1991). data with input from K.E. and P.S. I.V. produced the figures. P.S., K.E. and I.V. wrote the
30. Graham, J. et al. Mapping the moral domain. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 101, paper. F.J. edited the paper.
366 (2011).
31. Van Leeuwen, F., Koenig, B. L., Graham, J. & Park, J. H. Moral concerns Competing interests
across the United States: associations with life-history variables, pathogen
The authors declare no competing interests.
prevalence, urbanization, cognitive ability, and social class. Evol. Hum. Behav.
35, 464–471 (2014).
32. Van Leeuwen, F., Park, J. H., Koenig, B. L. & Graham, J. Regional variation in additional information
pathogen prevalence predicts endorsement of group-focused moral concerns.
Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/
Evol. Hum. Behav. 33, 429–437 (2012).
s41562-019-0647-x.
33. Inglehart, R. & Baker, W. E. Modernization, cultural change, and the
persistence of traditional values. Am. Sociol. Rev. 65, 19–51 (2000). Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
34. Inglehart, R. & Norris, P. Sacred and Secular: Religion and Politics Worldwide. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to P.S.
Cambridge Studies in Social Theory, Religion, and Politics (Cambridge
Peer review information: Primary Handling Editor: Mary Elizabeth Sutherland.
University Press Cambridge, 2011).
35. Andersen, R. & Fetner, T. Economic inequality and intolerance: Publisher’s note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
attitudes toward homosexuality in 35 democracies. Am. J. Polit. Sci. 52, published maps and institutional affiliations.
942–958 (2008). © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2019
NaTurE HumaN BEHaVIour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
1
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Corresponding author(s): Pontus Strimling
Last updated by author(s): May 14, 2019
Reporting Summary
Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency
in reporting. For further information on Nature Research policies, see Authors & Referees and the Editorial Policy Checklist.
Statistics
For all statistical analyses, confirm that the following items are present in the figure legend, table legend, main text, or Methods section.
n/a Confirmed
The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
A statement on whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided
Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.
A description of all covariates tested
A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
A full description of the statistical parameters including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient)
AND variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)
For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted
Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.
For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated
Our web collection on statistics for biologists contains articles on many of the points above.
Software and code
Policy information about availability of computer code
Data collection The data was collected using payed subjects through the amazon mechanical turk.
Data analysis The data was analyzed in R version 3.5.3. The lme4 and rptR libraries were used for analysis of argument applicability. The base library
was used for the main tests. The lme4 package was used to contest the independence assumption.
For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors/reviewers.
We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Research guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.
Data
Policy information about availability of data
All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable:
- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets
- A list of figures that have associated raw data
- A description of any restrictions on data availability
The collected data and the R code that reproduce the results of this study are available at https://github.com/irinavrt/moralopinion. The GSS data are available from
the GSS Data Explorer, http://gssdataexplorer.norc.org.
2
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Field-specific reporting
Please select the one below that is the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.
Life sciences Behavioural & social sciences Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences
For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/documents/nr-reporting-summary-flat.pdf
Behavioural & social sciences study design
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
Study description 1. We used a standard survey to ask people which arguments they think are relevant for different moral positions.
2. We then used the GSS data to analyze the US public moral opinions time trends.
Research sample 1. Collected sample: 423 amazon mechanical turk workers from the USA, 55.1% of females, the mean age is 34.9 years. The sample is not
aimed to be representative of the USA population, but it does represent the whole spectrum of political ideologies with 36% liberals, 25%
moderates, 36% conservatives, and 4% libertarians.
2. GSS sample: 61,759 respondents, 55.8% female, the mean age is 46 years. The sample is representative to the continental US
population.
Sampling strategy 1. We used a convenience sample. As the sample was not to test a hypothesis but rather to provide a classification there was no power
estimate that could give us what a reasonable sample size should be. Instead we aimed for 400+ individuals to ensure that the
classification had a small sampling error.
2. Stratified, multistage area probability sample.
Data collection 1. The data were collected online through Amazon mechanical turk's webpage.
2. The data were collected by National Opinion Research Center University of Chicago via face-to-face interviews, computer assisted
(CAPI) since 2002.
Timing 1. 1st data collection: from 2015-05-20 till 2015-05-31 2nd data collection: from 2016-12-21 till 2017-01-09
2. The cumulative data file includes 31 rounds of GSS from 1972 to 2016.
Data exclusions 1. No data exclusions.
2. The oversamples of black population in 1982 and 1987 were excluded to preserve the representativeness of the sample. The data for
four race related issues (racmar, racpush, racopen, racdin) were discarded from the collections before 1978 because they were asked
only among non-blacks and hence the data do not represent the whole USA population.
Non-participation 1. No participants dropped out.
2. The GSS response rate is ranging between 0.69 and 0.82 in different years.
Randomization No experimental design
Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods
We require information from authors about some types of materials, experimental systems and methods used in many studies. Here, indicate whether each material,
system or method listed is relevant to your study. If you are not sure if a list item applies to your research, read the appropriate section before selecting a response.
Materials & experimental systems Methods
n/a Involved in the study n/a Involved in the study
Antibodies ChIP-seq
Eukaryotic cell lines Flow cytometry
Palaeontology MRI-based neuroimaging
Animals and other organisms
Human research participants
Clinical data
Human research participants
Policy information about studies involving human research participants
Population characteristics See above
Recruitment The subjects where self selected. As the data collection was about finding general tendencies in the population rather than
3
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Recruitment saying anything that demands a representative sample self selection should be a minor issue. This is underlined by the strong
correlation in responses between those that held a position and those that held the opposite position of the same issue.
Ethics oversight All subjects provided informed consent. No ethical approval was sought, as the Swedish Act concerning the Ethical Review of
Research Involving Humans (2003:460) states that studies with adults using informed consent need approval only if they use a
method intended to physically or mentally influence a person or if they involve sensitive information that can be traced back to
individual persons.
Note that full information on the approval of the study protocol must also be provided in the manuscript.