Articles
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-019-0814-0
Infants rationally decide when and how
to deploy effort
Kelsey Lucca 1,2*, Rachel Horton 1 and Jessica A. Sommerville 1,3
The ability to decide whether, when and how to try is central to human learning. We investigated whether infants can make
rational inferences about when and how to try on a novel problem-solving task. After learning from an adult that the task was
either easy, difficult or impossible to solve, infants varied in whether, when and how they tried based on the type of social evi-
dence that they received and on their own ongoing experience with the task. Specifically, infants formed expectations about the
task, their own ability to solve the task and the experimenter’s ability to solve the task, in light of accumulating evidence across
time that impacted their time spent trying, trying force, affect, and help-seeking behaviour on the task. Thus, infants flexibly
integrate social input and first-hand experience in a dynamic fashion to engage in adaptive persistence.
P
ersistence in the face of obstacles is central to positive life out- underlying intention, and seek to reproduce her intention, even after
comes, from heightened academic achievement to enhanced seeing a failed attempt at achieving a goal5. For example, Meltzoff5
emotional well-being1–3. Nevertheless, persistence is metaboli- presented 18-month-olds with one of two models: one who success-
cally expensive and rife with opportunity costs. What truly spurs fully pulled apart a dumbbell-shaped toy and one who intended,
learning is adaptive persistence: dynamically integrating informa- but failed, to pull it apart. Infants reproduced the target action in
tion about one’s own abilities and the competencies of social part- both scenarios, suggesting they were able to infer the contents of the
ners to decide whether, when and how to try. Here we report that model’s unobservable intention. Second, infants seek to utilize the
infants vary the nature of their persistence adaptatively: they persist most efficient means to achieve a goal, and imitate unusual means
at solving an (impossible) task after learning that it is challenging only when the context suggests that the means are an explicit part of
for an adult to solve, they seek help from an expert after learning an actor’s intention4. For example, in a classic study by Gergely and
she can solve the task easily, and they stop trying when an adult colleagues4, 14-month-olds were presented with a model who turned
cannot solve the task. Thus, infants decide whether, when and how a light panel on with her head whilst having her arms restrained, or
to try based on a high-level integration of the context, their own a model who performed this same action but had her hands clearly
experience and the competencies of others. Moreover, these expe- displayed on the table, and were then given the opportunity to act
riences also have consequences for infants’ affect and subsequent on it themselves. When the model’s arms were restrained, infants
motivation on future tasks. These findings emphasize that infants turned the light on with their hands, suggesting they inferred that
are not erratic, impulsive and unpredictable in their pursuit of goals. the model used her head because her hands were unavailable;
Rather, infants selectively persist when they know it is worth the whereas, when the model’s arms were freely available, infants turned
effort—that is, when their hard work is likely to pay off. This abil- the light on with their head—suggesting that in the latter scenario
ity to make rational inferences regarding how and when to deploy infants inferred that the act of head-tapping, though unusual, was
effort is present within the earliest years of life, and serves as a foun- an intentional part of the demonstration and thus reproduced it.
dation for the uniquely human capacity for extraordinary learning. The second issue our work addresses concerns the computa-
A rich variety of evidence suggests that infants are ubiquitous tional principles that underlie early learning. Bayesian models of
and smart social learners: they acquire a wide variety of knowledge learning posit that infants (and more mature learners) probabilisti-
by observing and interacting with others. Infants also implement cally entertain multiple hypotheses about the world (priors) based
this social learning to guide their own persistence: they are more on observed evidence, and assign probabilities to these hypotheses
likely to try hard to overcome a challenge if they have previously that are subsequently adjusted in light of new information and expe-
seen an adult model persist4. However, what remains unknown is rience in the world6–9. Relatedly, the naive utility calculus10, nested
how the dynamics of persistence unfold over time as a function of within this Bayesian framework, views young learners as ‘utility
infants’ expectations about task difficulty and their own experi- maximizers’. For example, infants estimate the anticipated utility of
ence, and whether the effects of these dynamic expectations extend others’ actions by integrating and weighing the costs and rewards
beyond how much infants try to how hard they try, whether they of their actions, and then use this information to decide whether
elect to try themselves or recruit help from others, their affective and how others will act, as well as form inferences about the beliefs,
reactions to the task and future motivation to solve similar tasks. goals and desires of others. Though these frameworks have enriched
Two trenchant, interlinked issues exist regarding infants’ social and helped formalize theories early learning, there is only limited
learning specifically, and their learning more broadly construed. empirical evidence to support them11.
The first concerns the degree to which infants’ social learning or The goal of the current work is to move these research endeav-
imitation is rational. Recent evidence suggests that infants do not ours forward. Our work adds to the growing literature on rational
naively copy the actions of others when presented with modelled imitation by determining whether infants selectively reproduce
behaviour. First, infants appear to make inferences about an actor’s effortful behaviour when they have reason to believe they will be
1Department of Psychology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA. 2Department of Psychology, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, United States.
3Department of Psychology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. *e-mail: klucca@asu.edu
NAtuRe HumAN BeHAvIouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NATure HumAN BeHAviour
Warm-up Demonstration with three different sets of toys. Finally, to investigate infants’ subse-
quent motivation to solve the task when the task circumstances had
Demonstration changed, we gave infants a ‘recovery trial’ in which we presented
them with a new, out-of-reach toy in a container, with the difference
Test being that they could now freely pull the rope and obtain the toy.
Varying both the level of effort deployed by the adult model
Demonstration (high versus low) and whether the adult model was successful in
achieving her goal (yes versus no) enabled us to determine whether
Test
Test infants’ reproduction of effortful behaviour was indeed rational—
that is, occurred selectively in the face of success but not failure—
Demonstration
and additionally provided a test of whether infants apply a naive
utility calculus to their own actions (by selectively undertaking
Test
costs when the likelihood of rewards was high). In advance of pre-
vious work13, examining infants’ persistence in a single moment
Recovery
of time, we measured infants’ persistence across a cycle of three
demonstration–action trials to gauge their changing expectations
Fig. 1 | experimental procedure. Schematic of experimental procedure as a function of both what they saw and what they did. This tem-
(left) and screenshots taken from demonstration (top right) and test trials poral unfolding allowed us to test infants’ ability to dynamically
(bottom right). update their expectations as a function of ongoing experience in a
manner that is highly ecologically valid, given that observational
and first-hand experience are often interleaved in the real world.
successful. Moreover, we sought to assess whether infants can use We implemented four different convergent dependent measures
social information and their ongoing experience not only to flex- to shed light on the nature of infants’ persistence and its conse-
ibly infer a social partner’s intentions, but to adjust their inferences quences. Because persistence consists of both a temporal com-
more broadly regarding the nature of the task, and their social part- ponent (deciding how long to try) and an intensity component
ner’s ability to solve the task. In pursuing these goals, we sought to (deciding how hard to try), we measured both the time that infants
move beyond asking whether and how infants would reproduce a spent trying and their pulling force. This combination of mea-
single target behaviour, to examining the dynamic unfolding of all sures provides insight into the expectations held by infants about
of infants’ task-related actions, their help-seeking and affect, after the solvability and difficulty of the task. We also assessed infants’
watching a social demonstration. Our work directly contributes positive and negative affect while trying to probe their expecta-
to an understanding of the computational principles underlying tions about how hard/easy the task should be. Negative affect (that
infants’ inferences and behaviour by directly testing core tenets of is, frustration) signals that there is a mismatch between infants’
these models. Specifically, by examining infants’ responses across perceived expectations and reality, whereas positive affect signals
time as a function of interleaved experience, we can determine that their expectations and reality are aligned. Furthermore, we
whether the probabilities infants assign to different hypotheses investigated infants’ help-seeking from the experimenter to gauge
or expectations about the world change as a function of ongoing their inferences about the experimenter’s ability to solve the task;
experience12. Moreover, evidence regarding the naive utility calcu- infants should seek help more frequently from experimenters that
lus has primarily focused on infants’ application of this calculus to they perceive to be skilled. Finally, to examine the downstream
their implicit expectations and representations of others’ behaviour motivational consequences of infants’ experiences, we examined
(that is, infants infer others’ goals based on the costs of the actions how much support infants required during the recovery trial when
required to pursue those goals11); our work extends this framework the task changed and was now possible to solve.
by examining whether such a calculus may also guide infants’ own, Our central aim—to understand how infants dynamically inte-
overt behaviour. grate observed and first-hand information in deciding when and
In our experiment, we gave 18-month-olds a task in which a rope how to act—was reflected in our statistical approach. We examined
that was attached to an out-of-reach transparent box could be pulled the interaction between condition and trial number across each of
to reach a toy in the box (Fig. 1). Before the task, infants learned that our dependent measures. When a significant interaction between
an adult experimenter could either easily solve the problem (easy condition and trial number emerged, we conducted planned post
condition, n = 32), found the problem challenging but solvable hoc comparisons to examine the effect of trial number on infants’
(hard condition, n = 32) or was unable to solve the problem, even behaviour within each condition. We hypothesized that infants
after working hard at it (impossible condition, n = 32). These dem- would deploy effort rationally and that how long they tried for,
onstrations thus provided infants with information about the poten- how hard they pulled the rope and their attempts to recruit others
tial difficulty of the task: in the easy condition, infants had evidence would be guided by their evolving inferences about the difficulty of
that the task should be easy; in the hard condition, infants had evi- the task, as informed by the social evidence they received and their
dence that the task should be hard; and in the impossible condition, own experiences.
infants had evidence that the task should be impossible. Critically,
these demonstrations also provided infants with information about Results
the competency of their social partner: in the easy condition, infants Infants’ time spent trying across trials varied as a function of con-
learned that their social partner is highly capable; in the hard condi- dition (t(189) = 2.44, P = 0.02, unstandardized regression coeffi-
tion, infants learned that their social partner is competent, though cient (b) = 0.19, 95% confidence interval (CI) = 0.04–0.33; Fig. 2).
not highly skilled; and in the impossible condition, infants learned In the impossible and easy conditions, trying time decreased dra-
that that their social partner was not competent. matically across trials (t(63) = −4.56, P < 0.001, b = −0.23, 95%
We next examined infants’ persistence on the same task that, CI = −0.33 to −0.13 and t(63) = −5.94, P < 0.001, b = −0.30, 95%
unbeknownst to them, was actually impossible to solve (as the con- CI = −0.40 to −0.20, respectively; see Fig. 2). In contrast, in the
tainer was glued to the table); the only difference across conditions hard condition, infants’ trying time remained relatively constant
was the type of social input received before being presented with across time (t(63) = −1.96, P = 0.05, b = −0.12, 95% CI = −0.23
the task. This demonstration–test cycle was repeated three times to 0.00; effect sizes: easy condition: Cohen’s d = 0.93; impossible
NAtuRe HumAN BeHAvIouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NATure HumAN BeHAviour Articles
Easy Hard Impossible
15
10
5
0
1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3
Trial number
condition: Cohen’s d = 0.66; hard condition: Cohen’s d = 0.32; see We next investigated infants’ help-seeking behaviour in the form
Fig. 2). Infants’ maximum pulling force across trials also interacted of manual gestures toward the experimenter; specifically, we inves-
with condition (t(143.59) = 3.22, P = 0.002, b = 0.18, 95% CI = 0.07– tigated whether infants selectively sought help in the easy condition
0.28). Infants exerted consistently low levels of force in the impos- when provided with evidence that the experimenter was skilled at
sible condition (t(46.9) = 0.11, P = 0.91, b = 0.004, 95% CI = −0.07 the task. On test trials, infants in the easy condition demonstrated
to 0.08; Fig. 2); consistently high levels of force in the easy condi- high levels of help-seeking, whereas those in the hard and impos-
tion (t(46.35) = −1.57, P = 0.12, b = −0.06, 95% CI = −0.14 to 0.02; sible conditions engaged in low levels of help-seeking (hard versus
Fig. 2); and increasingly high levels of force in the hard condition easy conditions: t(92) = −3.08, P = 0.003, b = −0.57, 95% CI = −0.94
(t(50.67) = 2.99, P = 0.004, b = 0.11, 95% CI = 0.04–0.19; Fig. 2). to −0.20; impossible versus easy: t(92) = −3.19, P = 0.002, b = −0.59,
Thus, infants use social input to form expectations of task difficulty, 95% CI = −0.96 to −0.22; Fig. 2). These findings demonstrate that
which are then revised in light of their own experience and subse- infants uniquely sought help when their social partner had exper-
quently guide when and how hard they try. tise at solving the task (that is, in the easy condition), and also that
What do these findings reveal about infants’ persistence as a infants in this condition were probably decreasing their own trying
function of social evidence and their own experience? First, they in favour of trying to solicit help from the experimenter. We next
indicate that infants do not merely reproduce the actions of the investigated whether infants consider the interaction between the
experimenter: although infants in both the hard and impossible experimenter’s competence and their own ability to solve the task.
conditions saw effortful actions from the experimenter, those in We compared infants’ help-seeking in situations when they actually
the impossible condition showed decreasing time spent trying and required help (that is, during test trials when the task was impossible)
low force across trials, whereas infants in the hard condition dem- to situations in which no help was needed (that is, during recovery
onstrated consistent trying time and, increasing force across trials. trials when infants could freely solve the task on their own). Infants
Thus, infants’ persistence is rational and may be guided by a utility in the easy condition showed large decreases in help-seeking behav-
calculus, resulting in their trying more and/or harder when given iour (t(29) = −3.85, P < 0.001, b = −0.03, 95% CI = −0.05 to − 0.01,
evidence that effort results in success. Second, these results dem- Cohen’s d = 0.70), and those in the hard condition showed moder-
onstrate that infants integrate their own ongoing experience with ate decreases in help-seeking-behaviour (t(30) = −2.69, P = 0.01,
information gleaned from observation in a dynamic, ongoing fash- b = −0.01, 95% CI = −0.02 to −0.00, Cohen’s d = 0.48). In contrast,
ion. Infants exerted the most force in the easy condition, when they infants in the impossible condition showed uniformly low rates
should be confident about the probability of success. Coupled with of help-seeking across the test and recovery trials (t(29) = −2.03,
the fact that, in this condition, infants’ overall time spent trying P = 0.05, b = −0.01, 95% CI = −0.02 to −0.00, Cohen’s d = 0.37).
became increasingly short-lived across the experiment, these results These findings demonstrate that infants monitor their own abilities
suggest that infants believed that if an initial, intense attempt did and those of others and more frequently seek help when (1) they
not work then they were unlikely to solve the task. In the impossible actually need it and (2) their social partner’s competence at the task
condition, when failure seemed likely, infants withheld their effort. exceeds their own. Though it is possible that infants’ help-seeking
Infants in this condition engaged with the task only briefly and, behaviours were simply requests to engage the experimenter in
when they did, exerted low levels of force, probably because they the activity, the finding that they exclusively sought out help when
were producing more tentative or exploratory pulls on the rope. In help was actually needed—and when the experimenter was highly
contrast, in the hard condition, when infants have reason to believe capable of providing help—suggests that these gestures functioned
that the task should be hard but ultimately solvable, they sustained to request help from the experimenter.
their trying and ramped up their force over time, suggesting that To provide more precise insight into infants’ expectations about
they thought the source of their difficulty was insufficient quality how difficult the task should be, we also measured the degree to
of effort. The fact that infants initially exerted relatively low levels which their trying behaviour was accompanied by positive or
of force, then steadily increased the amount of force deployed over negative affect: we hypothesized that infants would exhibit greater
time, suggests that they may adopt a conservative approach in the negative affect when they expected the task to be easy to solve but
face of uncertainty (that is, in terms of exactly how hard the task it was not. Infants’ negative and positive affect systematically var-
will be) by putting forth the minimum amount of effort required to ied as a function of the nature of the social input and their own
achieve success and incrementally increasing their effort. experience with the task (condition by trial number interaction for
)s(
gniyrt
tneps
emiT
Easy Hard Impossible 12
9
6
3
0
1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3
Trial number
)isp( ecrof
gniyrt
.xam
egarevA
3
2
1
0
Easy Hard Impossible
)n( pleh
rof
stseuqer
naeM
Fig. 2 | Infants’ trying behaviour across all three indices of trying, conditions and test trials. Time spent engaging with task (left, n = 288 trials, condition
by trial number interaction: t(189) = 2.44, P = 0.02, b = 0.19, 95% CI = 0.04–0.33); maximum pulling force on the rope in pounds per square inch (psi)
(centre, n = 213 trials, condition by trial number interaction: t(143.59) = 3.22, P = 0.002, b = 0.18, 95% CI = 0.07–0.28); frequency of help-seeking behaviour
(right, n = 96 infants, hard versus easy condition: t(92) = −3.08, P = 0.003, b = −0.57, 95% CI = −0.94 to −0.20; impossible versus easy: t(92) = −3.19,
P = 0.002, b = −0.59, 95% CI = −0.96 to −0.22). The horizontal line dividing each box represents the median, the box ends show the upper and lower
quartiles, and points represent individual data points. Data are jittered slightly on the horizontal axis to avoid overplotting.
NAtuRe HumAN BeHAvIouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NATure HumAN BeHAviour
Easy Hard Impossible
1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0
1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3
Trial number
negative affect: Z = 2.57, P = 0.01, b = 0.63, 95% CI = 0.16–1.12; posi- information observed from others and that experienced directly—a
tive affect: Z = −5.46, P < 0.001, b = −1.22, 95% CI = −1.67 to −0.79; task most akin to their everyday experiences—to form inferences
Fig. 3). Infants in the easy condition exhibited the most negative not only about the a social partner’s intentions, but also about social
affect, growing dramatically more frustrated across the duration of partner competency and task difficulty.
the experiment (Z = 7.34, P < 0.001, b = 1.00, 95% CI = 0.74–1.27) Most critically, this research demonstrates that infants are able to
and reducing their positive affect (Z = −4.45, P < 0.001, b = −0.95, update their expectations about the world around them in real time
95% CI = −1.38 to −0.55). In the impossible condition, infants in light of new and changing evidence, and act in line with prin-
initially demonstrated low levels of negative affect—they knew ciples of computational models of learning. When infants expect
the task should be impossible and therefore were not frustrated or tasks to be challenging but solvable they sustain effort, primarily
surprised when it was, in fact, impossible. However, by the end of conserve affect and remain motivated to solve future tasks on their
the experiment, after continually being given a problem they knew own. In contrast, when tasks are unexpectedly difficult but social
they could not solve, they grew moderately frustrated (Z = 6.51, partners are skilled, infants trade off trying for help-seeking and
P < 0.001, b = 1.35, 95% CI = 0.96–1.77) and reduced their positive become increasingly frustrated and demotivated. Indeed, there was
affect (Z = −5.71, P < 0.001, b = −1.09, 95% CI = −1.48 to −0.73). a negative relation between the amount of time infants spent try-
In contrast, infants in the hard condition showed only a mod- ing and the number of help requests they produced (t(281) = −2.07,
est increase in negative affect (Z = 4.79, P < 0.001, b = 0.69, 95% P = 0.04 r = −0.12, 95% CI = −0.24 to −0.00; Fig. 4) and, critically,
CI = 0.41–0.98) and maintained positive affect across the duration this effect appears to be driven by infants in the easy condition,
of the experiment (P = 0.30; Fig. 3). These affective reactions also who have reason to believe that seeking help may be a more adap-
had motivational consequences: during the recovery trial, infants in tive strategy than trying directly (correlation between time spent
the easy and impossible conditions required significantly more sup- trying and number of help requests, easy condition: t(89) = −2.57,
port from the experimenter to solve the task than those in the hard P = 0.01, r = −0.26, 95% CI = −0.44 to −0.06; hard condition:
condition (easy versus hard condition: Z = 2.71, P = 0.007, b = 0.65; P = 0.85; impossible condition: P = 0.51; Fig. 4). And, when infants
95% CI = 0.19–1.13; hard versus impossible condition: Z = 2.62, expect tasks to be impossible, they simply reduce their trying and
P = 0.009, b = 0.63, 95% CI = 0.17–1.11; Fig. 3). Thus, infants’ affect show moderate changes in affect and motivational decreases. In
is driven by their expectations about task difficulty, not merely by sum, this work highlights that cognition, even in the earliest stages
whether or not they can complete the task, and these affective con- of development, is a complex process that dynamically updates and
sequences have a lasting impact on their motivation to complete integrates new evidence.
similar tasks. Though computational models of early learning have been influ-
ential in guiding research in developmental science, little empiri-
Discussion cal work has tested whether these models can accurately predict
Together, these results demonstrate that infants engage in adaptive infants’ overt behaviour in the world. Our findings provide support
persistence: they strategically decide when, whether and how to for Bayesian models of learning that argue that infants probabilis-
try based on the social input they receive and their own first-hand tically entertain multiple hypotheses about the world and assign
experience. These findings underscore the importance of social probabilities to these hypotheses that are then adjusted via expe-
learning as a complex process in which infants are active agents rience6–9. Infants’ behaviour in the current experiment was struc-
who dynamically act on and witness events in the world, and inte- tured around these exact principles: they formed hypotheses about
grate this information to rationally decide when and how to learn the nature of the task based on the social evidence at hand—that is,
from others, as opposed to agents who indiscriminately adhere to whether the task should be easy, hard or difficult to solve. Infants
and follow the behaviours of others. Critically, infants in the cur- then modified these hypotheses in an ongoing manner in light of
rent experiment adopted qualitatively different approaches based new experiences and accumulating evidence, as demonstrated by
on their integration of evidence from observed and direct experi- the finding that they dynamically changed, modified and updated
ences. This research builds on work examining infants’ rational imi- their strategies across the duration of the experiment. These results
tation, which has established that infants consider contextual cues also provide empirical support for a naive utility calculus model
in deciding who and how to imitate, and moves this field forward of cognition that proposes that social cognition is based on a set
by demonstrating that infants simultaneously weigh and integrate of computational principles that maximizes the utility of actions.
tceffa
evitisop
fo noitroporP
Easy Hard Impossible
1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0
1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3
Trial number
tceffa
evitagen
fo noitroporP
6
4
2
0
Easy Hard Impossible
Condition
)n(
dedivorp
stniH
Fig. 3 | Infants’ affect and recovery trial support across conditions. Frequency of positive affect across test trials (left, n = 218 trials, condition by trial
number interaction: Z = −5.46, P < 0.001, b = −1.22, 95% CI = −1.67 to −0.79); negative affect across test trials (centre, n = 218 trials, condition by trial
number interaction: Z = 2.57, P = 0.01, b = 0.63, 95% CI = 0.16–1.12); and number of hints provided during the recovery trial (right, n = 94 infants: easy versus
hard condition, Z = 2.71, P = 0.007, b = 0.65; 95% CI = 0.19–1.13; hard versus impossible condition, Z = 2.62, P = 0.009, b = 0.63, 95% CI = 0.17–1.11).
The horizontal line dividing each box represents the median, the box ends show the upper and lower quartiles, and points represent individual data points.
Data are jittered slightly on the horizontal axis to avoid overplotting.
NAtuRe HumAN BeHAvIouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NATure HumAN BeHAviour Articles
Easy Hard Impossible
15
10
5
0
0 1 2 3 4 0 1 2 3 4 0 1 2 3 4
Help requests (n)
In the current experiment, infants selectively performed metaboli- measures, open questions remain. For example, it will be important
cally costly acts to overcome a challenge only when they had evi- to explore whether these effects hold over longer time scales and in
dence that there was a high probability of an achievable reward. infants’ home environments. Recent research by Lucca, Horton and
Infants are not only strategic in when and how to try them- Sommerville20 suggests these results may be stable across time and
selves—they are also acutely aware of when it is most adaptive to settings, because the findings demonstrated that infants’ persistence
stop trying altogether and seek help from a social partner. Research is highly correlated across contexts. Thus, although the current work
has established that, in early childhood, children are highly sensi- measured infants’ persistence in a single, tightly controlled setting,
tive to the reliability and competency of social partners14 and, as it is reasonable to assume that these behaviours would transfer to
early as the end of the second year of life, infants preferentially seek more ecologically valid settings, such as a child’s home environ-
help from a social partner who will consistently and accurately pro- ment. Future research is needed to test this claim and explore the
vide them with information15–18. Our results demonstrate that this range of factors that influence early persistence.
ability is present by 18 months: infants preferentially request help Overall, our results demonstrate that infants are rational deci-
from those who are experts on a task (that is, the experimenter in sion-makers21: they dynamically integrate social evidence and their
the easy condition) compared to those who are capable, though not own experience to decide when, whether and how to deploy effort.
highly skilled (that is, the experimenter in the hard condition). By This ability may underlie infants’ capacity for rapid and extraordi-
examining infants’ help-seeking in contexts in which help was actu- nary learning.
ally needed versus not needed, the current work also elucidated an
advanced level of sophistication in infants’ metacognitive abilities. methods
Infants in the current experiment were keenly aware of when help We have complied with all relevant ethical regulations to conduct this work, which
was actually needed, and selectively requested it when they were was approved by the Institutional Review Board at the University of Washington:
Protocol Title: ‘Infants’ Persistence: Behaviours Throughout Early Childhood’, ID:
unable to complete the task themselves; they decreased their help-
STUDY00003312. Parents signed a consent form before participation, and consent
seeking during the recovery trial when they could freely solve the to publish images of research participants was obtained. Participants received a
task themselves. These findings suggest that infants not only moni- small toy for participating. Data collection and analysis was not performed blind
tor their own abilities19, but also undertake a relative comparison to the conditions of the experiment; all coding of data was performed blind to the
of their own abilities to those of another person, to decide when to conditions of the experiment.
seek help from others versus when to act on their own.
Participants. Ninety-six full-term, typically developing 18-month-olds (38 females,
The current results also shed light on the intimate relationship mean age = 18.50 months, range = 17.67–19.30 months) participated. Participants
between affect and cognition. Specifically, we show how examina- were recruited from a university-maintained database and identified by their
tion of infants’ affective responses to challenging situations provides parents as either White (n = 69), Asian (n = 3), Hispanic (n = 2), declined to report
information about the nature of their task representations, as well (n = 1) or mixed race (n = 21). Data from 16 additional infants were excluded due
to equipment failure (n = 2), refusal to participate (n = 13: fuss out, n = 8, did not
as their motivation to pursue related tasks in the future. Infants in
interact with warm-up toys, n = 5) or parental interference (n = 1). No statistical
all conditions received an identical, frustrating and impossible task. methods were used to predetermine sample size, but our sample size is similar to
Nevertheless, not all infants responded negatively. It was only when those reported in previous publications on early persistence13.
there was a mismatch between infants’ expectations and their real-
ity (in the easy condition) that there were dramatic affective conse- Procedure. In the testing room (3.2 × 2.7 m2), infants sat on their parents’ lap at a table
40 inches away from the experimenter. The experimental session was divided into four
quences. Infants in the easy condition, who expected the task to be
components: (1) warm-up, (2) demonstration, (3) test and (4) recovery. Infants were
easy, grew increasingly frustrated across the duration of the experi- randomly assigned to one of three between-subject conditions: easy (n = 32), hard
ment whereas infants in the hard and impossible conditions, who (n = 32) or impossible (n = 32), which varied in how much effort the experimenter
expected the task to be difficult, retained positive affect. Critically, exerted while solving the problem and whether they were ultimately successfully
in solving it. Throughout the experiment, parents wore occluding glasses and were
these findings provide evidence that it is not merely presenting
instructed to remain completely neutral and not to interfere with their infants’
infants with a difficult task that is frustrating—rather, frustration
behaviour in any way during the task. Between each of the four phases, parents faced
accrues when infants’ expectations about task difficulty are inaccu- away from the table towards a wall with four large pictures. Parents were instructed
rate. These results not only demonstrate the tight intertwining of to keep their child from looking as the experimenter set up, and were told they could
cognition and affect, but also highlight the pedagogical importance interact with their infant in any way they chose. This procedure and central hypothesis
were pre-registered on OSF (https://osf.io/f87ks) on 8 January 2018. We also collected
of setting appropriate expectations, even within infancy.
data from 12-month-olds as part of the same project, but these are not reported in
Although this work builds on previous work in that it assessed this manuscript. We explain this deviation along with others in a registration on OSF
infants’ changing behaviour over time using multiple converging (https://osf.io/y9qaj), as well as in the Supplementary Methods.
)s(
gniyrt
tneps
emiT
15
10
5
0
0 1 2 3 4
Help requests (n)
)s(
gniyrt
tneps
emiT
Fig. 4 | Infants’ help-seeking behaviour plotted against time spent trying. Data are presented collapsed across all conditions (left, t(281) = −2.07,
P = 0.04, r = −0.12, 95% CI = −0.24 to −0.00) and broken down by condition (right, easy condition: t(89) = −2.57, P = 0.01, r = −0.26, 95% CI = −0.44 to
−0.06; hard condition: P = 0.85; impossible condition: P = 0.51). n = 284 trials. Data are jittered slightly on the horizontal axis to avoid overplotting.
NAtuRe HumAN BeHAvIouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NATure HumAN BeHAviour
Warm-up trials. Infants participated in three warm-up trials. In each warm-up prompting at 15-s intervals until the infant finally obtained the toy. A maximum of
trial, the experimenter presented infants with a single familiar toy. After presenting nine hints was provided.
the toy, the experimenter prompted them to play, touch and interact with the toy
for approximately 30 s. After infants had interacted with the toy, the experimenter Coding. All coding was done offline by coders who were naive to condition,
introduced the next toy. The goal of the warm-up phase was to rule out the using Datavyu software (datavyu.org). During the experiment, infants were given
possibility that infants’ failure to interact with the task during the test trials was varying amounts of time to interact with the task during the test trial as a function
not due to shyness or lack of interest in interacting with the experimenter. It also of whether they were engaged with the task or not (the experimenter stopped the
allowed us to acclimate infants to the testing room and experimenter. Infants who trial 15 s after the infant stopped engaging with the task). We designed the task in
failed to interact with a toy in two out of the three warm-up trials were excluded this way so as to not disrupt infants while they were trying to complete the task,
from the final sample (n = 5). which may inadvertently cue them that they shouldn’t try in subsequent trials.
The shortest trial length of any trial was 20 s. Moreover, after the first 20 s of the
Demonstration trials. The purpose of the demonstration trials was for infants trial, infants generally diminished their trying behaviours and began playing
to learn how easy or difficult it was to complete the target task (that is, to obtain with the rope, making the coding of trying actions versus play actions extremely
an out-of-reach toy), as well as the experimenter’s ability to successfully solve the difficult. For these reasons, we limited all coding and analyses to the first 20 s
task. There was a total of three demonstration trials, each of which was directly of each test trial. Coders were naive to the experimental condition the infants
followed by a test trial. In the demonstration trial, the experimenter attempted to were in, whereas data collection and analysis were not performed naive to the
obtain an out-of-reach toy (located inside a closed transparent container). The conditions of the experiments.
container was 1 m outside of the experimenter’s reach, and accessible only by
pulling a rope that was attached to the container. A different toy was placed inside Measures of persistence. Duration of trying behaviour. A primary coder
the container on each trial in a fixed order: a dinosaur bath toy, a yellow knobby watched videos of participants and coded, in seconds, the amount of time
ball and a red plastic car, respectively. Without the infant seeing, the experimenter infants spent trying to pull the rope to obtain the toy. If infants pulled the rope
placed the container on the edge of the infant’s side of the table and stretched and looked at the target object immediately before, during or after pulling the
the rope attached to the container across the table with the handle of the rope rope, the coder considered the behaviour to be ‘trying’. If infants threw the
placed at the edge of the table on the experimenter’s side. The experimenter then rope and/or swung it side-to-side without looking toward the target object,
instructed parents to turn around and to stay away from the table so the infants the coder coded the behaviour as ‘play/not trying’. A secondary coder
could not reach the toy. Once parents put on their occluding glasses and infants independently coded 100% of videos to establish an intraclass correlation
were visually attentive, the experimenter pointed to the toy and said “Hi <child’s coefficient of 0.95 (P < 0.001).
name>, I want to get that toy”. The experimenter then demonstrated that she
could not reach the toy. The experimenter then tried to get the toy by using the Strength of trying behaviour. A 5-kg S-type load cell was connected to the toy’s rope
rope attached to the container. and hidden inside the target toy to measure infants’ pulling strength in pounds per
In the easy condition, immediately after showing that she could not reach the square inch (PSI). The load cell was connected via a discrete wire to a laptop, which
toy, the experimenter pulled the rope and quickly moved the container across stored infants’ PSI data. In any given trial in which infants’ behaviour was coded as
the table, successfully obtaining the toy. In the hard condition, the experimenter intentionally trying (by a human observer), we extracted infants’ maximum PSI.
attempted to get the toy by pulling on the rope a total of five times before Maximum PSI was extracted during the 20-s period following the experimenter’s
successfully obtaining the toy on her fifth and final try. Each try consisted of the initiation of the trial.
experimenter first pointing to the toy and either saying “I want to get that toy”
or “Look <child’s name>, I want to get that toy”, and then pulling on the rope. Additional measures. Help-seeking behaviour. A primary coder watched videos of
The experimenter appeared to exert a great deal of force in attempting to pull the participants and coded the number of communicative bids the infant produced.
rope. After each unsuccessful try, the experimenter said “hmm”, while looking at Based on previous research demonstrating that infants’ gestures function as
the container. When the experimenter successfully obtained the toy in the easy requests for help22, any reaching or pointing gestures that were directed towards
and hard conditions, she picked up the toy and said “I got it!” The impossible the target object were considered help-seeking communicative bids. We coded
condition was identical to the hard condition, except that the experimenter did not only those help-seeking behaviours directed toward the experimenter, because
successfully retrieve the toy on the fifth try, ending the trial by saying “hmm”. At the caregiver had their vision occluded and therefore any behaviour directed
the end of each trial, parents were instructed to turn towards the wall, away from toward the caregiver was unlikely to be a signal for help. Help-seeking behaviour
the table and experimenter. was coded during test trials and during the recovery trial. A secondary coder
independently coded 100% of the videos to establish an intraclass correlation
Test trials. The purpose of the test trials was to see how long and in what ways coefficient of 0.93 (P < 0.001).
infants attempted to get the toy that the experimenter had just demonstrated trying
to get. Without the infant looking, the experimenter replaced the board on top of Affect. Because we were interested in infants’ emotional reactivity while engaged in
the table with one that had a container, identical to that used in demonstration but trying behaviours, we coded infants’ affect only during moments of trying. During
glued to the table. Thus, the container was affixed to the table and, unbeknownst instances when infants’ behaviour was coded as trying, coders watched close-up
to the infant, it was not possible to move the container by pulling the rope (or via recordings of their faces and coded facial expressions using a coding scheme
any other means). The board was positioned with the container at the edge of the adapted from Repacholi and colleagues23. Facial expressions were rated on a freeze-
experimenter’s side of the table, and the rope stretched across the table with the frame every 500 ms during periods of trying. Though this was rare, it is possible
rope handle placed on the edge of the infant’s side of the table. Once the table was that infants simultaneously displayed features of positive and negative affect. As in
secured in place, the experimenter instructed parents to turn towards the table previous research24,25, we limited our coding of affect to infants’ facial expressions
and to get as close to the table as they could. Once the infant was at the table the (as opposed to bodily gestures). For a review on the power of facial expressions in
experimenter started a timer. Throughout the test trial the experimenter did not determining affect, see ref. 24.
look in the infant’s direction. The experimenter watched the infant from a monitor A facial expression was coded as ‘positive’ if the infant smiled (for example,
below the table, and ended the trial either after the infant stopped interacting with upturning of mouth). This was often (though not always) accompanied by cheek
the rope for 15 s or 120 s had passed. If the rope fell off the table or became out elevation and brow raising. If the infant did not display a clear positive affect,
of reach for the infant, the experimenter placed the rope on the table within the the coder rated the facial expression as ‘neutral/non-positive’. Fifty per cent
infant’s reach. of participants were coded by a secondary coder to establish high inter-rater
reliability (intraclass correlation coefficient: 0.97, P < 0.001).
Recovery trial. After completing the third and final test trial, the infant A facial expression was coded as ‘negative’ if the infant frowned. This was
participated in a recovery trial in which he/she could easily retrieve the toy by often accompanied by an anger expression, wrinkled nose, furrowed brow and/or
pulling on the rope (that is, the container was not affixed to the table top). When crying. If infants did not display clear negative affect, the coder rated their facial
the infant was facing away from the table and experimenter, the experimenter set expressions as neutral/non-negative. Fifty per cent of participants were coded by
up the table with a container placed on the edge of the experimenter’s side of the a secondary coder to establish high inter-rater reliability (intraclass correlation
table and the rope stretched across the table, with the handle at the edge of the coefficient: 0.96, P < 0.001).
table on the infant’s side. Once the table was secured in place, the experimenter
instructed the parent to turn towards the table and to get as close to the table as Number of hints given during recovery. To assess the level of support required by
they could. Once the infant was at the table, the experimenter started a timer. If infants to solve the task when it was possible to solve it, a coder watched videos of
the infant did not get the toy or interact with the rope after 15 s, the experimenter the recovery trial and coded the number of hints infants were given before solving
prompted the infant to get the toy by saying “<Child’s name> it’s your turn, can the problem. Importantly, the number of hints that the experimenter provided was
you get ...?” while pointing at the toy. If, after an additional 15 s, the infant did not based strictly on the amount of time that passed since the start of the trial, and was
get the toy or interact with the rope, the experimenter prompted him/her to get not contingent on infants’ behaviour or help-seeking. Fifty per cent of participants
the toy just as before and provided a hint by pulling slightly at the rope, showing were coded by a secondary coder to establish high inter-rater reliability (intraclass
that the container could be moved forward. The experimenter continued this correlation coefficient: 0.96, P < 0.001).
NAtuRe HumAN BeHAvIouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NATure HumAN BeHAviour Articles
Statistical approach of package lme430. All reported tests were two-tailed, and data met
In the current study, we were interested in testing how infants’ the assumptions of the statistical tests used. Additional analyses are
problem-solving approaches are impacted by observational infor- presented in Supplementary Results
mation suggesting that the task should be easy, hard or impossible,
and by information indicating that the task was either very diffi- Reporting Summary. Further information on research design is
cult or impossible to solve, generated from their own experience. available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this
To test these questions, we conducted a series of analyses in which article.
we analysed the effect of condition (easy, hard or impossible) and
trial number on each of our outcome measures of interest (that is, Data availability
time trying, trying force, affect, help-seeking). When significant All data are publicly available at https://github.com/klucca/Lucca_et_al_
main effects emerged from these analyses, we conducted post hoc Effort_2019.
contrasts to determine the source of these differences. When a sig-
Code availability
nificant interaction between trial number and condition emerged,
All code used for the analyses in the manuscript can be found at https://github.
we conducted within-condition comparisons to test how infants’
com/klucca/Lucca_et_al_Effort_2019.
behaviour changed over time.
For each outcome variable of interest, we fit a mixed-effects
Received: 22 May 2019; Accepted: 12 December 2019;
model. For variables that followed a linear distribution (that is,
Published: xx xx xxxx
time trying, trying force), linear mixed models were fit26. These
variables were square-root transformed after adding a constant of
References
ten to remove skewness and normalize distribution. For variables
1. Banerjee, P. N. & Tamis-LeMonda, C. S. Infants’ persistence and mothers’
that followed a nonlinear distribution (that is, affect, help-seeking),
teaching as predictors of toddlers’ cognitive development. Infant Behav. Dev.
generalized linear mixed models were fit27. This approach confers 30, 479–491 (2007).
several advantages over traditional repeated-measures analysis of 2. Duckworth, A. L., Peterson, C., Matthews, M. D. & Kelly, D. R. Grit:
variance. First, it allows us to standardize our analytic approach perseverance and passion for long-term goals. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 92,
1087–1101 (2007).
across all variables of interest, despite the fact that our out-
3. Eskreis-Winkler, L., Shulman, E. P., Beal, S. A. & Duckworth, A. L. The grit
come variables followed different distributions (linear, binomial,
effect: predicting retention in the military, the workplace, school and
Poisson). Second, since many of our outcome variables relied on marriage. Front. Psychol. 5, 1–12 (2014).
infants’ trying in a given trial (for example, we could not measure 4. Gergely, G., Bekkering, H. & Kiraly, I. Rational imitation in preverbal infants.
force in a given trial if infants did not try), this approach gave us Nature 415, 755 (2002).
5. Meltzoff, A. N. Understanding the intentions of others: re-enactment of
more power to handle the unbalanced design that resulted from
intended acts by 18-month-old children. Dev. Psychol. 31, 838–850 (1995).
missing data within individuals28.
6. Schulz, L. E. & Bonawitz, E. B. Serious fun: preschoolers engage in more
In each mixed-effects model, we included condition (easy, hard exploratory play when evidence is confounded. Dev. Psychol. 43,
or impossible), trial number (1, 2 or 3) and the interaction between 1045–1050 (2007).
the two terms as fixed-effect predictors. Pseudo-replication, which 7. Gopnik, A. et al. A theory of causal learning in children: causal maps and
Bayes nets. Psychol. Rev. 111, 3–32 (2004).
was caused by three repeated observations per infant, was taken
8. Xu, F. & Tenenbaum, J. B. Sensitivity to sampling in Bayesian word learning.
into consideration by including the infant’s ID in the model as a Dev. Sci. 10, 288–297 (2007).
random effect. This approach controls for variation in the response 9. Gopnik, A. & Wellman, H. M. Reconstructing constructivism: causal models,
driven by multiple consecutive and correlated test trials within an Bayesian learning mechanisms, and the theory theory. Psychol. Bull. 138,
individual. To assess model fit, we compared the fit of the full model 1085–1108 (2012).
10. Jara-Ettinger, J., Gweon, H., Schulz, L. E. & Tenenbaum, J. B. The naïve utility
(including all predictors of interest) to the reduced model (includ-
calculus: computational principles underlying commonsense psychology.
ing only the random effect) using likelihood ratio tests via the anova Trends Cogn. Sci. 20, 785 (2016).
command. For these model comparisons, we present chi-square sta- 11. Liu, S., Ullman, T. D., Tenenbaum, J. B. & Spelke, E. S. Ten-month-old
tistics, degrees of freedom, change in AIC (ΔAIC) and P values. infants infer the value of goals from the costs of actions. Science 358,
For each model that improved in fit relative to the null model, 1038–1041 (2017).
12. Jara-Ettinger, J., Floyd, S., Tenenbaum, J. B. & Schulz, L. E. Children
we present the Z- or t-statistic, degrees of freedom, P value, unstan-
understand that agents maximize expected utilities. J. Exp. Psychol. Gen. 146,
dardized regression coefficients (b) and 95% CIs. Cohen’s d-values 1574–1585 (2017).
were computed by calculating the mean difference between the first 13. Leonard, J. A., Lee, Y. & Schulz, L. E. Infants make more attempts to achieve
and last trials, and then dividing this value by the pooled standard a goal when they see adults persist. Science 1294, 1290–1294 (2017).
14. Kidd, C., Palmeri, H. & Aslin, R. Rational snacking: young children’s
deviation. In cases in which a significant interaction between condi-
decision-making on the marshmallow task is moderated by beliefs about
tion and trial number emerged, we tested for a simple main effect
environmental reliability. Cognition 126, 109–114 (2013).
of trial number within each condition by running a follow-up linear 15. Birch, S. A. J., Akmal, N. & Frampton, K. L. Two-year-olds are vigilant of
(or generalized linear) mixed model, with trial number as a fixed others’ non-verbal cues to credibility. Dev. Sci. 13, 363–369 (2010).
effect and infant ID as a random effect. If a main effect of trial num- 16. Kachel, G., Moore, R. & Tomasello, M. Two-year-olds use adults’ but not
peers’ points. Dev. Sci. 21, e12660 (2018).
ber was present, we conducted planned one-tailed post hoc con-
17. Zmyj, N., Daum, M. M., Prinz, W., Nielsen, M. & Aschersleben, G.
trasts within conditions between the first and third trials. If a main
Fourteen-month-olds’ imitation of differently aged models. Infant Child Dev.
effect of condition was present, we conducted planned one-tailed 12, 250–266 (2012).
contrasts across conditions in the first and third trials. We selected 18. Zmyj, N., Buttelmann, D., Carpenter, M. & Daum, M. M. The reliability of a
only the first and third trials to conserve the number of tests run, model influences 14-month-olds’ imitation. J. Exp. Child Psychol. 106,
208–220 (2010).
and also because we were primarily interested in assessing infants’
19. Goupil, L., Romand-Monnier, M. & Kouider, S. Infants ask for help
initial approach to the task and where they ended up performing
when they know they don’t know. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 113,
at the end of the experiment. Outliers detected at s.d. = 3 above/ 3492–3496 (2016).
below the mean were removed from analyses. Removal of outliers 20. Lucca, K., Horton, R. & Sommerville, J. Keep trying!: parental language
did not impact the results. Except where noted, data from 32 infants predicts infants’ persistence. Cognition 193, 104025 (2019).
21. Xu, F. & Kushnir, T. Infants are rational constructivist learners. Curr. Dir.
(96 trials) in each condition were included in each analysis (with
Psychol. Sci. 22, 28–32 (2013).
a total of 288 trials across 96 infants). Analyses were performed in 22. Goubet, N., Rochat, P., Maire-Leblond, C. & Poss, S. Learning from others in
R (v.1.1.463)29 using the functions anova and the lmer and glmer 9–18-month-old infants. Infant Child Dev. 15, 161–177 (2006).
NAtuRe HumAN BeHAvIouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NATure HumAN BeHAviour
23. Repacholi, B. M., Meltzoff, A. N., Hennings, T. M. & Ruba, A. L. Transfer of participated in this study. This work was supported by a grant from the Society of
social learning across contexts: exploring infants’ attribution of trait-like Research on Child Development awarded to K.L., and through a grant from NICHD
emotions to adults. Infancy 21, 785–806 (2016). (no. 1R01HD076949-01) awarded to J.A.S. The funders had no role in study design, data
24. Messinger, D. S. & Messinger, S. Positive and negative: infant facial collection and analysis, decision to publish or preparation of the manuscript.
expressions. Psychol. Sci. 11, 1–6 (2002).
25. Ekman, P. & Friesen, W. V. Facial Action Coding System: Investigator’s Guide Author contributions
(Consulting Psychologists Press, 1978).
K.L., R.H. and J.A.S. made substantial contributions to the conception and design of
26. West, B. T., Welch, K. B. & Galecki, A. T. Linear Mixed Models: A Practical
the work. R.H. collected the data. K.L. coordinated data coding and performed all data
Guide using Statistical Software. (Chapman and Hall/CRC, 2014).
analyses. J.A.S. provided critical oversight and feedback of the work. K.L. and J.A.S. wrote
27. McCullagh, P. & Nelder, J. A. Generalized Linear Models (Chapman &
the manuscript. R.H. provided critical feedback.
Hall, 2008).
28. Baayen, R. H., Davidson, D. J. & Bates, D. M. Mixed-effects modeling
with crossed random effects for subjects and items. J. Mem. Lang. 59, Competing interests
390–412 (2008). The authors declare no competing interests.
29. R Core Team. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing
(R Foundation for Statistical Computing, 2014).
30. Bates, D. & Maechler, M. lme4: Linear mixed-effects models using S4 classes. Additional information
R version 0.999375-35 https://github.com/lme4/lme4/ (2010). Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41562-019-0814-0.
Acknowledgements Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to K.L.
We thank the researchers of the Early Childhood Cognition Lab at the University of Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Washington for their help in participant recruitment, data collection and coding.
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
In particular, we thank A. Sedlacek, Y. Xu, J. Lee, S. Cho, K. McManus, M. Rozaniti,
published maps and institutional affiliations.
K. Ventura and P. Carpentier. We also thank B. Kuykendall for his assistance with the
force gauge installation and data extraction, as well as the families and infants who © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2020
NAtuRe HumAN BeHAvIouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
1
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Corresponding author(s): Kelsey Lucca
Last updated by author(s): 11/11/2019
Reporting Summary
Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency
in reporting. For further information on Nature Research policies, see Authors & Referees and the Editorial Policy Checklist.
Statistics
For all statistical analyses, confirm that the following items are present in the figure legend, table legend, main text, or Methods section.
n/a Confirmed
The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
A statement on whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided
Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.
A description of all covariates tested
A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
A full description of the statistical parameters including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient)
AND variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)
For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted
Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.
For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated
Our web collection on statistics for biologists contains articles on many of the points above.
Software and code
Policy information about availability of computer code
Data collection All behavior was coded using Datavyu software. Infants' force data was collected using MM01 MultiDAQ software.
Data analysis Analyses were performed in R (Version 1.1.463; R Development Core Team, 1999) using the functions anova and the lmer and glmer of
the package lme4 (Bates, Maechler, & Dai 2010).
For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors/reviewers.
We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Research guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.
Data
Policy information about availability of data
All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable:
- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets
- A list of figures that have associated raw data
- A description of any restrictions on data availability
All data are made publicly available here: https://github.com/klucca/Lucca_et_al_Effort_2019
Field-specific reporting
Please select the one below that is the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.
Life sciences Behavioural & social sciences Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences
2
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/documents/nr-reporting-summary-flat.pdf
Behavioural & social sciences study design
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
Study description This was a quantitative experimental study.
Research sample Ninety-six full-term, typically developing 18-month-olds (38 females, M = 18.50 months, range = 17.67 - 19.30) participated. Participants
were recruited from a university-maintained database and identified by their parents as White (n = 69), Asian (n = 3), Hispanic (n = 2),
declined to report (n = 1), and mixed race (n = 21).
Sampling strategy Sample sizes were selected based on prior research. Infants were selected from the university-maintained database based on their age.
Data collection Pen and paper were used to record participant metadata, SONY video cameras were used to record participant behavior, a force gauge
was used to measure infants’ trying behavior, and a computer stored infants’ force data. The main experimenter was not blind to
experimental condition and study hypotheses, but the researchers who coded the data were blind to experimental condition and study
hypotheses. The only person present during the procedure aside from the participant and experimenter was the participant’s parent,
who were occluding glasses so they were naïve to the experimental procedure.
Timing Data collection began on January 18, 2018 and ended on August 17, 2018.
Data exclusions Data exclusion criteria were pre-established. Outliers more than 3 standard deviations above the mean were removed from analysis (the
exact number for each analysis is reported in text).
Non-participation Exclusion criteria were preestablished. Data from 16 additional infants were excluded due to equipment failure (n = 2), refusal to
participate (n = 13: fuss out, n = 8, did not interact with warm up toys, n = 5), or parental interference (n = 1).
Randomization Participants were randomly assigned to one of three experimental conditions.
Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods
We require information from authors about some types of materials, experimental systems and methods used in many studies. Here, indicate whether each material,
system or method listed is relevant to your study. If you are not sure if a list item applies to your research, read the appropriate section before selecting a response.
Materials & experimental systems Methods
n/a Involved in the study n/a Involved in the study
Antibodies ChIP-seq
Eukaryotic cell lines Flow cytometry
Palaeontology MRI-based neuroimaging
Animals and other organisms
Human research participants
Clinical data
Antibodies
Antibodies used NA
Validation NA
Human research participants
Policy information about studies involving human research participants
Population characteristics See above.
Recruitment See above for recruitment information. Our participants were primarily white, which may impact the generalizability of the
findings to other racial groups.
Ethics oversight We have complied with all relevant ethical regulations to conduct this work, which was approved by the IRB at the University of
Washington: Protocol Title: “Infants’ Persistence: Behaviors Throughout Early Childhood”, ID: STUDY00003312.
Note that full information on the approval of the study protocol must also be provided in the manuscript.