
===== PAGE 1/22 =====
Meta-Psychology, 2022, vol 6, MP.2019.2162, Open data: Yes Edited by: Rickard Carlsson
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2019.2162 Open materials: Yes Reviewed by: Rima-Maria Rahal, Ignazio Ziano, Adrien Fillon
Article type: File Drawer Report Open and reproducible analysis: Yes Analysis reproduced by: Lucija Batinović
Published under the CC-BY4.0 license Open reviews and editorial process: Yes All supplementary files can be accessed at the OSF project
Preregistration: Yes page: https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/Y2TF6
Four Failures to Demonstrate that Scarcity Magnifies
Preference for Familiarity
Stephen Antonoplis
University of California, Berkeley
Serena Chen
University of California, Berkeley
As economic inequality increases in the United States and around the world,
psychologists have begun to study how the psychological experience of scarcity impacts
people's decision making. Recent work in psychology suggests that scarcity—the
experience of having insufficient resources to accomplish a goal—makes people more
strongly prefer what they already like relative to what they already dislike or like less.
That is, scarcity may polarize preferences. One common preference is the preference for
familiarity: the systematic liking of more often experienced stimuli, compared to less
often experienced stimuli. Across four studies—three experiments and one cross-
sectional survey (all pre-registered; see https://osf.io/7zyfr/)—we investigated whether
scarcity polarizes the preference for familiarity. Despite consistently replicating people's
preference for the familiar, we consistently failed to show that scarcity increased the
degree to which people preferred the familiar to the unfamiliar. We discuss these results
in light of recent failures to replicate famous findings in the scarcity literature.
Keywords: Scarcity, Familiarity, Open Science
What is Scarcity?
With economic inequality rising markedly since
the 1980s, and especially since the 2007 global Scarcity is defined as a lack of sufficient
recession (Piketty, 2014), scholars from various fields resources for accomplishing a goal (Shah,
have turned their attention to understanding the Mullainathan, & Shafir, 2012). Research has found
effects of scarcity on human psychology. A growing that it increases overborrowing and focus on the
approach to this question investigates the impact of present (Shah et al., 2012; Shah, Mullainathan, &
the psychological experience of scarcity on Shafir, 2018); increases the propensity to lie in order
thoughts, feelings, and behaviors. In this file drawer to secure financial rewards (Gino & Pierce, 2009);
report, we sought to understand the impact of and increases the likelihood of taking risks and the
scarcity on the familiarity bias, the systematic liking quickness to approach temptations if participants
of more familiar, compared to less familiar, stimuli grew up in a lower social class (Griskevicius et al.,
(Zajonc, 1968). 2013). Importantly, the resources for which a person
experiences scarcity can be of many different forms,
and the form of the resources (e.g., time or money)
is not thought to change the effects of scarcity on
human psychology (Mullainathan & Shafir, 2013). For
===== PAGE 2/22 =====
2
ANTONOPLIS & CHEN
instance, both time and material scarcity have been objects. How might the psychological experience of
found to increase overborrowing in the present scarcity alter this preference? Below, we suggest
(Shah et al., 2012; Shah et al., 2018). that scarcity may magnify people’s preference for
Most pertinent to the present research, recent familiarity, making people more strongly prefer
research suggests that scarcity polarizes familiarity under scarcity than not under scarcity.
preferences (Zhu & Ratner, 2015). When offered a
choice between various products, participants more
Does Scarcity Increase the Familiarity Bias?
strongly preferred their favorite (vs. non-favorite)
option when few of each option were available
Recent research suggests that scarcity polarizes
(scarcity) versus when many were available
preferences (Zhu & Ratner, 2015). When offered a
(abundance). This occurred because scarcity was
choice between various products, participants more
perceived as threatening, inducing higher arousal,
strongly preferred their favorite (vs. non-favorite)
which has been previously shown to polarize
option when few of each option were available
people’s preferences (e.g., Gorn et al., 2001; Mano,
(scarcity) versus when many were available
1992, 1994). Below, we propose that this effect may
(abundance). The researchers argued that this
extend to the preference for familiarity.
occurred because scarcity was perceived as
threatening, inducing higher arousal, which has
The Familiarity Bias been previously shown to polarize people’s
preferences (e.g., Gorn et al., 2001; Mano, 1992,
Familiarity bias refers to the systematic 1994). When participants experienced scarcity (here,
preference for more familiar stimuli over less of quantity), they felt threatened by it. This threat
familiar stimuli, where familiarity is defined as increased their arousal, which restricted the
frequency of exposure. In other words, familiarity number of evaluative dimensions considered
bias describes the phenomenon that people tend to relevant to the decision. One dimension, prior liking,
like things they have been exposed to more often was deemed particularly relevant to the decision,
simply because of the rate of exposure (Zajonc, perhaps because threat constitutes a negative
1968). Many classic studies in psychology suggest affective experience and people experiencing
that people normatively prefer more, to less, familiar negative affect often choose simple decision
stimuli. For instance, research on the mere exposure strategies (Mano, 1994). Finally, to determine their
effect has shown that individuals rate stimuli more preferences, participants more heavily relied on this
positively if the stimuli occur more versus less single dimension of prior liking, producing more
frequently in the participants’ natural environment, polarized preferences than would have resulted if
as well as if the stimuli resemble more versus less other, imperfectly correlated dimensions had been
closely other stimuli in participants’ natural incorporated into the decision.
environment (e.g., Johnson, Thomson, & Frincke, Applied to the familiarity bias, such theorizing
1960; Zajonc, 1968, 2001). Familiarity bias has been suggests that, when experiencing scarcity, people
shown across many kinds of stimuli, including fruit will feel more threatened and aroused, causing them
and vegetables (Zajonc, 1968), nonsense syllables to use simpler decision strategies. Because the
(Johnson et al., 1960), and people’s names familiarity bias is a common phenomenon
(Oppenheimer, 2004). Two meta-analyses have (Bornstein, 1989; Montoya et al., 2017; Zajonc, 1968,
examined the robustness of the phenomenon. 2001) and familiarity is a simple judgment to make
Across 208 experiments, Bornstein (1989) found the (e.g., Glaze, 1928), people may rely on familiarity of
effect to be quite reliable, although the impact of stimuli to guide their choices. As familiarity already
publication bias on the results was difficult to assess breeds liking (Zajonc, 1968), relying predominantly
due to a lack of adequate tests for assessing these on familiarity in a decision task should increase
effects at the time the meta-analysis was conducted. stratification along familiarity. In other words,
Montoya et al. (2017) built on Bornstein’s (1989) people should come to more strongly prefer familiar
meta-analysis and found that the effect was reliable stimuli, relative to less familiar stimuli, under
across 118 studies and, using more appropriate tests, scarcity. In addition, since scarcity is expected to
that publication bias likely did not bias the impact people similarly, regardless of its form
estimates. Thus, a large body of research indicates (Mullainathan & Shafir, 2013), the effect should
that people, in general, prefer more to less familiar appear across any form of scarcity (e.g., material,
===== PAGE 3/22 =====
3
FOUR FAILURES TO DEMONSTRATE THAT SCARCITY MAGNIFIES PREFERENCE FOR FAMILIARITY
time, quantity). Hence, in this file drawer report, we https://osf.io/7zyfr/). This report is an exhaustive
examined the effect of different forms of scarcity report on all data available from research projects
(material, time, and quantity) on the familiarity bias. relating to the topic, where at least one of the
authors was principal investigator, or have
otherwise the right to publish the results. This
The Present Research
includes not only null findings, or unexpected
findings, but also studies that are suspected to have
Across four studies we tested whether scarcity,
failed, with careful explanation of the circumstances
in various forms, amplifies individuals’ preference
of the failure (e.g., experimental error, failed
for familiar over unfamiliar stimuli. We aimed to
manipulation check). The context surrounding how
show that this pattern was consistent across various
these data were collected, and if they are somehow
kinds of more versus less familiar stimuli. Key to
connected to already published studies (e.g.,
note is that the studies by Zhu and Ratner (2015),
dropped experiments) is carefully explained. We
which we based ours on, took an idiographic
report how we determined our sample sizes, all data
approach to measuring preferences, examining
exclusions, and all measures in all studies. All
changes in each participant’s favorite and non-
analyses were conducted in R (version 3.6.2; R Core
favorite options. All of the work they cited in support
Team, 2019). Finally, to improve the paper’s
of the hypothesized link between scarcity and
narrative, we report studies differently than the
preferences took a nomothetic approach (e.g., more
chronological order in which they were conducted.
vs. less risky options in terms of normative
probability; Gorn et al., 2001; Mano, 1992, 1994). In
line with this, the authors speculated that their Study 1
hypothesis would hold using a nomothetic approach
(p. 12, Zhu & Ratner, 2015). Hence, in the present For the initial test of our hypothesis, we sought
studies, we tested the effect of scarcity on to combine methods from both the scarcity and
nomothetic preference for familiarity. This work, familiarity bias literatures in order to use non-
then, should be understood as a generalizability test controversial, reliable methods. To manipulate
of the work presented by Zhu and Ratner (2015), scarcity, we had people recall a time they
rather than a replication (LeBel et al., 2019). In experienced scarcity (cf. Roux et al., 2015; Mani et al.,
addition, some of our studies, unlike those of Zhu 2013). To measure preference for familiarity,
and Ratner (2015) used an incidental manipulation of participants rated how much they liked both familiar
scarcity, in which the experience of scarcity was not and unfamiliar given names and surnames (cf.
incorporated into the same situation or context as Oppenheimer, 2004), as well as nonsense syllables
the assessment of preference. As others have argued (cf. Johnson et al., 1960). The key test of our
(Bargh, 1992), incidental versus explicit manipulation hypothesis was whether the scarcity manipulation
of social psychological phenomena is not crucial to moderated participants’ preference for familiarity
studying the phenomena. What is crucial is that such that this preference was heightened under
manipulations bring to mind whatever concept (in scarcity. The pre-registration form, study materials,
this case, scarcity) is of interest, thereby allowing and data are available here: https://osf.io/7vtqr/.
this concept to shape how subsequent stimuli are
perceived. Thus, social psychological research on Method
scarcity has been able to use incidental
Following an informal lab policy of collecting 100
manipulations of scarcity without issue (e.g., Roux et
participants per between-subjects condition, 201
al., 2015).
participants were recruited from Amazon’s
For all studies, we pre-registered focal
Mechanical Turk. Their demographic
hypotheses, data exclusion criteria, statistical
characteristics matched typical samples on MTurk
modeling, and dependent and independent variables
on the Open Science Framework (available at
===== PAGE 4/22 =====
4
ANTONOPLIS & CHEN
Table 1
Demographics Across All Studies (Proportions and Means)
Study
Study 1 Study 2 Study 3 Study 4
Gender
Man .50 .61 .46 .50
Woman .27 .39 .53 .50
Transgender .00 .00 .004 .00
Decline to State .23 .00 .004 .00
Race
White .77 .75 .78 .67
Latinx/Hispanic .06 .05 .08 .11
Black .09 .08 .05 .10
Native American .00 .02 .00 .00
Asian .06 .11 .06 .00
Middle Eastern .00 .00 .00 .00
Mixed .01 .00 .04 .02
Other .00 .00 .00 .04
Decline to State .02 .00 .00 .00
Born in the U.S.
Yes .83 .98 .94 –
No .00 .02 .05 –
Decline to State .17 .00 .01 –
39.30 33.64 36.91 50.19
Age (M, SD)
(10.97) (9.58) (11.66) (16.72)
$38,130 $36,093 $38,643 $72,053
Income (M,SD)
($25,871) ($21,684) ($29,447) ($47,986)
Education
High School or Less .13 .14 .12 .41
At Least
.86 .86 .88 .59
Some College
Decline to State .02 .00 .00 .00
Note. “–“ indicates that an item was not administered in the dataset. With the exceptions of age
and income, all numbers in cells are proportions.
(mostly White, mostly men, in their mid-30’s, had relatively low income; Buhrmester et al., 2011) and
some amount of college education, and earning a are reported in full in Table 1. Participants were
===== PAGE 5/22 =====
5
FOUR FAILURES TO DEMONSTRATE THAT SCARCITY MAGNIFIES PREFERENCE FOR FAMILIARITY
randomly assigned to a scarcity or control outlier names). We used this same process to select
condition. In the scarcity condition, participants surnames, though names were pulled from the most
wrote about a time they felt their resources were recent (2010) US Census instead of Social Security
scarce (i.e., did not meet their needs; taken from data (familiar: Smith, Johnson, Williams, Brown;
Roux et al., 2015). We expected writing about an unfamiliar: Galloway, Bray, Nieves, Petty; data
experience of scarcity to be affectively unpleasant available at
and threatening and, thus, different from most day- https://www.census.gov/topics/population/
to-day experiences. Hence, participants in the genealogy/data/2010_surnames.html). We used
control condition wrote about an experience they names as stimuli because prior work had obtained
had in the past week, whether an activity, an familiarity effects using names (Oppenheimer,
interaction, or whatever came to mind. 2004).
After writing about a scarcity experience or a The nonsense syllables were taken from Study 3
recent experience, participants rated how much by Johnson et al. (1960). They found that syllables
they liked eight female given names (four familiar, obtaining low (0%), medium (47–53%), and high
four unfamiliar), eight male given names (four (100%) rates of judged association with English
familiar, four unfamiliar), and eight surnames (four words (in Glaze, 1928) were thought to have better
familiar, four unfamiliar). Participants also rated (i.e., more “good”) meanings when participants were
how good or bad they thought the meanings of told the syllables were words from foreign languages
twenty-four nonsense syllables were in a foreign and then judged how much the words referred to
language. All names were rated on a scale from 1 “good” or “bad” things. Glaze (1928) obtained the
(=dislike) to 7 (=like). All nonsense syllables were syllables’ associations with English words by asking
rated on a scale from 1 (=bad) to 7 (=good). 15 participants whether they could quickly form an
Participants were randomly assigned to either rate association to an English word for each syllable. The
all the names first and the syllables second, or the association rates (i.e., low, medium, and high) are the
syllables first and all the names second. This was percentage of the 15 participants who reported
done to avoid order effects. Although the use of an forming an association to a syllable. Johnson et al.
incidental manipulation indirectly related to the (1960) found that more familiar words (i.e., those
dependent variable might seem problematic for more frequently associated with known words) were
ecological validity, this practice is fairly common in judged more positively than unfamiliar words.
the scarcity (e.g., Mani et al., 2013) and familiarity After rating the names and nonsense syllables,
bias literatures (e.g., Muthukrishnan et al., 2009). participants completed standard demographic
Female and male given names were taken from items (race, gender, income, education, subjective
the 2016 US Social Security Registry of Baby names SES) and an embedded attention check. All
(available at https://namecensus.com/baby- participants were debriefed. Participants who did
names/popular-girl-names-in-2016/ for female not follow the manipulation instructions (e.g., copy
names and https://namecensus.com/baby- and paste text from a secondary document instead
names/popular-boy-names-in-2016/ for male of describing an experience; n=2), yielding a final
names). For each gender, we selected four names sample size of 199 participants (n =103,
Control
from the top twenty most common as the familiar n =96). Participants were paid $0.75 for
Scarcity
names (females: Isabella, Sophia, Emma, Olivia; completing the study.
males: Jacob, Ethan, Michael, William) and four
names from the bottom twenty of the top 1000 (i.e., Results
names 981–1000) as the unfamiliar names (females: Confirmatory Results
Lilith, Charleigh, Dania, Savannah; males: Truman,
Data were submitted to multilevel models that
Eliezer, Reuben, Bailey). We chose names from the
regressed liking ratings on stimulus familiarity,
top and bottom of the top 1000 to make sure that
experimental condition, and their interaction. In
the frequencies of the names varied and that all
names were somewhat recognizable (i.e., to avoid
===== PAGE 6/22 =====
6
ANTONOPLIS & CHEN
2
elbaT
1
ydutS
rof
sledom
raenil
lacihcrareih
morf
)ES(
B
e lbairaV
tnednepeD
s
emaN
s
elballyS
esnesnoN
neviG
elaM
neviG
elameF
–74
&
%0(
selballyS
esnesnoN
%0(
selballyS
esnesnoN
semanruS
semaN
semaN
)ecnerefer
sa
%35
)ecnerefer
sa
s mreT
noissergeR
)81.0(
40.0
)51.0(
02.0-
)51.0(
62.0-
)80.0(
11.0-
)80.0(
11.0-
yticracS
–
–
–
–
**
)22.0(
66.0
%35–74
–
–
–
***
)02.0(
11.1
***
)61.0(
19.0
%001
)53.0(
35.0
**
)43.0(
03.1
*
)33.0(
71.1
–
–
railimaF
–
–
–
–
)21.0(
60.0
%35–74
X
yticracS
–
–
–
)41.0(
11.0
)21.0(
90.0
%001
X
yticracS
)91.0(
11.0-
)91.0(
20.0-
)12.0(
03.0-
–
–
railimaF
X
yticracS
.ledom
a
ni
dedulcni
ton
saw
mret
noisserger
a
taht
setoned
”–“
.100.
<
p
***
,10.
< p
**
,50.
<
p
*
.etoN
===== PAGE 7/22 =====
7
FOUR FAILURES TO DEMONSTRATE THAT SCARCITY MAGNIFIES PREFERENCE FOR FAMILIARITY
addition, all ratings were partitioned into random included random intercepts and slopes for
intercepts within participants and random effects of experimental condition within stimuli in order to
familiarity within participants. That is, we controlled prevent stimulus-specific effects from impact the
for the possibility that overall rating patterns might overall result. Table 2 shows the multilevel
vary across participants and that preferences for regression results for all dependent variables.
familiarity might vary across participants. We also
Figure 1. Scarcity condition depicted with filled circles and solid lines; control condition, with hollow circles
and dashed lines. All name ratings were in terms of liking (1=dislike, 7=like). Syllable ratings were in terms
of how bad (=1) or good (=7) participants thought it meant in a foreign language.
As expected, participants rated more familiar appeared to operate as expected in that they yielded
given names as more preferable to less familiar given the normative preference for more to less familiar
names (females: B=1.17, t(6.62)=3.57, p=.010, pseudo- objects. In contrast, preferences did not vary across
R2=.66; males: B=1.30, t(6.51)=3.82, p=.008, pseudo- more and less familiar surnames (B=0.53,
R2=.69). In addition, relative to low-association t(6.63)=1.50, p=.179, pseudo-R2=.25), suggesting that
syllables, participants rated medium-association the chosen surnames were inappropriate to test our
syllables as better-sounding (B=0.66, t(22.58)=2.97, hypothesis. In addition, as expected, there were no
p=.007, pseudo-R2=.55) and high-association main effects of scarcity on ratings (B’s from -0.26–
syllables as better-sounding (B=0.91, t(25.43)=5.62, 0.03; p’s from .093–.771; pseudo-R2’s from .0004–
p<.001, pseudo-R2=.28). High-association syllables .04). Recalling an experience of scarcity did not
were also rated as better-sounding than combined cause participants to rate all stimuli as more or less
medium- and low-association syllables (B=1.11, preferable or good, relative to the control condition.
t(25.43)=5.62, p<.001, pseudo-R2=.45). Thus, all of If this main effect had been observed, it might
these given name and nonsense syllable stimuli suggest a different psychological effect of scarcity
===== PAGE 8/22 =====
8
ANTONOPLIS & CHEN
than hypothesized: that it makes people like or Thus, our stimuli and scarcity manipulation mostly
dislike any stimuli more on top of any heightened conformed with our reasoning about how each
preference contrasts between subsets of stimuli. would function.
Table 3
Mean (SD) for unfamiliar and familiar stimuli across two experimental conditions in Study 1
Dependent Variable
Nonsense Female Given Male Given
Experimental Condition Syllables Names Names Surnames
Control 0% 3.27 (1.43) – – –
47–53% 3.89 (1.37) – – –
100% 4.64 (1.48) – – –
Unfamiliar – 3.83 (1.82) 3.41 (1.79) 4.03 (1.65)
Familiar – 5.15 (1.53) 4.72 (1.59) 4.61 (1.36)
Scarcity 0% 3.09 (1.44) – – –
47–53% 3.78 (1.50) – – –
100% 4.60 (1.60) – – –
Unfamiliar – 3.72 (1.87) 3.21 (1.86) 4.12 (1.64)
Familiar – 4.74 (1.66) 4.51 (1.64) 4.60 (1.46)
Note. “–” denotes that a regression term was not included in a model. The three levels of nonsense
syllables reflect association rates between syllables and English words made by participants (N = 15)
reported in Glaze (1928).
Our focal hypothesis—that scarcity would condition typically reported more liking of familiar
magnify preferences for familiar over unfamiliar objects than those in the scarcity condition.
objects—did not receive support (B’s from -0.30–
0.11; p’s from .155–.910; pseudo-R2’s from .00008– Exploratory Results
.09). Figure 1 shows scatterplots and means across
What proportion of participants preferred
conditions for all dependent variables. Table 3 lists
familiarity?. Following a reviewer’s suggestion, we
the means and standard deviations of ratings for
checked the proportion of participants whose
each group and dependent variable. In general,
personal preferences for familiarity matched the
means are quite consistent across experimental
normative preference. To do so, we examined the
groups. Any apparent moderation of ratings by
distribution of random effects of familiarity,
experimental group appears to come from
calculating the percentage of participants with a
participants in the scarcity condition disliking
random effect greater than 0. After that, we re-ran
unfamiliar objects more, rather than liking familiar
the models using only participants whose personal
options more. In fact, participants in the control
preference matched the normative preference. We
===== PAGE 9/22 =====
9
FOUR FAILURES TO DEMONSTRATE THAT SCARCITY MAGNIFIES PREFERENCE FOR FAMILIARITY
did this for all four outcomes. Across all outcomes, a variance or a considerable portion of the variance.
majority of participants’ personal preferences These results suggest that our samples were not
matched the normative preference for familiar over sufficiently powered to estimate the interaction’s
unfamiliar stimuli (from 77%–96%). Subgroup effect size using the full model.
analyses examining only participants who preferred
familiar over unfamiliar stimuli did not yield Discussion
substantively different results from the main
Recalling an experience of scarcity, versus a
analyses. The critical interaction between familiarity
recent experience, did not make participants more
and scarcity remained non-significant (p’s from
strongly prefer familiar to unfamiliar objects. These
.149–.879). These results suggest that focusing on
results do not appear to have happened because of
individual versus normative preference for
poor stimulus selection or alternative psychological
familiarity does not explain our null results.
processes of scarcity. All but one set of stimuli
Bootstrapped equivalence test. Though results
successfully recreated the normative preference for
were inconsistent with our hypothesis, failure to
familiarity, and overall rating patterns did not vary
reject a null hypothesis is not equivalent to
across experimental conditions. In addition, manual
demonstrating evidence in favor of the null. To
inspection of written responses to the manipulation
argue in favor of the null, one would need to show
showed that most participants (99%) wrote a
that results are more consistent with some prior
relevant response. It is possible that our
belief about the distribution of data (i.e., Bayesian
manipulation did not work, but our lack of a
analysis) or show that the observed effect falls
manipulation check prevents probing this
outside the range of effect sizes one considers
possibility. The manipulation has previously been
worth studying (i.e., smallest effect size of interest
found to successfully manipulate felt scarcity in the
in equivalence tests). We did not have a strong prior
same population we used (Roux et al., 2015) and
about the effect size or a smallest effect size of
follows the format of other successful manipulations
interest, so instead we bootstrapped effect sizes
of broad social constructs and mindsets (e.g., social
(R2’s) for the key interaction test for our four
power; Galinsky, Gruenfeld, & Magee, 2003; Kraus,
outcome variables. The bootstrapped estimate and
Chen, & Keltner, 2011). Hence, though a different
confidence intervals provide a sense of what the
manipulation of scarcity might better test our
true effect is likely to be, and other researchers may
hypothesis, the present results seem more
decide whether effects in this range are worth
consistent with the null hypothesis.
pursuing. We started the bootstrapping using the
In the following studies, we tested whether
full models from the confirmatory hypothesis tests.
alternative manipulations of scarcity may produce
If models consistently failed to converge, random
our predicted effect. We also tested the possibility
effects were dropped until the models consistently
that the stimuli we used—names and nonsense
converged. This process resulted in dropping
syllables—are inappropriate stimuli for testing our
random effects of experimental condition and
hypothesis. Finally, we tested whether the predicted
stimulus familiarity for the surnames outcome and
effect is inappropriate to be tested with brief
for all pairwise comparisons between syllables
experimental methods (e.g., the effect unfurls over
outcomes.
time) and instead better tested with an individual-
For surnames the average R2 was .002, 95% CI
difference approach.
[1.76e-6,.01]; for female given names, .11, 95% CI [2e-
4,.36]; for male given names, .04, 95% CI [3.75e-
5,.18]; high versus low syllables, .0005, 95% CI Study 2: A Different Manipulation of Scarcity
[4.98e-7,.002]; medium versus low syllables, .0002,
95% CI [1.59e-7,7e-4]; and high versus medium and After finishing Study 1, we became aware of a
low syllables, .001, 95% CI [1.24e-6,.005]. Clearly, the study by Litt, Reich, Maymin, and Shiv (2011) that
inclusion or exclusion of random effects made a claimed to show our effect of interest. In two
large difference in the estimates and confidence studies, the authors found that, under increased
intervals. Outcomes with simpler models indicated time pressure, participants were more likely to
that the key interaction was unlikely to account for select a strategy associated with a stimulus they had
very much variance at all. Outcomes with the full previously been made more familiar with (i.e., an
model (i.e., female and male given names) indicated incidentally familiar strategy), even though the more
that the key interaction could account for very little familiar strategy was less helpful for their goal
===== PAGE 10/22 =====
10
ANTONOPLIS & CHEN
completion. Based on these results, the authors in the hypothesized order, proceed to collect data
concluded that scarcity (here, of time) increased until we reached our informal lab standard of 100
preference for familiarity. However, by varying the participants per between-subjects condition.
utility of strategies for goal completion, the authors In total, 66 participants were recruited from
added a factor to their design, a factor for which Amazon’s Mechanical Turk and paid $0.40 for
they did not test all levels. The authors studied only completing a 4-minute study. Their demographic
the condition where the familiar is less helpful than characteristics matched typical samples on MTurk
the unfamiliar (familiar < unfamiliar), not where the (mostly White, mostly men, in their mid-30’s, had
two are equal in helpfulness (familiar = unfamiliar) or some amount of college education, and earning a
familiar is more helpful than unfamiliar (familiar > relatively low income; Buhrmester et al., 2011) and
unfamiliar). Thus, the studies do not indicate what are reported in full in Table 1. After consenting to
the baseline preference for familiarity is across participate, participants were randomly assigned to
different utilities and whether the difference a scarcity or control manipulation. Participants then
observed in the reported studies results from time read a passage instructing them to imagine a
pressure increasing preference for familiarity or hypothetical scenario for one minute. In the scarcity
lack of time pressure opening people up to the condition, participants read the following passage,
unfamiliar when it is more helpful. These studies similar to other passages used to manipulate
demonstrate only that under different amounts of scarcity (e.g., Mani et al., 2013):
time pressure participants, on average, preferred a You’re short for rent this month. You need
more familiar object at different rates. They do not about $1,000 to make it. Imagine you have the
provide information on whether participants’ opportunity to win this amount by playing some
behavior under time pressure represents a deviation small bets online. You are offered six bets, but
from standard rates of preference for familiarity. they are paired up into three pairs—and you have
To fully understand whether scarcity increases only enough money to choose one of the bets in
preference for the familiar, we conducted a similar each pair, for a total of three bets. Whichever
study to Litt et al. (2011) that examined choices three you play, winning all three guarantees you
across all possible utilities (i.e., familiar > unfamiliar, at least $1,000. The bets are presented on the
familiar = unfamiliar, familiar < unfamiliar). In following pages. Which three do you choose?
particular, we adapted the general experimental Participants in the control condition read the
design of manipulating scarcity (here, as financial following passage, which we designed to trigger a
pressure, instead of as time pressure), the familiarity sense of abundance or non-scarcity:
of possible strategies for completing the target goal Every few months you like to play some small
(here, as given names, instead of as primed bets online and treat yourself to something nice
familiarity), and the degree of helpfulness of possible with whatever you win. Imagine that this month,
strategies (here, where the more familiar strategy you’re offered six bets, but they are paired up into
could be more, equal, or less helpful, instead of only three pairs—and you can only choose one of the
less helpful). Thus, this study should not be bets in each pair, for a total of three bets.
considered a replication of Litt et al. (2011) but Whichever three you play, winning all three
instead a conceptual replication and extension guarantees you at least $1,000. The bets are
(LeBel et al., 2019). The pre-registration form, study presented on the following pages. Which three
materials, and data are available here: do you choose?
https://osf.io/2tykn/. An embedded, invisible timer in the page
required participants to spend at least thirty
Method seconds reading and imagining the passage they
were shown. After thirty seconds had passed,
After designing the experiment, we, the authors,
participants could advance to the next screen where
disagreed about the likelihood it would show the
they were presented with three pairs of bets.
hypothesized effect and so devised a stopping rule
The bets asked participants to guess the rank of
for participation based on how much money we
a male or female given name’s frequency of
were willing to spend on the study. We decided to
assignment within ±20 positions across all US
first collect data from 66 participants (33
newborns in the next calendar year. The names used
participants per between-subjects condition);
were the same as in Study 1 (familiar: Isabella,
inspect the condition means; and if the means were
Sophia, Emma, Olivia, Jacob, Ethan, Michael,
===== PAGE 11/22 =====
11
FOUR FAILURES TO DEMONSTRATE THAT SCARCITY MAGNIFIES PREFERENCE FOR FAMILIARITY
William; unfamiliar: Lilith, Charleigh, Dania, Results
Savannah, Truman, Eliezer, Reuben, Bailey). For
As pre-registered, after collecting data from
each pair of bets, participants saw a new pair of
sixty-six participants, we inspected means across
names, always chosen so that one was familiar and
conditions to determine whether participants’
the other, unfamiliar. In total, each subject saw six
choices were in the predicted directions. Overall,
of 16 possible names. Within each pair of bets, names
participants favored to bet on the more familiar
were matched on gender. Participants were
option, even when it was worth less than the
randomly assigned to see three female pairs, two
unfamiliar option. Figure 2 plots means and standard
female pairs and one male pair, one female pair and
errors of choice across experimental condition and
two male pairs, or three male pairs. Thus, for two
bet payout. Contrary to our hypothesis that scarcity
participants that saw two female pairs and one male
would increase preference for familiarity,
pair, one subject could see {Isabella vs. Lilith, Sophia
participants in the scarcity condition appeared to
vs. Charleigh, Jacob vs, Truman} and the other,
less strongly prefer the familiar option across all
{Sophia vs. Dania, Olivia vs. Savannah, Michael vs.
bets (scarcity: M =2.06, SD=0.91; control:
Bailey}. Each pair of names was randomly assigned ChooseFamiliar
M =2.31, SD=0.82) and to show a stronger
to one of the three pay rates (familiar > unfamiliar, ChooseFamiliar
decline in preference for the familiar bet across
familiar = unfamiliar, familiar < unfamiliar), and the
payouts (scarcity: from 84% choosing familiar in
order in which the three pay rates were presented
familiar > unfamiliar to 53% choosing familiar in
was randomized for each participant. This degree of
familiar < unfamiliar; control: from 88% choosing
randomization was necessary to remove any
familiar in familiar > unfamiliar to 59% choosing
potential order or pairing confounds from the
familiar in familiar < unfamiliar). Based on these
results.
patterns and our pre-registration, we ceased data
Each pair of bets was presented as follows:
collection.
Which do you play? (Both names are in the top
1000 most popular names.):
Earn [$400, $450, $350] if you guess the rank,
somewhere between 1 and 1000, of the name
[familiar name] relative to other names given to
US newborns next year (within 20 rank
positions).
Earn [$400, $350, $450] if you guess the rank,
somewhere between 1 and 1000, of the name
[unfamiliar name] relative to other names given
to US newborns next year (within 20 rank
positions).
All possible combinations of winnings totaled
more than $1000, as indicated in the initial
instructions participants read ($400 + $450 + $350 =
$1200; $400 + $450 + $450 = $1300; $400 + $350 +
$350 = $1100). Totals from winning all three bets
were equal if a subject chose all the familiar ($400 +
$450 + $350 = $1200) or all the unfamiliar bets ($400
+ $350 + $450 = $1200), so there was no monetary
incentive to prefer one over the other.
After selecting the three bets they would play, Figure 2. Bars are standard errors.
participants completed the same demographic
items as in Study 1 (race, gender, education, income, Exploratory Analyses
subjective SES) and an embedded check (i.e., “Please
Planned analyses. Per a reviewer’s suggestion, we
select ‘Strongly Agree’ for this item.”). Following our
conducted our planned statistical analyses on the
pre-registration, participants who failed the
data from 64 participants. Following the qualitative
attention check were removed from all analyses
inspection, participants, on average, preferred the
(n=2), leaving a final sample size of 64 (n =32,
Control
familiar bet to the unfamiliar bet across all
n =32).
Scarcity
===== PAGE 12/22 =====
12
ANTONOPLIS & CHEN
conditions (B=3.33 , z=3.72, p<.001, OR=27.94, 95% CI Discussion
[4.83,161.49). This preference was not significantly
As in Study 1, we failed to reject the null
stronger in the control versus scarcity condition
hypothesis per the conditions stipulated in our pre-
(B=-0.73, z=-0.61, p=.541, OR=0.48, 95% CI
registration. Thus, we again failed to demonstrate
[0.05,5.02]), and it varied linearly across the bet
that scarcity magnifies the preference for
worth conditions such that the familiar option was
familiarity. Admittedly, our manipulation was
chosen most often when it was worth more than the
slightly non-intuitive and lacked high ecological
unfamiliar option and less often when the two were
validity (who is short on rent but has enough money
equal in value or the unfamiliar option was worth
to place somewhat large bets?), and that may have
more (B=-1.00, z=-3.01, p=.003, OR=0.37, 95% CI
impacted results. Despite this, it was internally valid
[0.19,0.71]). Finally, the interaction between scarcity
in that the names used showed the expected
versus control condition and bet worth was not
familiarity bias. Moreover, being short on rent was a
significant (B=0.08, z=0.17, p=.866, OR=1.09, 95% CI
common scarcity experience described in the
[0.41,2.85]), suggesting that the scarcity condition
written responses to Study 1’s manipulation of
did not make participants more strongly prefer
scarcity. Perhaps the problem emanated from our
familiarity even when it was not in their interest to
control condition, winning extra money for a treat.
prefer familiarity.
But given that participants in Study 1 considered
What proportion of participants preferred
being short on money for critical things (e.g., rent,
familiarity?. Following Study 1, we checked the
textbooks, medical expenses) to be experiences of
proportion of participants whose personal
scarcity, trying to win money for a non-essential
preferences for familiarity matched the normative
luxury experience (a treat) would seem to be a good
preference and re-ran the main analyses using only
conceptual opposite of what MTurkers consider
these participants. One hundred percent of
experiences of scarcity. As we did not include a
participants showed the normative preference in
manipulation check, it is not possible to test how
their personal preferences. Hence, restricting
well the manipulation induced scarcity for
analyses did not eliminate any deviant participants,
participants. Another possibility is that our stimuli
and results remained as reported above, suggesting
are inappropriate. Maybe our hypothesized effect
that scarcity did not make participants more
occurs for only a subset of all possible stimuli, and
strongly prefer familiarity when it was not in their
given names lie outside that subset. Though we
interest to prefer familiarity.
weren’t sure what that subset would be, the stimuli
Equivalence test. The odds-ratio effect size
used in Zhu and Ratner (2015), who showed that
(OR=1.09) and its 95% confidence interval
scarcity magnifies individual preferences, would
([0.41,2.85]) for the interaction between scarcity and
appear to be appropriate. Hence, we adapted an
familiarity from the full model provide a simple
experimental design from Zhu and Ratner (2015) for
check of what effect sizes can be ruled out from the
a subsequent study.
present data. The confidence interval covers a very
large range of effect sizes, including both very large
negative effects (lower bound of 0.41), indicating Study 3: Alternative Stimuli
that, on average, participants in the scarcity
condition less heavily favored the familiar bet Having observed two non-significant results, we
relative to participants in the control condition as its thought it best to try a manipulation from the study
worth decreased), and very large positive effects that reported the result inspiring our study.
(upper bound of 2.85), indicating that, on average, Perhaps, the two manipulations of scarcity we had
participants in the scarcity condition more heavily used, though apparently valid in prior work, were
favored the familiar bet relative to participants in inappropriate for our research question. In addition,
the control condition as its worth decreased).Thus, the stimuli we used may have been inappropriate,
these results are not very informative about the whereas stimuli from the original report should be
range of effect sizes that can plausibly be ruled out. appropriate. Hence, we adapted the experimental
This is to be expected from the small sample size. design of Study 1 from Zhu and Ratner (2015). In
particular, we used the same “buying groceries at
the market” paradigm (described further below) and
altered the kinds of groceries available in order to
===== PAGE 13/22 =====
13
FOUR FAILURES TO DEMONSTRATE THAT SCARCITY MAGNIFIES PREFERENCE FOR FAMILIARITY
match our theoretical question (described further had some amount of college education, and earning
below). Thus, as stated in the Introduction, this a relatively low income; Buhrmester et al., 2011) and
study should not be considered a replication of Zhu are reported in full in Table 1. As we did not have a
and Ratner (2015), but instead a generalizability readily available dataset of yogurt flavor
study to normative preferences for familiarity (LeBel consumption or production, we used fruit as stimuli
et al., 2019). The pre-registration form, study instead of yogurt flavors. We thought the use of fruit
materials, and data are available here: was justified because they are a kind of food
https://osf.io/4nxrb/. typically consumed as a snack, like yogurt, and are
considered healthy, like yogurt. In addition, Zhu and
Ratner (2015) used a variety of stimuli, both food and
Method
non-food, with no apparent heterogeneity in effect
presence. Because we wanted to examine whether
Zhu and Ratner (2015) used the following
the effect extended to nomothetic preferences, we
procedure: First, participants were asked to report
did not ask participants for their fruit preferences
their preferences for four flavors of yogurt (as a rank
before choosing. Instead, we chose fruit that varied
order and rating scale from 0=not at all to 100=very
in normative familiarity.
much). Participants were then asked to imagine they
We selected fruit based on the amount consumed
were shopping for groceries and encountered a
in the US per year (USDA, 2016), how highly ranked
“Pick Any 4 Yogurts for $1” sale on yogurt.
they were according to online ranking websites
Participants were randomly assigned to one of two
(“Delicious” from Ranker.com, 2018; “Favorites” from
conditions: resource scarcity, wherein only four of
TheTopTens.com, 2018a; “Delicious” from
each yogurt flavor was available, or resource
TheTopTens.com, 2018b), and the average calories
abundance, wherein forty of each yogurt flavor
per serving of each fruit (USDA, 2016). In addition,
remained. Finally, participants selected how much
we also sought to select fruit that would be similarly
of each flavor they wanted. Examining differences
easy to eat (e.g., whether need to wash before
between participants’ favorite (=rank 1) and non-
eating, whether need to peel skin off to eat). Based
favorite yogurts (=all other ranks), Zhu and Ratner
on these criteria, we selected apples and bananas as
(2015) found that participants in the scarcity, versus
the more familiar fruit and oranges and peaches as
abundance, condition reported a larger difference
the less familiar fruit. Data for all the fruit we
between their favorite and non-favorite flavors for
considered are shown in Table 4. The fruit
both liking and share of chosen yogurts.
considered for the study were constrained by the
We altered this procedure as follows: First, we
kinds of fruit on which the USDA provided data. We
used fruits as stimuli, rather than yogurt flavors, as
considered all fruit for which the USDA provided
information on fruit familiarity, but not yogurt flavor
data (except lemons, which are rarely eaten as a
familiarity, was available. Second, we did not ask
snack in the US, where the study was conducted).
participants for their preferences regarding the fruit
Following Zhu and Ratner (2015), participants
prior to the manipulation but instead selected fruit
were told they were going to the grocery store to
to vary in their normatively defined familiarity. We
buy some snacks for the day, and that there was a
describe the experiment in greater detail below.
sale on fruit at the grocery store. The grocery store
Whereas our lab normally collects 100
was allowing customers to buy four fruit consisting
participants per between-subjects, we decided to
of any combination of apples, bananas, peaches, and
increase the number to 150 for the added statistical
oranges for $1. Customers could buy four apples for
power. Thus, we recruited three hundred
$1; two bananas and two peaches for $1; one of each
participants from Amazon’s Mechanical Turk
fruit for $1; or any other combination of the four fruit
(paying $0.25 for a two-minute study). Their
for $1. The conditions participants had been
demographic characteristics matched typical
randomly assigned to varied
samples on MTurk (mostly White, in their mid-30’s,
===== PAGE 14/22 =====
14
ANTONOPLIS & CHEN
4
elbaT
3
ydutS
rof
ilumits
tiurf
gnitceles
rof
airetirC
s
noitaredisnoC
lanoitiddA
s gnitaR
evitcejbuS
n
oitpmusnoC
seirolaC
egarevA
reknaR
neTpoT
neTpoT
noitpmusnoC
noitpmusnoC
noitaraperP
)gnivres
1(
knaR
detoV
suoicileD
suoicileD
setirovaF
knaR
)atipac/raey/sbl(
t iurF
hsaW
27
6
8
5
5
2
5.81
selppA
leeP
501
5
5
6
4
1
5.72
sananaB
hsaW
78
33.12
11
24
11
01
2.1
seirrehC
leeP
28
33
82
64
52
9
9.1
stiurfeparG
hsaW
401
76.5
2
9
6
4
1.8
separG
leeP
26
9
4
41
9
3
2.9
egnarO
hsaW
95
33.9
6
21
01
7
9.2
sehcaeP
hsaW
59
52
31
74
51
8
8.2
sraeP
tuC
28
76.6
9
4
7
6
3.7
selppaeniP
hsaW
64
33.1
1
2
1
5
8
seirrebwartS
neewteb
ohr
s’namraepS
.8102
ni
dessecca
erew
atad
gnitar
evitcejbuS
.SU
eht
ni
6102
morf
era
atad
noitpmusnoC
.etoN
lautca
dna
ecnereferp
detar
evitamron
taht
gnitacidni
,)10.
=
p(
77.
saw
knaR
detoV
egarevA
dna
knaR
noitpmusnoC
.yduts
eht
ni esu
rof
detceles
erew
stiurf
dedloB
.detaler
ylhgih
erew
noitpmusnoc
===== PAGE 15/22 =====
15
FOUR FAILURES TO DEMONSTRATE THAT SCARCITY MAGNIFIES PREFERENCE FOR FAMILIARITY
by the amount of fruit available. In the scarcity Participants could not select more than four of any
condition, there were only four of each fruit kind of fruit.
available. In the control condition, there were 40 of As expected, participants chose more familiar
each fruit available. Participants indicated how (M=1.20, SD=1.02) than unfamiliar fruit (M=0.80,
many of each fruit they wanted by writing a number SD=0.99), B=0.40, t(4.88)=4.62, p=.006, pseudo-
from one to four in empty boxes next to each fruit. R2=.82. In addition, the scarcity condition did not
The experiment was programmed such that only affect mean fruit choices across conditions
numbers could be entered into the boxes, and (scarcity: M=1.00, SD=1.08; control: M=1.00,
participants could not progress in the experiment if SD=0.95), B=0.00, t(184.7)=0.00, p=1.00, pseudo-
the sum of numbers entered did not equal four. R2=.00. Contrary to our hypothesis, preference for
After indicating their choices, participants familiar fruit was not stronger in the scarcity than
completed an instructional manipulation check (“In control condition, B=-0.02, t(184.9)=-0.16, p=.875,
the scenario you just read, about how many of each pseudo-R2=.0001. Consistent with Study 1,
kind of fruit were available at the grocery store” with participants showed nearly identical preferences for
≤ 5, 10–20, and > 35 as possible responses) and familiar (scarcity: M=1.19, SD=1.05; control: M=1.20,
reported demographic characteristics (income, SD=0.98) over unfamiliar fruits (scarcity: M=0.81,
MacArthur Ladder, education, race, gender) and an SD=1.07; control: M=0.80, SD=0.88) across our two
attention check embedded in the demographics experimental conditions. Figure 3 displays these
section (e.g., “Please selected ‘Strongly Agree’ for results.
this item.”). Per our pre-registration, participants
who failed the attention check (n=10) or answered
the instructional check incorrectly based on their
experimental condition (n=41) were excluded from
all analyses. These exclusions reduced the final
sample size to 249 individuals (n =108,
Control
n =141).
Scarcity
Results
Confirmatory Results
Due to the clustered nature of our data, we used
a multilevel model for analysis. Participants’ fruit
choices were regressed on scarcity condition (=1;
dummy-coded), whether a fruit was familiar (=1;
dummy-coded), and their interaction. We included
random intercepts and random slopes of fruit
familiarity within participants, and random
intercepts and random slopes of experimental
condition within fruits (following the logic of Study
Figure 3. Bars are standard errors.
1). Note that the random effects within fruits depart
from the pre-registration’s specification of only
Exploratory Results
random effects within participants. We made an
error in the pre-registration and report the more What proportion of participants preferred
appropriate model here (though exclusion of familiarity?. Following Study 1, we checked the
random effects within fruits does not change the proportion of participants whose personal
results). We further departed from the pre- preferences for familiarity matched the normative
registration by using a Gaussian, instead of binomial, preference and re-ran the main analyses using only
distribution. The dependent variable is a count these participants. Eighty-two percent of
variable, so a binomial distribution would have been participants showed the normative preference in
impossible to use. We did not use a Poisson their personal preferences. Restricting analyses to
distribution because our data violate a key participants who showed the normative preference
assumption of it: that the variable is unbounded. did not substantively change the results. The
===== PAGE 16/22 =====
16
ANTONOPLIS & CHEN
interaction between scarcity and familiarity Method
remained non-significant (p=.580).
Bootstrapped equivalence test. Following Study 1, Sample
we used 5000 bootstrapped resamples to estimate
Data came from the first phase of the Measuring
pseudo-R2 values for the key interaction. The mean
Morality dataset maintained by The Kenan Institute
R2 was .001, 95% CI [1.62x10-6,.007]. This suggests
for Ethics at Duke University (available at
we can rule out pseudo-R2’s larger than .007 as
https://kenan.ethics.duke.edu/attitudes/resourc
plausible effect sizes.
es/measuring-morality/). This was a nationally
representative sample of adults in the United States.
Discussion
The full sample includes data from 1,519 individuals
In a third experiment, we failed to show that (full details of demographics are reported in Table 1).
situational scarcity magnifies the preference for We selected items based on our own assessment of
familiarity. Based on prior work, our experimental whether they measured our constructs of interest.
manipulation would appear to be internally valid, We pre-registered that we planned to combine the
and our stimuli clearly are, as they replicated the items into general indices but that items might be
classic familiarity bias. In addition, our increased dropped based on low correlations with other items
sample size allowed us to find that the key in the index.
interaction between scarcity and familiarity is likely
very small, in fact much smaller than typical effect Measures
sizes in social–personality psychology (Richards et
To assess perceived material scarcity, we used an
al., 2003). Whereas Studies 1 and 2’s results may be
index of the following items: “Agree that I just don’t
explained in terms of methodological issues, the
have enough money to live the life I would like to
results of Study 3 seem to more clearly suggest that
live.” (code: ppl10018; from 1=strongly agree to
situationally induced scarcity does not magnify
5=strongly disagree; reverse-scored), “Agree that
preference for familiarity. Although we cannot rule
generally, I live from paycheck to paycheck.” (code:
out that the manipulation did not induce scarcity for
ppfs0684; from 1=strongly disagree to 4=strongly
participants, as we did not include a manipulation
agree), “How would you rate your own personal
check. Still, one possibility that remains untested is
finances these days?” (code: ppfs0679; from
that situationally induced scarcity does not alter
1=excellent to 4=poor), and “Are your personal
familiarity bias, but longer term scarcity does. We
finances getting better these days, or worse?” (code:
tested this possibility in Study 4.
ppfs0680; 1=better, 2=worse, 3=same; recoded so
that worse and same switched numerical values, and
Study 4: Individual Differences then reverse-scored). All four items were
standardized prior to averaging and showed
Whereas the apparent null effects in Studies 1–3 acceptable internal consistency (α=.73).
suggest that experimentally induced (i.e., To measure perceived time scarcity, we used an
situational) scarcity does not magnify situational index of the following items: “Agree that life is so
preference for familiarity, it remains possible that busy that I find I have less time to spend with family
longer term experiences of scarcity may be and friends.” (code: ppl10008; from 1=strongly agree
correlated with higher preference for familiarity. to 5=strongly disagree; reverse-scored), “Agree that
This would be the case if scarcity’s effect on it is hard for me to find the time to be involved in
preference for familiarity builds up over time. Then, local/community matters.” (code: ppl10009; from
repeated exposure to scarcity would be necessary in 1=strongly agree to 5=strongly disagree; reverse-
order to observe differences in preference for scored), and “Agree that it is becoming increasingly
familiarity. Hence, in a final study, we examined difficult to find the time to relax and unwind.” (code:
whether individual differences in both perceived ppl10012; from 1=strongly agree to 5=strongly
time and material scarcity correlated with individual disagree; reverse-scored). Although these items
differences in preference for novelty. The pre- differ from canonical manipulations of time scarcity
registration form, study materials, and data are wherein participants have more or less time to
available here: https://osf.io/spzv4/. complete a task (Shah et al., 2012), we thought that
as individual-difference measures of time scarcity
they are sufficient. An experience of scarcity occurs
===== PAGE 17/22 =====
17
FOUR FAILURES TO DEMONSTRATE THAT SCARCITY MAGNIFIES PREFERENCE FOR FAMILIARITY
when a person lacks sufficient resources to meet a to their face validity, we examined whether average
goal or need. Our three items all referred to responses to our three items on preference for
normatively valued goals: personal relationships, familiarity were below the scale midpoint. That is,
community involvement, and relaxing/leisure. did participants, on average, think that “look[ing] for
Thus, our items appear to satisfy the basic definition new things to try” was “not like me,” disagree that “I
of scarcity (lacking a resource—i.e., time—for valued often try new brands because I like variety,” and
goals). Moreover, people might vary in the extent to disagree that they are the first of their friends to “try
which they value these goals, but that is also true of new products and services”? Affirmations of these
the small monetary awards typical of lab studies (cf. questions would indicate average preferences to
Shah et al., 2012) and, thus, not unique to our items. avoid novelty, presumably in favor of seeking
All three items were standardized prior to averaging familiarity. To test these hypotheses, we conducted
and showed good internal consistency (α=.81). one-sample t-tests, comparing the sample mean to
To measure preference for familiarity, we used the scale midpoint (3.5 for question 1, 3 for question
the following three items: “I think it is important to 2, and 2.5 for question 3). We used one-tailed tests
do lots of different things in life. I always look for because we had directional predictions, that sample
new things to try.” (code: SV6; from 1=very much like means would be lower than the scale midpoints.
me to 6=not like me at all), “I often try new brands The mean of question 1 (“I think it is important to
because I like variety.” (code: PPADOPT2; from do lots of different things in life. I always look for
1=strongly agree to 5=strongly disagree), and “Agree new things to try.”) was 3.96 (SD = 1.29), above the
that I am usually the first of my friends to try new scale midpoint of 3.5 (p=1.00). Questions 2 and 3,
products and services.” (code: ppfs0687; from however, showed the expected levels. The mean of
1=strongly disagree to 4=strongly agree). Although question 2 (“I often try new brands because I like
we had planned to combine these items into a single variety.”) was 2.75 (SD=1.14), t(1496)=-8.33, p<.001.
index, they showed low internal consistency (α=.54), The mean of question 3 (“Agree that I am usually the
so we used them as three separate items. first of my friends to try new products and
Note that sample sizes vary across hypothesis services.”) was 1.94 (SD=0.86), t(1086)=-21.55, p<.001.
tests because some questions were not asked to all Thus, two of the familiarity preference items we
participants, some participants declined or refused selected operated as expected, and one did not.
to answer questions, and some participants Scarcity and preference for familiarity. Table 5
reported being unsure of their response. We displays bivariate correlations between time and
recoded any responses of “Not asked”, “Refused”, material scarcity and the three measures of
“Not applicable”, and “Not sure” as missing because preference for familiarity. Evidence in favor of our
they were not substantive responses. hypothesis would be a statistically significant
negative correlation between the scarcity and
Results familiarity measures. No such correlations were
Confirmatory Results obtained. Thus, we failed to reject the null
hypothesis across all six hypothesis tests.
Checking preference for familiarity. To check
that we had selected appropriate items, in addition
===== PAGE 18/22 =====
18
ANTONOPLIS & CHEN
Table 5
Correlations between scarcity and familiarity preference (Study 4)
Scarcity
Time Material
Items for Familiarity Preference r p 95% CI r p 95% CI
I think it is important to do lots of
different things in life. I always look for .03 .209 [-.02,.08] -.03 .212 [-.08,.02]
new things to try.
I often try new brands because I like
.08 .002 [.03,.13] .02 .472 [-.03,.07]
variety.
Agree that I am usually the first of my
.05 .113 [-.01,.11] .00 .921 [-.06,.06]
friends to try new products and services.
===== PAGE 19/22 =====
19
FOUR FAILURES TO DEMONSTRATE THAT SCARCITY MAGNIFIES PREFERENCE FOR FAMILIARITY
Exploratory Results Equivalence test. The correlation effect sizes (r’s
in Table 5) and their 95% confidence intervals (95%
Alternative measures of scarcity. Prior research
CI in Table 5) provide a simple check of what effect
on scarcity has used traditional measures of social
sizes can be ruled out from the present data. The
class (e.g., income, “mouths to feed”) as indicators of
confidence intervals cover a relatively small range of
scarcity (i.e., Mani et al., 2013; Shah et al., 2015). The
effect sizes, from r=-.06 to r=.13. This suggests we
logic supporting this usage is that people with fewer
can rule out r’s outside of the range of -.06–.13 as
resources in general are also likely to have fewer
plausible effect sizes. In addition, relative to other
resources than they need. Hence, we estimated
effect sizes in social–personality psychology, these
post-hoc correlations between “mouths to feed”
fall near or below the 33rd percentile, suggesting
(household income / sqrt(family size)) and our three
that the effect of scarcity on familiarity, assuming it
measures of preference for familiarity. Again,
is not null, is smaller than most effects in social–
scarcity, as “mouths to feed,” was uncorrelated with
personality psychology.
preference for familiarity (r’s from -.01–.05, p’s from
.77–1.00).
Discussion
What proportion of participants preferred
familiarity?. Following Study 1, we checked the Taking an individual differences approach, we
proportion of participants whose personal found that participants preferred familiarity to
preferences for familiarity matched the normative novelty and that scarcity, both as time and material
preference and re-ran the main analyses using only scarcity, did not magnify this preference. Consistent
these participants. Thirty-five percent of with Study 3, an equivalence test suggested that the
participants disagreed that it was important to try effect of scarcity on familiarity bias, to the extent
new things in life. Forty-two percent disagreed that that it exists, is very small. These results cohere with
they tried new brands because they like variety. our experimental results from Studies 1–3. In
Seventy-five percent disagreed that they were the aggregate, these results suggest that scarcity does
first of their friends to try new products and not increase preference for familiarity in states or in
services. longer term attitudes.
Analyzing data for only participants who showed
the expected preferences for familiarity, material
General Discussion
scarcity was significantly negatively correlated with
thinking it is important to try new things in life (r=-
Across four pre-registered studies, we failed to
.09, p=.045, N=512) and with being the first of one’s
find evidence for the hypothesis that scarcity
friends to try new products and services (r=-.08,
polarizes preferences for familiarity. Three studies
p=.030, N=818), but not with trying new brands
tested this experimentally, using diverse stimuli and
because of taste for variety (r-.00, p=.966, N=619).
manipulations. A fourth tested it using an individual
These results suggest that people experiencing
differences approach. Although perhaps surprising
greater material scarcity had a relatively stronger
given prior research (Zhu & Ratner, 2015), these null
preference for familiarity. However, the p-values
results help identify a potential boundary condition
were quite high, higher than would be expected if
of when scarcity polarizes preferences. In
these were true effects (Simonsohn et al., 2014), so
particular, scarcity may yield this effect only at the
we are not entirely sure they are real. Time scarcity
idiographic level. When people experience scarcity,
was not significantly correlated with thinking it is
versus abundance, they may exhibit stronger
important to try new things in life (r=.02, p=.614,
preferences for things they themselves already like,
N=497) or trying new products and services before
and not for things that are generally liked across
one’s friends (r=.01, p=.681, N=797), but was
people.
significantly positively related to trying new brands
Beyond the possibility that idiographic
because of taste for variety (r=.09, p=.022, N=604).
preferences are key to the predicted effect of
That is, people who reported experiencing more
scarcity increasing the familiarity bias, why else
time scarcity exhibited a preference for novelty:
might we have observed these null results? We do
They were more likely to report trying new brands
not suspect it is an issue of study design. Poor
trying new brands because of taste for variety. If
stimulus selection cannot explain these failures, as
real, this is in the opposite of our predicted
we consistently found evidence for a normative
direction.
===== PAGE 20/22 =====
20
ANTONOPLIS & CHEN
preference for familiarity (seven of nine dependent a shot when one has limited shots) and cease when
variables showed the effect). In addition, we do not the situation changes (e.g., considering strategies
expect that we poorly operationalized scarcity. For for future rounds, an unrelated cognitive control
one, our operationalizations map onto the definition task). Given that we studied a secondary effect (the
of scarcity pretty well (e.g., not having enough time primary effects being typical mediators like stress,
or money or options to satisfy all of one’s desires). arousal, etc.), our hypothesis may have been
Second, several of our operationalizations of doomed from the start. Still, at least one version of
scarcity were used in prior research that found the hypothesis has received empirical support (i.e.,
effects of scarcity on psychological outcomes and the idiographic approach; Zhu & Ratner, 2015), so
used manipulation checks to assess the key future research should determine the robustness of
assumption that they induced an experience or these original results.
perception of scarcity (with all p’s < .001; Litt et al.,
2011; Roux et al., 2015; Zhu & Ratner, 2015). Of Conclusion
course, we cannot fully rule out the possibility that
We failed to find support for the hypothesis that
our manipulations may have failed to induce a
scarcity magnifies the preference for familiarity.
psychological experience of scarcity, due to our not
These results may help place a boundary on prior
including manipulation checks. Third, we used both
work showing similar results (Zhu & Ratner, 2015). At
experimental and correlational designs, suggesting
the very least, they identify for other researchers a
the null result is not a feature of study type.
hypothesis that is unlikely to be generative or,
One possible explanation is low power. Studies 3
alternatively, demonstrate several sub-optimal tests
and 4, which had the largest sample sizes of all of our
of the hypothesis, which future researchers can
studies, suggested that the key effect was quite
know to avoid.
small, to the extent that it existed at all. In particular,
Study 3’s results suggested that the key effect was a
pseudo-R2 of .001, 95% CI [1.62x10-6,.007], and Author Contact
Study 4’s results suggested that the key effect was
an r from -.06–.13 (R2 from .004–.017). None of our Stephen Antonoplis, antonoplis@berkeley.edu,
studies was designed to detect an effect that small. Department of Psychology, University of California,
To the extent that methodological issues do not Berkeley, CA 94720, U.S.A.
explain the null results, a theoretical explanation is
possible, too. In particular, it may be the case that
Acknowledgements
scarcity does not have “secondary” effects in the
sense that it does not impact thoughts, feelings, or
The authors thank members of the Self, Identity,
behaviors that are not relevant to the immediate
and Relationships lab for their feedback on this
context in which scarcity was experienced. Some
project.
recent work on scarcity has begun to suggest that
scarcity may not have such “secondary” effects. For
instance, Camerer et al. (2018) failed to replicate the
Conflict of Interest and Funding
finding that a brief experience of scarcity reduced
cognitive control on a subsequent, unrelated task The authors hold no known conflicts of interest
(i.e., ego depletion; originally reported as Study 1 in
relevant to this work. S. Antonoplis was funded by a
Shah et al., 2012). In response, Shah et al. (2018)
NSF Graduate Research Fellowship, Grant Number
replicated every study from their own 2012 paper
DGE 1752814.
and found that none of scarcity’s secondary effects
replicated. These included the aforementioned
depletion effect, as well as neglect of future Author Contributions
demands and neglect of details helpful for future
tasks, but not the immediate task. Shah et al. (2018) S.A. and S.C. conceived the project and designed
did, however, replicate all of the “primary” effects of the studies jointly. S.A. conducted data analyses and
scarcity (i.e., greater present focus, more over- drafted the manuscript, with critical feedback from
borrowing). These failures to replicate suggest that S.C.
scarcity’s effects may be limited to the immediate Open Science Practices
situation at hand (e.g., spending more time focusing
===== PAGE 21/22 =====
21
FOUR FAILURES TO DEMONSTRATE THAT SCARCITY MAGNIFIES PREFERENCE FOR FAMILIARITY
Journal of Genetic Psychology, 35(2), 255–269.
https://doi.org/10.1080/08856559.1928.10532
156
Gorn, G., Pham, M. T., & Sin, L. Y. (2001). When
arousal influences ad evaluation and valence
This article earned the Preregistration+, Open
does not (and vice versa). Journal of Consumer
Data and the Open Materials badge for
Psychology, 11(1), 43–55.
preregistering the hypothesis and analysis before
Griskevicius, V., Ackerman, J. M., Cantu, S. M.,
data collection, and for making the data and
Delton, A. W., Robertson, T. E., Simpson, J. A.,
materials openly available. It has been verified that
Thompson, M. E., & Tybur, J. M. (2013). When
the analysis reproduced the results presented in the
the Economy Falters, Do People Spend or
article. The entire editorial process, including the
Save? Responses to Resource Scarcity Depend
open reviews, is published in the online supplement.
on Childhood Environments. Psychological
Science, 24(2), 197–205.
References https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797612451471
Johnson, R. C., Thomson, C. W., & Frincke, G. (1960).
Bargh, J. A. (1992). Does subliminality matter to Word values, word frequency, and visual
social psychology? Awareness of the stimulus duration thresholds. Psychological Review,
versus awareness of its influence. In R.F. 67(5), 332.
Bornstein & T. S. Pittman (Eds.), Perception Kraus, M. W., Chen, S., & Keltner, D. (2011). The
without awareness: Cognitive, clinical, and power to be me: Power elevates self-concept
social perspectives (pp. 236–255). Guilford consistency and authenticity. Journal of
Press. Experimental Social Psychology, 47(5), 974–
Bornstein, Robert F. (1989). Exposure and Affect: 980. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jesp.2011.03.017
Overview and Meta-Analysis ofResearch, 1968- LeBel, E. P., Vanpaemel, W., Cheung, I., & Campbell,
1987. Psychological Bulletin, 106(2), 265–289. L. (2019). A Brief Guide to Evaluate
Buhrmester, M., Kwang, T., & Gosling, S. D. (2011). Replications. Meta-Psychology, 3, 9.
Amazon’s Mechanical Turk: A New Source of Litt, A., Reich, T., Maymin, S., & Shiv, B. (2011).
Inexpensive, Yet High-Quality, Data? Pressure and Perverse Flights to Familiarity.
Perspectives on Psychological Science, 6(1), 3– Psychological Science, 22(4), 523–531.
5. https://doi.org/10.1177/1745691610393980 https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797611400095
Camerer, C. F., Dreber, A., Holzmeister, F., Ho, T.- Mani, A., Mullainathan, S., Shafir, E., & Zhao, J.
H., Huber, J., Johannesson, M., Kirchler, M., (2013). Poverty impedes cognitive function.
Nave, G., Nosek, B. A., Pfeiffer, T., Altmejd, A., Science, 341(6149), 976–980.
Buttrick, N., Chan, T., Chen, Y., Forsell, E., Mano, H. (1992). Judgments under distress:
Gampa, A., Heikensten, E., Hummer, L., Imai, T., Assessing the role of unpleasantness and
… Wu, H. (2018). Evaluating the replicability of arousal in judgment formation. Organizational
social science experiments in Nature and Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 52(2),
Science between 2010 and 2015. Nature Human 216–245.
Behaviour, 2(9), 637–644. Mano, H. (1994). Risk-taking, framing effects, and
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-018-0399-z affect. Organizational Behavior and Human
Galinsky, A. D., Gruenfeld, D. H., & Magee, J. C. Decision Processes, 57, 38–58.
(2003). From Power to Action. Journal of Montoya, R. M., Horton, R. S., Vevea, J. L.,
Personality and Social Psychology, 85(3), 453– Citkowicz, M., & Lauber, E. A. (2017). A re-
466. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022- examination of the mere exposure effect: The
3514.85.3.453 influence of repeated exposure on recognition,
Gino, F., & Pierce, L. (2009). The abundance effect: familiarity, and liking. Psychological Bulletin,
Unethical behavior in the presence of wealth. 143(5), 459–498.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision https://doi.org/10.1037/bul0000085
Processes, 109(2), 142–155. Mullainathan, S., & Shafir, E. (2013). Scarcity: Why
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.obhdp.2009.03.003 having too little means so much. Times
Glaze, J. A. (1928). The Association Value of Non- Books/Henry Holt and Co.
Sense Syllables. The Pedagogical Seminary and
===== PAGE 22/22 =====
22
ANTONOPLIS & CHEN
Muthukrishnan, A. V., Wathieu, L., & Xu, A. J. (2009). Zajonc, R. B. (2001). Mere Exposure: A Gateway to
Ambiguity Aversion and the Preference for the Subliminal. Current Directions in
Established Brands. Management Science, Psychological Science, 10(6), 224–228.
55(12), 1933–1941. Zhu, M., & Ratner, R. K. (2015). Scarcity Polarizes
https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.1090.1087 Preferences: The Impact on Choice Among
Oppenheimer, D. M. (2004). Spontaneous Multiple Items in a Product Class. Journal of
discounting of availability in frequency Marketing Research, 52(1), 13–26.
judgment tasks. Psychological Science, 15(2), https://doi.org/10.1509/jmr.13.0451
100–105.
Piketty, T. (2014). Capital in the Twenty-First
Century. Harvard University Press.
R Core Team. (2019). R: A language and
environment for statistical computing. R
Foundation for Statistical Computing.
https://www.R-project.org/
Ranker.com. (2018). The Most Delicious Fruits.
https://www.ranker.com/list/most-
delicious-fruits/analise.dubner
Roux, C., Goldsmith, K., & Bonezzi, A. (2015). On the
Psychology of Scarcity: When Reminders of
Resource Scarcity Promote Selfish (and
Generous) Behavior. Journal of Consumer
Research, ucv048.
https://doi.org/10.1093/jcr/ucv048
Shah, A. K., Mullainathan, S., & Shafir, E. (2012).
Some Consequences of Having Too Little.
Science, 338(6107), 682–685.
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1222426
Shah, Anuj K, Mullainathan, S., & Shafir, E. (2018). An
exercise in self-replication: Replicating Shah,
Mullainathan, and Shafir (2012). 15.
Shah, Anuj K., Shafir, E., & Mullainathan, S. (2015).
Scarcity frames value. Psychological Science,
26(4), 402–412.
Simonsohn, U., Nelson, L. D., & Simmons, J. P.
(2014). P-Curve: A Key to the File-Drawer.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
143(2), 534–547.
TheTopTens.com. (2018a). Top Ten Favorite Fruits.
https://www.thetoptens.com/favorite-fruits/
TheTopTens.com. (2018b). Top Ten Most Delicious
Fruits. https://www.thetoptens.com/most-
delicious-fruits/
USDA. (2016). Fruit and Tree Nut Yearbook Tables.
https://www.ers.usda.gov/data-
products/fruit-and-tree-nut-data/fruit-and-
tree-nut-yearbook-
tables/#Supply%20and%20Utilization
Zajonc, R. B. (1968). Attitudinal effects of mere
exposure. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 9(2p2), 1.