
===== PAGE 1/19 =====
Meta-Psychology,2022,vol6,MP.2020.2601 Opendata:Yes Editedby:AlexO.Holcombe
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2020.2601 Openmaterials:Yes Reviewedby:JasonM.Chin,HannahFraser
Articletype:OriginalArticle Openandreproducibleanalysis:Yes Analysisreproducedby:LucijaBatinovi´c
PublishedundertheCC-BY4.0license Openreviewsandeditorialprocess:Yes AllsupplementaryfilescanbeaccessedatOSF:
Preregistration:Yes https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/HA6KD
Better Understanding the Population Size and
Stigmatization of Psychologists Using
Questionable Research Practices
Nicholas W. Fox
Rutgers University, New Brunswick, New Jersey, USA
Nathan Honeycutt
Rutgers University, New Brunswick, New Jersey, USA
Lee Jussim
Rutgers University, New Brunswick, New Jersey, USA
Abstract
Therehasbeenlowconfidenceinthereplicabilityandreproducibilityofpublishedpsychologicalfindings. Previous
work has demonstrated that a population of psychologists exists that have used questionable research practices
(QRPs),orbehaviorsduringdatacollection,analysis,andpublicationthatcanincreasethenumberoffalse-positive
findings in the scientific literature. Across two survey studies, we sought to estimate the current size of the QRP-
usingpopulationofAmericanpsychologistsandtoidentifyifthissub-populationofscientistsisstigmatized. Usinga
self-reportdirectestimator,weestimateapproximately18%ofAmericanpsychologistshaveusedatleastoneQRPin
thepast12months. Wethendemonstratetheuseoftwoadditionalestimators: theunmatchedcountestimate(an
indirectself-reportestimator)andthegeneralizednetworkscaleupmethod(anindirectsocialnetworkestimator).
Additionally,attitudesofpsychologiststowardsQRPusers,andegonetworkdatacollectedfromself-reportedQRP
users, suggest that QRP users are a stigmatized sub-population of psychologists. Together, these findings provide
insightintohowmanypsychologistsareusingquestionablepracticesandhowtheyexistinthesocialenvironment.
Keywords: QuestionableResearchPractices,QRPs,ReplicationCrisis,SocialNetworks,Stigma,PersonPerception
Introduction In pursuing these tasks, the researcher has many deci-
sions to make: How many observations will I collect?
It is the psychology researcher’s job to generate the-
How will I operationalize my variables? What is my
ories, test hypotheses, collect and interpret data, inter-
population of interest for this given study? Should I
pret results, and to publish their findings. This is all
excludeanyobservationsfromthefinalanalysis?
done to learn more about the world and how it works.
Each decision point is a “researcher degree of free-
===== PAGE 2/19 =====
2
dom” (Simmons et al., 2011) with the potential to in- Without reporting all dependent measures, readers are
troduceerrorandbias. Sincethereisahighlevelofam- left with a false impression of the research activity un-
biguity in academic research, these degrees of freedom derlyingthereportedfindings. ThisestimatefromJohn
can be resolved in a variety of ways. In reviewing how et al. (2012) was contested by Fiedler and Schwarz
researchers handle outlying observations, Simmons et (2016). In their conceptual replication that used dif-
al. (2011) found different research groups made dif- ferentlywordedquestions,adifferentconceptualization
ferent decisions on what was most correct. When re- of “prevalence”, and tested a German (as opposed to
searchers cleaned their data and removed participants an American) cohort of psychologists, they found less
who made responses that were “too fast”, some de- than10%prevalenceofthesamequestionablepractice
fined this as two standard deviations below the mean (omitting dependent variables). Agnoli et al. (2017)
response speed, some defined this as any observation recentlyreplicatedtheoriginalJohnetal. (2012)study
smaller than 200 milliseconds, and others removed the in an Italian cohort of psychologists and found some-
fastest 2.5% of observations. None of these definitions what higher levels of QRP use (47.9% of respondents
are an inherently incorrect interpretation of “too fast”, had omitted dependent variables, see Table 1). Conse-
which creates a problem – without clear standards of quently, there is currently no consensus on the preva-
reporting in place, this type of flexible decision making lenceofQRPuseinpsychology.
can blur the lines between what decision is right, what Given these inconsistencies in assessing the preva-
decisionproducesadesiredresult,andwhatdecisionis lence of questionable research practices, the present
mostlikelytohelpafindinggetpublished. work seeks to expand on this existing literature in sev-
Therearemany“researcherdegreesoffreedom”that eral ways. First, we investigate current QRP users, op-
exploit the grey areas of acceptable practice and may erationalized as an “individual” who has used at least
bias research findings (John et al., 2012; Wicherts et oneofnineQRPs“inthepast12months”. Thisisdiffer-
al., 2016). Some examples include trying different entfromthepreviousliteratureasitshiftstheattention
ways to score the chosen primary dependent variable to individuals who perform questionable practices and
and deciding how to deal with outlying observations awayfromthebehaviorasaconcept.
in an ad hoc manner. Ten of these types of behav- Second,itaddressestherecentuseofQRPsbydefin-
iorshavebeencollectivelycalled“questionableresearch ing behaviors performed within a specified time period
practices” (QRPs) and have been defined as behaviors of one year. Previous work estimating QRP prevalence
duringdatacollection,analysis,andreportingthathave has done so by either estimating lifetime prevalence or
the potential to increase false-positive findings in the via estimating frequency of QRP use, both providing
publishedscientificliterature. Forthisstudy,nineofthe limited insight on recent use of questionable research
tenQRPswereconsidered(Table1). Wedidnotinclude practices. Put another way, knowing whether a re-
“fabricateddata”(QRPitem10)astheauthorsconsider searcherhasusedaQRPatsomepointduringtheirca-
this a fraudulent, not questionable, behavior. Not only reerdoesnottellusmuchabouthowmanyresearchers
canQRPuseincreasethenumberoffalse-positivefind- currently use QRPs, nor does it provide an accurate es-
ings(e.g.,takinga“non-significant”resultandpushing timateofthesizeofthecurrentQRP-usingpopulation.
it over a threshold into being "significant"), but using A third unique contribution of the present research
multipleQRPscanalsoinfluencethereportedeffectsize is that it addresses prevalence of QRP users with three
of a given finding due to sampling bias and low power different estimating methodologies. One is a direct es-
(Button et al., 2013). Thus, QRP use can lead to field- timate heavily based on prior research (Agnoli et al.,
wide interpretations of findings that are not warranted 2017; Fiedler and Schwarz, 2016; John et al., 2012).
bythedata. We directly ask researchers if they had used any of the
9behaviorsassessedinTable1atleastonceinthepast
PrevalenceofQuestionableResearchPracticeUsers 12months.
PreviousworktoestimatetheprevalenceofQRPuse
Consideroneofthemostbasicquestionstoaskabout
inpsychologyhasalsoreliedondirectself-reportofbe-
the current replication crisis in psychology: How many
havior from participants. It is well known that asking
peoplearecontributingtoit? Johnetal. (2012)found
participants to self-report on their socially undesirable
63%ofpsychologistsadmittedtopublishingworkwith-
behaviors can lead to an underestimation, as partici-
outallthedependentmeasuresincluded(atsomepoint
pants can lie about their behaviors to researchers to
in their academic career). As articulated by Simmons
avoid potential negative consequences of their actions
et al. (2011), this is highly problematic, as increasing
(Fisher, 1993; Holbrook and Krosnick, 2010; Salganik
thenumberofdependentvariablesiscorrelatedwithan
and Heckathorn, 2004). Even when survey responses
increaseintheprobabilityoffindingasignificantresult.
===== PAGE 3/19 =====
3
Table1
The10behaviorscommonlydescribedas"questionableresearchpractices",includingpreviousestimatesoftheprevalence
ofthesebehaviorsacrossparticipants’careersfromJohnetal. (2012)&Agnolietal. (2017). Items1-9areusedinthe
presentwork,asitem10,falsifyingdata,isfraudulentbehaviorratherthanquestionable.
QuestionableResearchPractice John et al. (2012) Agnoli et al. (2017)
prevalence estimate prevalence estimate
(US sample, control (Italiansample)
group)
1 Failingtoreportallofastudy’sdependentmeasures 63.4% 47.9%
2 Collecting more data after looking to see if the results 55.9% 53.2%
weresignificant
3 Failingtoreportallofastudy’sconditions 27.7% 16.4%
4 Stopping data collection earlier than planned because 15.6% 10.4%
onefoundtheresultonewaslookingfor
5 Roundingoffp-valuestoachievesignificance 22.0% 22.2%
6 Selectivelyreportingstudiesthat"worked" 45.8% 40.1%
7 Deciding whether to exclude observations after seeing 38.2% 39.7%
theeffectofdoingsoontheresults
8 Reporting unexpected findings as being predicted from 27.0% 37.4%
thestart
9 Reporting results are unaffected by demographics 3.0% 3.1%
whenactuallyunsureornottested
10 Falsifyingdata 0.6% 2.3%
arecompletelyanonymous,manyparticipantsmayfeel Stigmatization of Questionable Research Practice
pressuretorespondinthesociallydesirableway(Maki- Users
motoetal.,2001). Forthisreason,wefeltitwasimpor-
The term “stigma” was formally described by Erving
tanttoattempttoaddressthisknownbiasbyusingtwo
Goffman as “an attribute that makes [a person] differ-
different indirect methods of estimation, in addition to
ent from others in a category of persons available for
theself-reportestimate.
[them] to be, and of a less desirable kind” (Goffman,
The first indirect method, called the unmatched
1963). Goffman describes two states of a stigmatized
count technique, is an estimating technique aimed at
identity: “discredited”,wherethestigmatizingattribute
reducingsocialdesirabilityresponsebiasinself-reports
isoutwardlyidentifiabletostrangers(i.e.,race,gender,
(Arentoft et al., 2016) (see Method for details). The
physical handicap – sometimes referred to as “spoiled
second method generates an indirect estimate of the
identities”),and“discreditable”,wherethestigmatizing
population size of QRP users by using social network
attribute can be concealed from others (i.e., sexual ori-
information from the general population of psycholo-
entation, medical condition, certain mental disorders,
gists (Jing et al., 2014; McCormick et al., 2010; Sal-
behaviors). Since discredited people suffer from a re-
ganik et al., 2011; Zheng et al., 2006), circumventing
duced social status, it is potentially beneficial for dis-
the need for a participant to report on their own be-
creditable people to conceal their stigmatized attribute
haviorentirely. Neithertheunmatchedcounttechnique
and to continue being considered “normal” (Goffman,
nor this social network method require participants to
1963). This is controlled through the process of im-
identifyasbelongingtoapotentiallystigmatizedgroup
pression management, where the actor (a person with
(i.e., QRP users), thereby reducing the risk of socially
a concealable stigma) communicates with an audience
desirable response bias compared to more traditional
(others in a social group unaware of the actor’s “true”
direct estimates. While network methods are expected
identity) in a manner to convince the audience of the
to provide insights into QRP use prevalence, they have
appropriateness of their assumed role in society (Goff-
yettobeusedinpsychology. Thus, thisworkproduced
man,1959).
threeestimatesofQRPuseprevalence.
Reactions towards stigmatized members of society
candifferdependingontheperceivedcontrollabilitythe
stigmatizedindividualhasovertheirstigma. Forexam-
ple,peoplewithlungcancertendtobeblamedmorefor
===== PAGE 4/19 =====
4
their condition compared to other cancer patients due theoretical domains: attribution theory and stigma, so-
to the link between cigarette smoking (a controllable cialnormsandstigma,fearandstigma,andpowerand
behavior) and lung cancer (Chapple et al., 2004). This stigma(Stuberetal.,2008). Thesedomainsareimpor-
effect persists even if the individual with lung cancer tantforunderstandingifQRPuseisstigmatizedbypsy-
never smoked. Corrigan (2000) describes differing af- chologists. For instance, population members may fear
fective responses by population members towards stig- that QRP users will damage the reputation of psychol-
matized individuals depending on whether or not that ogyasascientificfieldandthuslookdownonthosewho
person is responsible for their stigma. Those seen as they perceive to be negative contributors. Additionally,
responsible are met with anger and potential punish- LinkandPhalen(2001)arguethatindividualswhoare
ment, while those seen as not responsible are met with stigmatized must have less power than those doing the
pity and potential helping behaviors. QRP use could stigmatizing,whichisinvestigatedinthisstudy.
be framed as either externally or internally attributed. In addition to measuring the attitudes of the gen-
OnecouldarguethatQRPuseisaninevitableoutcome eralpopulationofpsychologiststowardsQRPusers,this
ofworkinginastressfulacademiccareerwheresuccess studyalsomeasuressocialwithdrawalandselectivedis-
ismeasuredinscientificoutput(here,QRPuseisexter- closurebehaviorsofself-identifiedQRPusers. Byusing
nally attributed to stress). It could also be argued that this two-pronged approach, this study attempts to an-
QRPs are only used by those unfit to be academics and swerthefollowingresearchquestions:
result to using QRPs to make up for their own inade-
1. AreQRPusersstigmatizedbythegeneralpopula-
quacies (here, QRP use is internally attributed to low
tionofpsychologists?
ability).
There are ways that stigmatized individuals may at-
2. DoQRPusersbehaveasastigmatizedgroup?
tempt to manage their identity while minimizing neg-
ative effects. One way is through social withdrawal. Better understanding the size of the QRP-using popula-
By interacting with fewer people, there are fewer mo- tion of psychologists, and how psychologists view their
ments when a concealed identity can be revealed (Ilic peersusingQRPs,willsetafoundationforfutureinter-
et al., 2014). Another way is through selective disclo- ventionsaimedatreducingQRPuse.
sure of their stigmatized identity. Selective disclosure
totrustedothers(oftenthosewhosharethisconcealed Study1: SizingtheQRP-UsingPopulationof
identity) is an adaptive identity management strategy Psychologists
– it allows the stigmatized individual to control their
Methods
social interactions in a beneficial way and reduces stig-
matizing experiences. Social withdrawal, on the other Preregistration statement. This study, which de-
hand,dependsmorefromtheindividualbyaskingthem scribes three estimates of QRP prevalence in the US
tocontinuouslymonitortheirsocialnetworkandantic- psychologist population, was preregistered on May
ipate their potential social interactions. This additional 15, 2017. The preregistration is available here:
burdenresultsinworsementalhealthoutcomesandno https://osf.io/xu25n.
reductioninstigmatizingexperiences(Ilicetal.,2014). Populationofinterestandtargetgroup. Thepop-
ConsideringthepotentialstigmatizationofQRPusers ulation of interest for this work was all tenured or
is important: determining if QRP users are stigmatized tenure-trackresearchersassociatedwithaPhD-granting
willenablethedevelopmentofinterventionsthateither psychologydepartmentintheUnitedStates. QRPusers
decrease or increase stigmatization. It is generally ac- (thetargetgroup)arethereforeasubgroupofthispop-
cepted that increased stigmatization of tobacco smok- ulation,withasizegreaterthanzeroandmaximallythe
ers has decreased the number of people who smoke sizeofthepopulationofinterest.
(Bayer, 2008), though it is unclear whether the group Acompletelistofnamesandcontactinformationfor
or the individual should bear more of the stigma bur- the population of interest was obtained via private cor-
den(Courtwright,2013). Forthesereasons,itisimpor- respondence with Dr. Leslie John (John et al., 2012).
tanttofirstunderstandhowQRPusersexistwithintheir The list provided was current as of 2010, so name and
socialenvironmentpriortoimplementinginterventions email contact data was updated in May, 2017 as this
aimedtoreduceQRPuse. research program was beginning. This was done by
To assess whether QRP use is stigmatizing, we at- reviewing the faculty at each PhD-granting psychology
tempt to measure stigma in two ways. First, we assess departmentintheUnitedStatesandthenaddingorre-
the attitudes held by the general population of Ameri- movingindividualsasappropriate.
can psychologists towards QRP users, focusing on four
===== PAGE 5/19 =====
5
Surveydistribution. Membersofthepopulationof social network was only 150 individuals, that respon-
interest were invited via email to participant in a brief dent would be excluded from analysis. Two hundred
survey on personal social network size and attitudes ninetynine(49%)participantsidentifiedasfemale,279
towards researchers. All invitations were sent and all (46%) identified as male, and 19 (3%) chose not to
surveyswereadministeredusingtheQualtricswebtool identify their gender. One hundred thirty one (21%)
(Qualtrics,2005). Allmembersofthepopulationofin- participantsidentifiedasAssistantProfessor,141(23%)
terest (N = 7,101) were solicited via email to partici- identifiedasAssociateProfessor,and208(34%)identi-
pate. Emails were sent in 10 waves, with each wave fiedasFullProfessor. Onehundredthirteenparticipants
consistingof200-400invitations. Allinitialemailswere chosenottodisclosetheirtenurelevel.
sent to potential participants on a Thursday, and a sin-
gle follow-up “reminder” email was sent on the follow- EstimatingMethods
ing Monday. Participants who had finished the survey
Estimate1: directestimate. Theself-reportdirect
were sent a “thank you” email on the Thursday follow-
estimate involved asking members of the target popu-
ing the initial solicitation. All invitations were sent be-
lation whether they have used at least one QRP in the
tweenSeptember2017andDecember2017.
past12months,andwascalculatedasthenumberofre-
Three surveys were distributed simultaneously. This
spondentswhoself-identifiedasusingatleastoneQRP
was to facilitate the different types of direct and in-
dividedbythetotalnumberofrespondents.
direct estimates that will be described in the follow-
Estimate2: unmatchedcounttechniqueestimate.
ing sections. Surveys 1 and 2 were each distributed
The unmatched count technique (UCT) is an indirect
to 1,775 members of the population of interest. Sur-
way of measuring base rates of concealable and poten-
vey 3 was distributed to 3,551 members of the popu-
tially stigmatized identities (Gervais and Najle, 2017).
lation of interest. Survey 3 included the self-report di-
In this estimate, two groups of participants are given a
rectestimator. Tomaximizethenumberofself-reported
list of innocuous items that could apply to them (e.g.,
QRP users observed that would then receive additional
I own a dishwasher; I exercise regularly). The list of
questions about their social networks, we distributed
items for both groups is the same except for one addi-
Survey 3 to half of the total 7,101 population mem-
tional item that one group receives and the other does
bers and split the remaining half between Surveys 1
not. This extra item asks about the concealable iden-
and 2. All surveys included relevant instructions and
tity (e.g., I own a dishwasher; I exercise regularly; I
definitions(i.e.,definingbehaviorsidentifiedasQRPs).
smoke crack cocaine – examples from Gervais and Na-
See https://osf.io/2zwqf/ for the survey materials dis-
jle, 2017). See Table 2 for the full list of items used.
tributed as well as supplemental materials which de-
Participants are asked to count and report the number
scribesthedeviationsfromthepreregistration.
ofitemsinthelistthatapplytothem. Atnopointdoesa
In these surveys, “QRP use” was defined as having
participantidentifywhichitemstheyarecounting. The
usedatleastoneofthenineQRPsinTable1inthepast
proportion of participants that identify with the extra
12months. Similarly,a“QRPuser”wasdefinedasaper-
item is calculated as the mean difference between the
sonwhohasusedatleastoneofthenineitemsinTable
innocuousandconcealableidentitylists.
1 (excluding item 10 for reasons described previously)
Estimate 3: generalized network scale up esti-
in the past 12 months. Participants were presented the
mate. Networkmethodsestimatepopulationsizesus-
definition of QRP use at the start of the survey and the
inginformationaboutthepersonalnetworksofrespon-
definitionwasalwaysavailablebyhoveringovertextin
dents, basedontheassumptionthatpersonalnetworks
thesurveybyusingtheircomputermouse.
are, on average, representative of the population (Sal-
Survey responses. Ofthe7,101emailsolicitations
ganik et al., 2011). Each participant’s social network
sent, 214 emails bounced (3%). Six hundred thirteen
provides a sample of the general population, and by
full responses were collected (9% full response rate),
collectingnetworkdataonmanyparticipants,thoseac-
and 296 partial responses were collected. There was
cumulated social networks provide access to the larger
nocompensationofferedforparticipation. Onlyfullre-
population. Participants were asked about how many
sponses were used in the generation of population size
psychologiststhey"know"inthepopulationofinterest.
estimates. Additionally, 26 participant responses were
In this study, "know" was defined as: the person knows
removedforeitherbeingmarkedcompleteerroneously
you by face or by name, you know them by face or by
by the Qualtrics webtool, or due to breaking estimate-
name, you could contact the person if you wanted to,
specificcriteria. Forexample,ifarespondentclaimedto
and you’ve been in contact with them in the past two
know290individualswhohaveusedaQRPinthepast
years (Bernard et al., 2010). Participants were then
12 months, yet the estimate of the size of their total
asked a series of questions to estimate the total size
===== PAGE 6/19 =====
6
Table2 thepast12months. Briefly,thismethodhasparticipants
Items used in the Unmatched Count Technique (UCT). answer a set of questions about what they know about
Items 1-9 were included on both lists, while only item 10 the QRP use of several others (called “alters”) in their
wasusedinthe“sensitiveitem”list(list2). social network, and what those alters know about the
Item List participant’sQRPuse. Thequestionsaresemi-graphical
1 Iamavegetarian. 1&2 and responses are recorded on a digital 2x2 grid, rep-
2 Iownadog. 1&2 resenting the four possible ways information can flow
3 I work on a computer nearly every 1&2 through a given ego-alter relationship (both the partic-
day. ipant and the alter know of each others’ QRP use, the
4 Ihaveadishwasherinmykitchen. 1&2 alter knows of the participant’s QRP use only, the par-
5 Icandriveamotorcycle. 1&2 ticipant knows of the alter’s QRP use only, or neither
6 My job allows me to work from 1&2 the participant nor the alter have insight on the QRP
homeatleastonceaweek. behaviorsoftheother). Thetransmissionrateτisthen
7 Ijogatleastfourtimesaweek. 1&2 calculatedas:
8 Ienjoymodernart. 1&2
(cid:80)
9 I have attended a professional 1&2 wi
τ= (cid:80) (2)
soccermatch. xi
10 I have used at least one QRP in the 2only
wherewi isthenumberofaltersthatknowtheegoisa
past12months.
member of the target group, and xi is the total number
of alters generated by the ego. This produces a value
between zero and one, where one represents complete
of their social network, and the number of people they transparencyofinformation(allaltersareawareofthe
know who have used at least one QRP in the past 12 participant’s QRP use) and zero represents the identity
months. Together, the network scale-up can be used to being completely hidden from all alters. For a full de-
estimate the proportion of QRP users, and was calcu- scription of the game of contacts, see Salganik et al.
latedasfollows: (2012).
(cid:80) The current study utilized a digital distribution of
y
ρ= (cid:80) i (1) the game of contacts. This method is typically per-
d
i formed in a face-to-face interview setting with the
where ρ is the proportion estimate of people who have participant (Salganik et al., 2012). Due to the dis-
used at least one QRP in the past 12 months, y is the tributed nature of our frame population, this was not
i
number of people known in the target group y by par- feasible. Instead, participants were presented with
ticipanti,andd istheestimatedtotalnumberofpeople the game of contacts via Qualtrics (Qualtrics, 2005).
i
knownd byparticipantiwithinthepopulationofinter- These questions were pretested with several academics
est(seeKillworthetal.,1998formoreonestimatingd). not within the population of interest for question clar-
Thisequationmakestwoassumptions: thatmembersof ity. A comparison between an in-person and digital
thepopulationofinterestknowallidentityinformation gameofcontactshasbeenpre-registeredbytheauthors
aboutallmembersoftheiregonetworks,andthatQRP (https://osf.io/yf4xc/)forfuturestudy.
usershavethesamesizesocialnetworksasthegeneral Additionally, to relax the assumption of equal social
populationofinterest. network sizes between the general population of psy-
Since QRP use is concealable and potentially stig- chologists and QRP users, a popularity ratio (delta, δ)
matizing, the assumptions made for the previous esti- wascalculatedas:
matemaynotbeappropriate. Forthatreason,datawas
dE
collected from self-identifying QRP users to estimate δ= (3)
how QRP-use identity information transmits through dT
ego networks. This estimate is called the transmission where dE is the average network size for the target
rate, or tau (τ), and estimates the social transmissibil- group (QRP users), and dT is the average network size
ity of a person’s identity information. This data was for the population of interest (tenure or tenure-track
collected using the game of contacts method (Salganik facultyassociatedwithPhDgrantingpsychologydepart-
etal.,2012),describedbelow. mentsintheUnitedStates).
To estimate the QRP use identity transmission rate Together, tau and delta adjust the network scale-up
tau, we performed the game of contacts with partici- estimate into the generalized network scale-up as fol-
pants who self-identified as using at least one QRP in lows:
===== PAGE 7/19 =====
7
Silva, 2018), it is reasonable to believe some partici-
pants withheld their identity when we asked directly.
GNSUM Estimate The following indirect estimation methods sought to
mitigatethissocialdesirabilitybias.
Unmatched count technique estimate. The re-
maining 3,550 psychologists contacted were asked to
Direct Estimate
participateinourunmatchedcountestimatewith1,775
randomizedintotheinnocuouslistcondition,and1,775
randomized into the sensitive list condition. From this,
wereceived279responsesforanalysis.
UCT Estimate
The average number of list items corresponding to
participants in the innocuous list condition was 4.28.
−20 0 20 40 60 Theaveragenumberoflistitemscorrespondingtopar-
ticipants in the sensitive list condition was 4.39. We
Figure1. QRPuserprevalenceestimates(%)usingthree
calculated QRP user prevalence to be 10.46% (per-
estimating techniques: the Generalized Network Scale
centilebootstrapped95%confidenceinterval[-20.19%,
UpEstimate(GNSUM),theDirectEstimate,andtheUn-
22.40%]).
matched Count Technique (UCT). Bars represent 95%
It was unexpected that the calculated UCT estimate
percentilebootstrappedconfidenceinterval.
wouldbelowerthanourdirectestimate. Typically,due
toreducingresponsebias,UCTestimatesarelargerthan
direct estimates when the behavior or identity in ques-
(cid:80) tionisconcealableandpotentiallystigmatized(Gervais
y 1 1
ρ= (cid:80) i ∗ ∗ (4) andNajle,2017;StarostaandEarleywine,2014;Wolter
d τ δ
i and Laier, 2014). Given the bootstrapped 95% con-
where ρ is the proportion estimate of people who have fidence interval crosses zero, it is likely the relatively
(cid:80)
usedatleastoneQRPinthepast12months, (cid:80)yi isthe low number of participants in our UCT (n = 279) led
di
network scale-up estimate, τ is the transmission rate, this calculation to be overly sensitive to individual re-
and δ is the popularity ratio. All network scale-up re- sponses.
sultsarecalculatedusingthisequation,incorporatingτ Upon reviewer suggestion, we calculated the 95%
andδ. confidenceintervalusingthreeadditionalbootstrapping
methods: basic, normal, and BCa using the R package
Results ‘boot’ (Ripley, 2021). These three additional methods
produced similar CI ranges (basic = [-19.3%, 41.1%],
The three estimates of recent QRP use in the frame
normal = [-19.4%, 40.1%], BCa = [-19.2%, 41.1%]).
population of American tenured or tenure-track faculty
Since the UCT estimate is calculated as the mean dif-
are summarized in Figure 1 and described in detail be-
ference between the two item list means, and because
low.
bothoursamplesizeandtheobservedmeandifference
Direct estimate. To ensure the highest number of
(0.11)weresmall,bootstrappingthetwoitemlistsand
participants in our game of contacts, half of the total
then calculating the UCT estimate can produce repli-
populationwereaskedtoparticipateinSurvey3,which
cates where the mean for the innocuous item list is
contained our direct estimate question. Thus, 3,551
larger than the mean for the concealable identity list,
psychologists were solicited, and we received 308 re-
producing a negative population size estimate. The
sponses able to be analyzed. Of the 308 participants
factthatthisestimate’sconfidenceintervalcrosseszero
56 indicated they had used at least one QRP in the
shouldbeindicativethat,althoughthemeandifference
past 12 months. We calculated QRP prevalence to be
can be used to generate a point estimate population
18.18%(percentilebootstrapped95%confidenceinter-
size,thevariabilityofresponseswithineachlistgroupis
val[13.96%,22.40%]).
sufficientenoughtomakethisestimateuninterpretable.
It is possible this estimate underestimates the true
Generalized network scale up estimate. All par-
numberofpsychologistsusingQRPs. Forone,socialde-
ticipants who were randomized into the UCT estimate
sirabilitymayleadsomescientistswhohaveusedQRPs
were also asked to answer questions about their social
to be unwilling to admit it. This estimate is only gen-
networks, and to estimate how many researchers they
eratedbythoseparticipantswillingtorevealtheiriden-
know who have used at least one QRP in the past 12
tity as a QRP user. Given the somewhat critical social
months. Participants who were randomized into the
environment for QRP users (Fiske, 2016; Teixeira da
===== PAGE 8/19 =====
8
direct estimate and who self-identified as a QRP user we estimate QRP user prevalence to be 24.40% (per-
in that estimate were also asked to answer questions centilebootstrapped 95%confidence interval[10.93%,
about their social network and to participate in the 58.74%]).
gameofcontactsmethod. Participantsinthedirectesti- Additional analyses assessed the validity of the net-
matewhodidnotself-identifyasaQRPuserwereasked work scale-up method in this population by using it to
questions about their social network as well, but were generate estimates of other populations of known size.
not asked how many researchers they know who have NSUMestimates(whichdonotincludetauordelta,see
used at least one QRP in the past 12 months. This was Equation 1) were then compared to those actual pop-
because these participants would later be asked about ulation sizes. If NSUM estimates correspond well with
their views on those who use QRPs (see Study 2) and the actual size of these populations, it would suggest
we did not want to prime these participants to think that the GNSUM network scale up method most likely
aboutQRPusersintheirownsocialnetworkinaneffort providesagoodestimateofpopulationsizeinthisgroup
to reduce response bias. Therefore, we collected social ofparticipants.
networkresponsesfrom531participantsfromthegen- To this end, we generated additional estimates of 24
eral frame population (to be used in estimating δ, 56 populationsofknownsize;thenumberofpsychologists
responses from participants who self-identified as QRP withparticularfirstnames(thenumberofpsychologists
users who also completed the game of contacts (to be named David, named Janet, etc). The 24 names were
used in estimating τ and δ), and 279 responses from genderbalancedandrepresentedcommon,uncommon,
participants who estimated the number of researchers andrarenamesthatexistwithinthecensusofthepop-
they know who have used at least one QRP in the past ulation of interest. The size estimates of these popula-
12months. tions of known size can be seen in Figure 2 compared
These 279 individuals identified a sum total of 664 to their actual size. The estimates made by our partici-
QRPusers,andknowasumtotalof46,828researchers. pants of the size of these 24 populations are similar to
Given the total frame population is 7,101 we are fairly theactualprevalenceofthesegroups,seeFigure2. The
confident all or nearly all members were identified at correlationbetweenourparticipants’estimatesofthose
leastoncebyourparticipants. Usingthenetworkscale- groupsizesandtheactualgroupsizesisr=0.91.
up estimate (which does not include tau or delta), TheNSUMestimatewecalculatedfortheproportion
this generates an estimate of 1.42% (percentile boot- ofQRP-usingpsychologistswas1.42%. Basedontheva-
strapped 95% confidence interval [0.85%, 2.14%]). lidity estimate, it is possible this NSUM value is an un-
This estimate assumes QRP use is completely transpar- derestimateofthetrueproportionofpsychologiststhat
ent and that all participant’s would know the QRP use have used a QRP in the past 12 months. This would
of the members of their social network. Clearly, this is result in our GNSUM estimate of 24.4% also being an
apoorassumptionforthispopulation,butthisestimate underestimation. Eventhemostcommonfirstnamefor
serves as the base starting point for our key network ourpopulationofinterest(David)onlyhadatruepreva-
estimate, the Generalized Network Scale-Up Estimator lence of 2.5%, so understanding the relationship be-
(GNSUM),detailedbelow. tween NSUM-estimated and actual prevalence beyond
The GNSUM relaxes the assumptions of equal net- thisvaluecannotbedeterminedwithourdata.
work size (delta) and total information transmission We cannot know for certain whether the NSUM and
(tau) by incorporating these estimates into the equa- GNSUMestimatesaccuratelyidentifiedthetruepropor-
tion. Using the 531 responses from the general popu- tion of QRP users in psychology, given we are estimat-
lation and the 56 responses from the participants who ing several variables that can effect the population size
indicatedusingaQRPinthepast12monthsandEqua- estimate. Nonetheless, that using the NSUM with the
tion 3, we estimate δ, which is the ratio of average same participants generated estimates similar to their
social network sizes between self-identified QRP users known values across multiple populations is consistent
andthegeneralpopulationofpsychologists,tobe0.97. withtheconclusionthatourGNSUMestimatemayhave
This means that, on average, the social network size of also generated an estimate similar to the true propor-
a self-identified QRP-using psychologist is 97% the size tionofQRPusersinpsychology.
of a psychologist that has not identified as a QRP-user.
Using the game of contacts and Equation 2, we esti- Discussion
mate τ, which is the transmissibility of QRP use iden-
Because of inconsistencies in previous research, this
tity information, as 0.06 (percentile bootstrapped 95%
studygeneratedthreeestimatesofcurrentQRPuse,us-
confidence interval [0.03, 0.10]). Using Equation 4
ing three estimating procedures. While the point es-
to calculate the generalized network scale up estimate,
timates generated by our three estimators range from
===== PAGE 9/19 =====
9
3
2
1
0
0 1 2 3
Actual Prevalence of Group (%)
)%(
puorG
fo
ecnelaverP
detamitsE
estimates in the literature. Compared to John et al.
(2012), Fraser, Parker, Nakagawa, Barnett, and Fidler
(2018), Makel et al., (2019), and Agnoli et al. (2017),
we estimate lower rates of questionable research prac-
tices. Compared to Fiedler and Schwarz (2016), how-
ever,weestimatehigherratesofthesepractices. Oneof-
tendiscussedreasonforinconsistentQRPuseestimates
is how QRP behaviors are defined. In this work, we
defined questionable research practices using the same
languageasJohnetal. (2012)andAgnolietal. (2017),
though restricted use to a timespan of only 15 months
(questionwordingof“inthepast12months”withdata
collection lasting 3 months). It should have been ex-
pected that our estimates would be lower than some
of those reported previously that used an unrestricted
timespanofQRPuse. Additionally,ourestimatemaybe
lowerthanotherreportedestimatesduetolowerusage
of QRPs – increased attention to replication failures in
psychology may have led to a decrease in these behav-
Figure 2. Comparison of estimates made using the GN- iors.
SUM estimate to the actual prevalence of populations Thisisalsothefirstreporttousethegeneralizednet-
(researcherswithspecificfirstnames). Dottedlinerep- workscaleupestimatortoinvestigatetheprevalenceof
resentswhentheestimateequalstheactualprevalence. QRP users in psychology. Previous use of this estima-
Largergroupshaveatendencytobeunderestimated,a tor in the domains of public health (those most at risk
phenomenon observed in other published GNSUM es- ofHIV/AIDS)andoncology(cancerprevalenceinIran)
timations (such as Salganik et al., 2011). Correlation havebothshowntheusefulnessofusingsocialnetworks
between estimated prevalence and actual prevalence r to measure hard-to-reach populations (Salganik et al.,
=0.91. 2011;Vardanjanietal.,2015). Amajorstrengthofthis
estimatingtechniqueisthatitcanincorporateestimates
of information transmissibility, or how available infor-
10.4% to 24.4%, the large confidence intervals gener- mationistoanobserver. Directestimates, ontheother
ated for both the GNSUM and the UCT estimates make hand, rely on an individual’s willingness to participate
itdifficulttomakeapreciseassessmentbasedonthese and their willingness to honestly share their identity to
two estimating methods. These large confidence in- the researcher. Pressure to appear a certain way (so-
tervals are most likely due to two reasons: first, com- cialdesirabilitybias)candistortadirectestimatedown-
pared to the direct estimate, both the GNSUM and the ward.
UCT estimating equations have more values being esti- Social network methods, on the other hand, enable
mated (two in the UCT and six in the GNSUM). Sec- researcherstobetterunderstandthesocialprocessesat
ond, we observed a high amount of variance, which workthatproduceanenvironmentwheremembersvary
may be due to the small size of the population of in- intheiridentityandtheidentityinformationtheyshare
terest (7,101 individuals total) and the low response with others(Zheng etal., 2006). In theprocess ofpro-
rate we recorded within this population (8.63%). This ducingthereportedpopulationsizeestimateforcurrent
in turn effected the precision of our estimates. How- QRPusers,wealsoreportthefirstestimateofthesocial
ever, we have more confidence that our direct estimate transmissibilityofQRP-useidentityof0.06[0.03,0.10],
of 18.18% [13.96%, 22.40%] is anaccurate estimation or6.02%. Thismeansthatonly6%ofthepopulationof
oftheproportionofpsychologistswhohaveusedaQRP QRPusersis“visible”throughthesocialnetworksofthe
inthepast12months,knowingthatitmaybeanunder- general population of psychologists. This estimate sug-
estimateduetotheweaknessofself-reportmeasuresto geststhat,foreachoneQRPuserapsychologistknows,
responsebias. there are approximately 16 other psychologists in their
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report socialnetworkwhoalsoareQRPusers.
of the prevalence of QRP users in a proximal times- These population size estimates can serve as a base-
pan. As such, it is difficult to draw conclusions about line to measure the effectiveness of current initiatives,
the magnitude of our estimates compared to previous aswellasafoundationfornewones. Whilemuchwork
===== PAGE 10/19 =====
10
isbeingdonetogrowsupportforinterventionssuchas Dependent measure. Because there was no ex-
pre-registration (Wagenmakers and Dutilh, 2016) and isting measures of QRP-related stigma, questionnaire
Registered Reports (Chambers et al., 2014), it is un- items measuring stigma related to being a QRP user
known what quantitative effect these are having on were developed from a scale designed to assess per-
curbing behaviors associated with inflated Type I error ceived devaluation and discrimination related to smok-
such as QRPs. By performing follow-up estimates at ing cigarettes (Link and Phelan, 2001; Stuber et al.,
future time points, the field can use the baseline esti- 2008). The measure assesses respondent perceptions
mates presented here to measure the effectiveness of of what most other researchers believe. These items
theseprogramsatreducingQRPuse. were modified to frame them in terms of QRP use. For
As noted previously, QRPs exist in a grey area of ac- example, the item “Most people think less of a person
ceptedscientificpractice. Therefore, itisdifficulttoin- whosmokes”wasmodifiedto“Mostpeoplethinklessof
terpret the severity of QRP use. This difficulty, along those who use QRPs”. Cronbach’s alpha was calculated
with the high variability among previous estimates of to assess the reliability of the items as a scale and al-
QRP prevalence, has led to a number of different con- pha = 0.78, suggesting acceptable internal consistency
clusions. Some have concluded that the problems are (Tavakol and Dennick, 2011). Responses to each ques-
overstated (Fanelli, 2018), while others argue QRP use tion were on a four-point Likert scale that ranged from
presentsarealthreattotheviabilityofseveralscientific “strongly disagree” to strongly agree”. The dependent
fields,suchaseducationandpoliticalscience(Boscoet measure was constructed as the sum of these four item
al., 2016). Although our estimates move the field for- responses, where larger values indicated higher QRP
wardinunderstandingtheprevalenceofthosethatuse stigma.
thesebehaviors,itprovideslessguidanceontheseverity Independent measures. The independent mea-
oftheconsequencesofQRPuseonthewhole. sures were: Age: Participants self-reported their age
in years. PhD year: Participants self-reported the year
Study2: AssessingtheStigmatizationofQRP-Using in which they obtained their PhD. Although collected,
Psychologists this measure was not used in subsequent analyses. Ac-
ceptability: To access descriptive and injunctive social
Methods
norms at a peer level, one question was asked to par-
Preregistrationstatement. Thisstudywasnotpre- ticipants: “How do most of your colleagues feel about
registered and should be considered an exploratory as- using QRPs? Do they find it acceptable, unacceptable,
sessment of the stigmatization of QRP users within the or that they don’t care one way or another?” The 17
US psychologist population. Future preregistered stud- participants who responded “they don’t care one way
iesshouldbeconductedtoconfirmtherelationshipsde- or another” were excluded from analyses that included
scribedinthisstudy. thismeasureduetoambiguityinwhetherthisresponse
Populationofinterestandtargetgroup. Thepop- indicated positive or negative attitudes about QRP use.
ulation of interest for this study was all tenured or Attribution: Twoitemswereusedtoassesswhatpartic-
tenure-trackresearchersassociatedwithaPhD-granting ipantsbelievewerethecausesofQRPuse: “QRPuseis
psychologydepartmentintheUnitedStates. Asthiswas duetoweakcharacter”,whichwasusedtoassessinter-
the same population of interest for Study 1, data was nal attribution, and “QRP use is due to stress”, which
collectedforbothstudiessimultaneously. was used to assess external attribution. Fear: To ac-
Survey distribution. Survey material was dis- cessfearrelatedtotheacademichazardsposedbyQRP
tributed as described previously (Study 1). In total, users in their capacity as mentors, one item was: “QRP
1,775populationmembersweresolicitedtoparticipate. users are a threat to their students”. Power: Socioe-
Stigma-relatedsurveyitemswererestrictedtoSurvey1, conomic status was assessed by tenure level (assistant
whichdidnotaskindividualsabouttheirownQRPuse. professor, associate professor, or full professor), and by
One hundred thirty responses were collected from this individual income level (measured with six bins: less
survey,ofwhich98werefullresponseswithoutmissing than $49,999, $50,000 - $74,999, $75,000 - $99,999,
data. These98responseswereusedforanalysis. $100,000 - $149,999, $150,000 - $199,999, $200,000
ormore). Althoughcollected,tenurelevelwasnotused
insubsequentanalyses.
Control variables. Racial/ethnic status was as-
sessed by self-identification of categories planned to be
used in the 2020 U.S. Census (White, Black or African
American,Latino,HispanicorSpanishOrigin,American
===== PAGE 11/19 =====
11
IndianorAlaskaNative,Asian,MiddleEasternorNorth
% Agree
African,NativeHawaiianorOtherPacificIslander,None
oftheAbove,orPreferNottoSay). Politicalorientation QRP users perceive high stigma
against them
(“politics”) was assessed on a 6-point scale (Very Con-
servative, Somewhat Conservative, Middle-of-the-road, Most researchers believe using QRPs
is a sign of professional failure
SomewhatLiberal,VeryLiberal,andNotSure). Gender
was assessed as either Female, Male, or Prefer Not to Most researchers would not let a
QRP user mentor their students
Say.
Behavioral measures. To assess behaviors associ- Most researchers think less of those
who use QRPs
atedwithconcealingastigmatizedidentity,socialwith-
0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100%
drawal and selective information transmission were
Figure 3. Prevalence of perceived stigma against QRP
measured. TheaveragesocialnetworksizeofQRPusers
users among the general population of psychologists.
wasmeasuredandusedinthecalculationoftheGener-
Fewer than half believe QRP users perceive stigma
alized Network Scale Up Method in Study 1. If QRP
againstthem,thoughnearly80%ofrespondentsbelieve
userssociallywithdrawalasanadaptationtolivingand
theresearchercommunitythinkslessofQRPusers.
working with a stigmatized identity, we would predict
thattheiraveragesocialnetworksizewouldbesmaller
thantheaveragesocialnetworksizeofthegeneralpop-
ulation of psychologists. Selective transmission was as- Results
sessedbymeasuringthenumberofsocialnetworkalters
Figure 3 shows the prevalence of perceived stigma
ineachQRP-user’ssocialnetworkwhoareawareofthe
againstQRPusersamongthegeneralpopulationofpsy-
QRP-useidentityoftheparticipantandassessingwhich
chologists. Participants agreed that “most researchers
alters are also QRP users. If a QRP user selectively dis-
think less of those that use QRPs” (77.3% of partic-
closes their identity information to in-group members,
ipants agree) and that “most researchers would not
wepredictthatanotherQRPuserismorelikelytoknow
let a QRP user mentor their students” (55.8% of par-
theQRP-usestatusofaQRP-usingparticipantcompared
ticipants agree). Furthermore, 44.6% of participants
toapsychologistwhoseQRPuseidentityisunknownto
agreedthatusingQRPsisasignofprofessionalfailure.
the QRP user. In other words, QRP users disclose their
Interestingly,only36.7%ofparticipantsagreedwiththe
QRP-useidentityinformationtootherQRPusersrather
statement that QRP users perceive high stigma against
than disclose to individuals with an unknown QRP-use
them. It could be argued that the gap between “most
status.
researchersthinklessofthosewhouseQRPs”and“QRP
Statistical analyses. For descriptive analyses, re-
users perceive high stigma against them” speaks to the
sponses answered on a four-point Likert scale were
nature of stigma itself; that it is a negative process es-
reduced to two bins (“agree” and “disagree”). Lin-
tablishedattheenvironmentallevel(asopposedtothe
ear regression was used to assess the direct relation-
individuallevel)bythosefreeofthestigmatizingmark.
ship between independent measures and the depen-
Table 3 reports the multiple regression output of all
dent measure using the statistical program R (ver-
independent variables of interest regressed on the de-
sion 4.0.2 – RMarkdown files with full analyses and R
pendent variable. For this analysis, income was used
packages used are available on our project OSF page:
as the operationalization of power, and age (in years)
https://osf.io/2zwqf/). A possible curvilinear relation-
was used as the operationalization of age (as opposed
ship between power and QRP stigma was tested by in-
toPhDconferralyear)astheseweremoreinterpretable
troducingthesquaredpowerpredictortoanadditional
variables and have been used in previous literature
model. Datapointsdepictedinlinearregressiongraphs
(Stuberetal.,2008). Thismodelalsoincludedthecon-
werejitteredtoprovideincreasedclarity. Anoddsratio
trol variables of gender, ethnicity, and political orienta-
was calculated to determine the odds of a QRP-using
tion.
alter knowing the participant’s QRP-use identity com-
In this model, age and fear are both significant pre-
pared to an alter with unknown QRP-use status know-
dictors of stigmatization of QRP users. Here, younger
ing the participant’s QRP-use identity. An independent
participants gauged QRP use as significantly more stig-
samples t test was calculated to determine the mean
matizing than older participants (p = 0.03), and those
difference between the average social network size of
who feared QRP users as a threat to their students
QRPuserscomparedtotheaveragenetworksizeofthe
were significantly more stigmatizing to QRP users (p
generalpsychologistpopulation.
= 0.0069). As we are interested in whether specific
theoretical domains of stigma predict stigma against
===== PAGE 12/19 =====
12
Table3
Multipleregressionoutputofthesinglemodelthatincludesallstigmadomains(age,acceptability,externalattribution,
internalattribution,fear,andpower(linear),aswellascontrolvariablesgender,ethnicity,andpoliticalorientation.
Coefficients Estimate(β) Estimate(b) SE t-value p-value
(Intercept) — 7.8437 2.4069 3.26 .0016**
Age -0.23245 -0.0408 0.0185 -2.21 .03*
Acceptability -0.01056 -0.0494 0.4917 -0.1 .9202
Internalattribution 0.13725 0.4822 0.3803 1.27 .2083
Externalattribution -0.00675 -0.022 0.3511 -0.06 .9502
Fear 0.31118 0.9136 0.3299 2.77 .0069**
Power(linear) 0.16157 0.368 0.2328 1.58 .01178
Gender -0.07151 -0.258 0.4253 -0.61 .5458
Ethnicity -0.05825 -0.1381 0.2852 -0.48 .6296
Politicalorientation 0.02853 0.0508 0.1909 0.27 .7908
Table4
β coefficient outputs of the seven individual regressions run to test domains of stigma. Each model was specified as fol-
lows: StigmaDVregressedondomain(age,acceptability,internalattribution,externalattribution,fear,power(linear),
orpower(quadratic))+gender+ethnicity+politicalorientation.
Model1 Model2 Model3 Model4 Model5 Model6 Model7 p-value
Age -0.22 .031*
Acceptability 0.43 .000***
Internalattribution 0.28 .008***
Externalattribution 0.15 .160
Fear 0.4 .000***
Power(linear) 0.12 .250
Power(quadratic) 0.27 .660
Gender 0.01 -0.03 -0.09 -0.03 -0.03 -0.05 -0.04
Ethnicity -0.15 -0.04 -0.1 -0.12 -0.03 -0.14 -0.15
Politicalorientation -0.07 -0.03 0 -0.06 -0.01 -0.02 -0.02
QRP users, it was theoretically important to also look of QRP users than older participants (β = -0.22, p =
atthedirectrelationshipsbetweenthepredictorsinthe 0.031).
multipleregressionandtheQRPstigmaoutcome(Mela Acceptabilitywasdummycoded, whereQRPusebe-
and Kopalle, 2002). Investigating the direct relation- ing acceptable was coded as “0” and QRP use being
ships between each theoretical domain of stigma and unacceptable was coded as “1”. In the direct model,
QRP stigma provides additional insight into whether acceptability of QRP use was a significant predictor of
QRPusesatisfiesconditionspredictedbystigmatheory: stigma. ThoseparticipantswhoconsideredQRPuseun-
namely, that QRP use breaks social norms, is internally acceptableheldgreaterstigmatizingviewsofQRPusers
attributed, is feared, and that QRP users are in a lower than those who considered QRP use acceptable (β =
position of power compared to the general population 0.43,p=0.000).
of psychologists. Age is an additional predictor that is In the direct model, internal attribution of QRP use
outside of classic stigma theory, but interesting in this was a significant predictor of stigma. Participants who
specific context, as QRP use and the resulting scien- more strongly believed that QRP use was due to a
tificreformmovementmayunequallyaffectresearchers researcher’s weak character held greater stigmatizing
acrossage(EverettandEarp,2015). views of QRP users (β = 0.28, p = 0.008). However,
Theresultsofthesevendirectmodelsarereportedin wedidnotobserveastatisticallysignificanteffectofex-
Table4. Agewasasignificantpredictorofstigma,with ternal attribution on stigma towards QRP users (p =
youngerparticipantsholdinggreaterstigmatizingviews 0.16).
===== PAGE 13/19 =====
13
Fear of QRP users was a significant predictor of
stigma. Participants who more strongly believed that
0.004
QRPuserswereathreattotheirstudentsheldagreater
stigmatizingviewofQRPusers(β=0.40,p=0.000).1
0.003
Powerwasoperationalizedasindividualincome,and
was modeled both linearly and curvilinearly as it was
theoretically plausible that those at the very low and 0.002
high ends of income in the academic workplace would
hold more similar views towards QRP users compared 0.001
to those at middle incomes. In both the linear and
quadraticmodels,wedidnotobserveastatisticallysig- 0.000
nificant difference in stigma predicted by power (p = 0 150 300 450 600 750 90010501200135015001650180019502100
Social network size
0.25andp=0.66).
Beyond the bivariate relationships, it is also impor-
tanttoconsiderthefrequencyofparticipantresponses.
Table 5 reports the prevalence of agreement with the
independent measures used in the previous regression
models.
Although internal attribution was a significant and
positive predictor of stigma (see Table 2), only a
small number (24%) of participants agreed that QRP
use could be internally attributed. Most participants
(66.2%) agreed that QRP use could be externally at-
tributed to stress. Similarly, most participants (75%)
agreed that QRP use broke social norms and that QRP
usewasthreateningtostudents(68.5%).
Stigma-related behaviors. To assess whether self-
identified QRP-using psychologists behave in ways pre-
dicted by social stigma theory, two behaviors were ob-
servedandassessed: socialwithdrawalandselectivein-
formationtransmission(orselectivedisclosure).
Socialwithdrawal. Theaverageprofessionalsocial
networksizeforthegeneralpopulationofpsychologists
was184.93individuals. Theaverageprofessionalsocial
networksizeforself-identifiedQRP-usingpsychologists
was 178.60 individuals. We did not observe a statisti-
cally significant difference in social network size, t(72)
=-0.2,p=0.8. SeeFigure4forthekerneldensityplot
ofprofessionalsocialnetworksizesforallparticipants.
Selective disclosure. The 56 self-identified QRP
users in this work produced a total of 1,230 social net-
work alters from the game of contacts procedure (de-
scribed in Study 1). One hundred of these alters were
considered“in-group”members,meaningthesewereal-
ters that were identified as QRP users by participants
in the study who self-identified as QRP users. In other
words, the participants and these alters shared a com-
mon “QRP user” identity. The other 1,130 social net-
work alters were out-group members, or psychologists
with an unknown QRP-use status by the 56 QRP-using
participantsdescribedinthiswork.
Participants, or “egos”, were asked for each alter
whether or not that person knew of the participant’s
ytisned
lenreK
population
general
QRP
Figure 4. Kernel density plot of social network size
forself-identifiedQRPusersandthegeneralpopulation
(those who did not self-identify as a QRP user). The
social network distributions for these two groups were
notsignificantlydifferent,t(72)=-0.2,p=0.8. Gener-
ated using geom_density() function within the ggplot2
packageinR4.0.2.
QRP-user identity status (either “this person knows I
have used a QRP in the past 12 months” or “I do not
know if this person knows I have used a QRP in the
past 12 months”). The counts of these responses are
depictedinFigure5.
As seen in Figure 5, 58 out of 100 in-group alters
generated know the ego’s QRP-use identity (58%, top
left panel). Conversely, when the alter’s QRP-use sta-
tus is unknown to the ego, only 16 out of 1,130 alters
generated know of the ego’s QRP-use identity (1.44%,
top right panel). This results in an odds ratio of 96.14
(95% confidence interval [51.03, 181.14], calculation
described in Szumilas 2010), indicating that the odds
of an in-group alter knowing the ego’s QRP-use status
is 96.14 times higher than out-group alters. This pro-
videsevidenceofselectivetransmissionofQRP-identity
statustoin-groupmembersoverout-groupmembers,a
1Note that one item of the stigma DV, “QRP users are a
threattotheirstudents”issimilartotheIVitemoperational-
izingthefearcomponentofstigma,“mostresearcherswould
notletaQRPusermentortheirstudents”. Inaposthocanal-
ysisperformedduringmanuscriptreview,thefearIVitemwas
asignificantpredictorof3ofthe4itemsinthestigmainven-
tory: “most researchers think less of those whouse QRPs”, β
=0.44,p<0.01,“mostresearcherswouldnotletaQRPuser
mentor their students”, β = 0.37, p < 0.01, and “most re-
searchersbelieveusingQRPsisasignofprofessionalfailure”,
β = 0.43, p < 0.01. It was not a significant predictor of the
fourthitem,“QRPusersperceivehighstigmaagainstthem”,β
=0.06,p=0.54.Thisshouldprovidesomeadditionalinsight
thatthisrelationshipisnotbeingdrivensolelybyasimilarity
betweenIVandDVitem.
===== PAGE 14/19 =====
14
Table5
PercentofparticipantswhoagreedorstronglyagreedwithitemsintheStigmadependentmeasure.
Domain Item %Agree
Acceptability MostofyourcolleaguesfeelusingQRPsisunacceptable 75.0%
Fear QRPusersareathreattotheirstudents 68.5%
ExternalAttribution MostresearchersbelieveusingQRPsisduetostress 66.2%
InternalAttribution MostresearchersbelieveusingQRPsisduetoweakcharacter 24.0%
significantpredictorofQRPstigmainthisstudy. Itcould
be that economic power is a poor operationalization of
powerintheacademicsocialenvironment. Itispossible
that the number of published papers, citation count, h-
index, or years in a prestigious position could serve as
better proxies of power in the academic social setting
than income (Bourdieu, 1988). It could also be that
thereisnodifferenceinpowerbetweenQRPusersand
the general population of psychologists. Academia is
unlikethetypicalsocialenvironmentinsomekeyways.
For instance, success as an academic psychologist has
reliedmoreandmoreonworkingwithothers. Collabo-
rationratesinpsychologyhavebeenrisingoverthepast
90 years (Zafrunnisha and Pullareddy, 2009), and this
selective pressure to collaborate may serve as a vehicle
for high income and lower income academics to inter-
sect. The academic model is also based on a mentor-
menteerelationship,whereprofessorswhomakeanad-
equatesalaryoftencloselyworkwithgraduatestudents,
who are either unpaid, paid a modest stipend, or are
Figure5. A2x2plotofthe1,230altersgeneratedbythe
economically insecure (Ehrenberg and Mavros, 1992).
56 self-identified QRP users in this study. If the partic-
Academiamaynotsupportasocialenvironmentwhere
ipant in our study (the ego) knows the alter is a QRP
those of higher economic power can stigmatize those
user,thealterismuchmorelikelytoknowtheQRP-use
oflowereconomicpower. Itcouldalsobethatthosein
identity of the ego compared to when the ego does not
highsocioeconomicpositionsusedQRPbehaviorstoget
know the QRP-use behavior of the alter (odds ratio =
tothatpositionofpower,andthusareinnopositionto
96.14(95%confidenceinterval[51.03,181.14])).
holdstigmatizingattitudestowardsotherQRPusers.
Taken together, the results of these models suggest
that QRP-using psychologists are stigmatized by the
behavioralsoobservedinotherstigmatizedpopulations
generalpopulationofpsychologists. QRPusersareseen
(Herman,1993).
as breaking social norms and are feared as a threat to
their students. When QRP use is internally attributed,
Discussion
stigmatizingattitudesarehigher. However,whenasked
This study focused on the relationships between directly, most participants agreed that QRP use was
groups of research psychologists and whether QRP- more attributable to external variables (like stress, see
usingpsychologistswerestigmatizedbytheirpeers. All Table5)thaninternalvariables(likeweakcharacter).
analyses except those focused on socioeconomic power Beyondjustinvestigatingtheattitudesofthegeneral
(model 6 and 7, Table 4) support the hypothesis that population of psychologists on QRP users, this study
QRP-usersareastigmatizedsubpopulationofpsycholo- also directly observed stigma-related behaviors of QRP
gists. users themselves. This is a step forward in determin-
One reviewer was not sympathetic to the prediction ing if QRP users are stigmatized because we can ask
madebyLinkandPhalen’s(2001)modelofstigmathat the question “Do QRP users act like other stigmatized
those with more socioeconomic power would be more groups?”. Thereweretwo-stigma-relatedbehaviorsob-
stigmatizing in the academic context. We believe that servedinthisstudy: socialwithdrawalandselectivein-
there are some potential reasons why power was not a formationtransmission(selectivedisclosure).
===== PAGE 15/19 =====
15
Figure4showsthecomparisoninsocialnetworksize fact that the “replication crisis” is already several years
between QRP users and the general population of psy- old. The current research suggests that even at this
chologists. Although QRP users have a slightly smaller time, a non-negligible number of psychologists are us-
average social network size (178.6 versus the general ingpracticesindatacollection,butespeciallyinprepar-
populationofpsychologists’averagesocialnetworksize ing scientific reports that can increase the number of
of 184.93), this difference was not statistically signifi- false-positivesinthepublishedliterature. Itshowsthat
cant. Heretoo,itispossiblethatthenatureofacademic more work must be done to change researcher behav-
psychology inhibits QRP users from socially withdraw- iors that are beyond the influence of statistical initia-
ing. As mentioned previously, success as a psychologist tives like lowering the conventional alpha threshold in
hasreliedmoreandmoreoncollaboration,thereforere- null hypothesis significance testing (Benjamin et al.,
strictingone’sacademicsocialnetworkdirectlyinhibits 2017). SixofthetendefinedQRPsinTable1takeplace
success. This outcome may also be due to selection duringmanuscriptwritingandpreparation,meaningan
bias, where those QRP-using psychologists who had so- interventionthatgoesbeyonddataanalysisisneededto
ciallywithdrawntoprotecttheirstigmatizedidentityno impactandreducethesebehaviors.
longerfoundsuccessinacademiaandmovedontoother Second,itcontributestotheliteratureonstigma. We
careers. Having a sufficiently large social network may use data from both the general population and from
be a key factor to success in academic psychology, and thepotentiallystigmatizedpopulationtodeterminethe
shrinking one’s social network to protect a concealed stigma status of that group. Being able to observe a
identitymayreduceacademicsuccess,andthepossibil- group collectively manage their stigma, while simulta-
ityofbeingsolicitedforthisstudy. neouslycollectingdataonthenegativeattitudesheldby
Theotherstigma-relatedbehaviorstudiedwasselec- the general population towards that group provides us
tive transmission of QRP-use identity. Figure 5 shows with additional confidence in the conclusion that QRP-
thenumberofpeopleinQRPusers’socialnetworksthat usingpsychologistsareindeedastigmatizedpopulation
either do or do not know about that person’s QRP-use ofscientists. Thatsaid,asanobservationalstudy,causal
identity,giventhatthesocialnetworkmembereitheris relationshipsbetweenstigmatizingattitudesandpoten-
orisn’tofknownQRP-usestatusthemselves. Itsuggests tialbehavioralresponsesinQRPuserscannotbedeter-
that the social transmission of QRP-use identity is de- minedhere.
pendent on a shared in-group social status. When both
membersofasocialdyad(egoandalter)areQRPusers, Strengths,limitations,andfutureresearch
they are more likely to know that information about
There were numerous strengths to these studies.
each other. When the QRP-use identity of an alter is
Rather than relying solely on self-reports, the popula-
unknown (they may or may not be a QRP user), the
tion sizing was conducted using three different estima-
alterismuchlesslikelytoknowtheQRP-usingidentity
tors. Forthisreason,welearnednotonlyaboutthesize
of the ego. This is evidence that QRP users selectively
of the population, but how these estimates and their
disclosetheirQRPusetootherknownQRPusers.
confidenceintervalrangescanvaryaccordingtothees-
Revealingisonesignificantwayindividualscanman-
timator selected. This is important, especially within
age an invisible social identity (Goffman, 1963). Being
the context of attempting to measure a sub-population
stigmatized is harmful, as it can lead to stereotyping,
(QRP-users) of a small population of interest (Ameri-
loss of status, and discrimination (Clair et al., 2005;
canpsychologistsinPhD-grantingdepartments,totalN
Link and Phelan, 2001). By selectively revealing an
= 7,101). The social network estimator allowed us to
invisible stigmatized identity to in-group members (in
estimate the size of the population, but also provided
this case, other QRP users), one can avoid the harmful
insight into how QRP users share their identity infor-
effects of stigmatization while minimizing the negative
mation with others, a critical insight elaborated on in
consequences of keeping one’s identity a secret from
Study2. Whilebothstudieshaveelementsofself-report
others(GarciaandCrocker,2008;Ilicetal.,2014).
(in the self-report estimate in Study 1, and investigat-
ingtheattitudesofthegeneralpopulationofpsycholo-
GeneralDiscussion
gists in Study 2), each study used multiple approaches
Contributions tominimizepotentialsocialdesirabilitybiases.
Amajorlimitationofthisworkwasthelowresponse
The present research makes a number of important
rateweobserved(8.63%fullresponserate). Thereare
contributions. First, it identifies that approximately
a few possible reasons why the response rate was low.
20% of American psychologists are recent users of
First, we did not offer an incentive of any type for par-
QRPs. This is a large proportion, especially given the
ticipatinginthissurvey. Thiswasduetothefactthatthe
===== PAGE 16/19 =====
16
work was unfunded. Another potential reason for this AuthorContact
low response rate was that the window to participate
Correspondingauthor:
wasonlyopenforoneweekfollowingouremailsolicita-
NicholasFox
tion. Wealsoonlyincludedparticipantswhocompleted
institutionalemail: nwf7@scarletmail.rutgers.edu
theentiresurvey,furtherreducingourresponserate.
permanentemail: nfox423@gmail.com
The behaviors of researchers have the potential to
ORCID:0000-0002-3772-8666
shift quickly as norms change with the increased adop-
tion of interventions like preregistration and the Reg-
istered Reports format of publishing. Future research
ConflictofInterestandFunding
should continue to estimate the total number of QRP
userstohelpdetermineiftheseinterventionsarehaving At the time of manuscript submission, Nicholas Fox
an effect, or if new, different mechanisms are needed. worked at the Center for Open Science as a Research
Future work should also start to use the stigma liter- Scientist. The Center for Open Science has an interest
ature to its advantage when considering how to best inseeingresearchbecomemoretransparentandshare-
reduce the use of questionable research practices. By able. All work, including data collection and the writ-
knowing that QRP users are stigmatized, future re- ingofinitialdrafts,wasperformedwhileNicholaswasa
search could focus on the causal relationships that PhDcandidateatRutgersUniversity,workinginLeeJus-
may exist between social attitudes and QRP users feel- sim’slaboratory. Thisprojectwasnotexplicitlyfunded,
ing stigmatized. Future interventions could investigate thoughaccesstoQualtricswasprovidedbyRutgersUni-
whether decreasing stigma produces an environment versitytoallfacultyandstudents.
that promotes QRP users revealing their identity or re-
formingtheirresearchbehaviors,orifincreasingstigma AuthorContributions
onQRPuserslimitsthenumberofresearcherswhobe-
CRediTtaxonomy
lieve QRPs are acceptable research practices and thus
Studyconceptualization: NF
limitsthenumberofnewQRPusers(Bayer,2008).
Resources: LJ
Datacuration: NF
Conclusions
Software: NF,NH,LJ
Much work has shown that there are psychologists Formalanalysis: NF
who use questionable research practices in the course Supervision: LJ
ofanalyzingtheirdataandpreparingtheirmanuscripts Fundingacquisition: N/A
thatcontributetotheinflatedfalse-positiveratesinthe Validation: NF
publishedliterature. Thecurrentstudiesprovideanes- Investigation: NF
timate of the size of this population among tenure or Visualization: NF
tenure-track American research psychologists (18.18% Methodology: NF
using a direct estimate, though this study showed that Writing,originaldraft: NF
both the point estimate and variance surrounding this Writing,editing: NF,NH
estimate can depend on the estimator used). These Projectadministration: NF,LJ
researchers are a stigmatized subgroup of psycholo-
gists; members of the general population of psycholo- Nicholas Fox conceptualized the work, carried it
gists hold negative attitudes towards them in domains out, and developed the first and final drafts of the
consistent with the stigma literature, and they selec- manuscript, and thus is first author. Lee Jussim super-
tively disclose their QRP-using identity to in-group oth- visedtheprojectfrombeginningtoend,providedfeed-
ers, or social network members they have identified as backandguidanceasaPhDcandidateadvisorthrough-
like QRP-users themselves. These results suggest that outthework, andprovidedphysicalspaceforconduct-
even after several years of a “replication crisis” and a ingthiswork,andisthuslastauthor. NathanHoneycutt
movement towards reform, the field of psychology has providedcriticalfeedbackduringtheeditingprocessof
muchworktodoincurbingtheuseofquestionablere- this manuscript, including recommending the addition
search practices and shifting its constituent researchers ofStudy2,andisthussecondauthor. Healsosubmitted
towardsreducingtheinfluenceoftheresearcheronthe themanuscripttothejournal,andforthatNicholasFox
resultsoftheresearch. isextremelythankful.
===== PAGE 17/19 =====
17
OpenSciencePractices Button, K. S., Ioannidis, J. P. A., Mokrysz, C., Nosek,
B. A., Flint, J., Robinson, E. S. J., & Munafò,
M.R.(2013).Powerfailure:Whysmallsample
sizeunderminesthereliabilityofneuroscience.
Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 14(5), 365–376.
This article earned the Preregistration+, Open Data https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn3475
and the Open Materials badge for preregistering the Chambers,C.,Feredoes,E.,D.Muthukumaraswamy,S.,
hypothesis and analysis before data collection, and for & J. Etchells, P. (2014). Instead of “playing
making the data and materials openly available. It has the game” it is time to change the rules: Reg-
been verified that the analysis reproduced the results istered Reports at AIMS Neuroscience and be-
presented in the article. The entire editorial process, yond. AIMS Neuroscience, 1(1), 4–17. https://
includingtheopenreviews, arepublishedintheonline doi.org/10.3934/Neuroscience.2014.1.4
supplement. Chapple, A., Ziebland, S., & Mcpherson, A. (2004).
Stigma, shame and blame experienced by pa-
References tientswithlungcancer:Qualitativestudy.BMJ,
onlinefir(June),1–5.https://doi.org/10.1136/
Agnoli, F., Wicherts, J. M., Veldkamp, C. L. S., Albiero,
bmj.38111.639734.7C
P., & Cubelli, R. (2017). Questionable research
Clair,J.A.,Beatty,J.E.,&Maclean,T.L.(2005).Outof
practices among Italian research psychologists.
sight but not out of mind: Managing invisible
PLoS ONE, 12(3), 1–17. https://doi.org/10.
social identities in the workplace. Academy of
1371/journal.pone.0172792
ManagementReview,30(1),78–95.https://doi.
Arentoft, A., Van Dyk, K., Thames, A. D., Sayegh, P.,
org/10.5465/AMR.2005.15281431
Thaler, N., Schonfeld, D., Labrie, J., & Hinkin,
Corrigan,P.(2000).MentalHealthStigmaasSocialAt-
C.H.(2016).Comparingtheunmatchedcount
tribution : Implications for Research Methods
technique and direct self-report for sensitive
and Attitude Change Mental Health Stigma as
health-riskbehaviorsinHIV+adults.AIDSCare
Social Attribution : Implications for Research
-PsychologicalandSocio-MedicalAspectsofAID-
MethodsandAttitudeChange.ClinicalPsychol-
S/HIV, 28(3), 370–375. https://doi.org/10.
ogy Science and Practice, 7(1), 48–67. https://
1080/09540121.2015.1090538
doi.org/10.1093/clipsy.7.1.48
Bayer,R.(2008).Stigmaandtheethicsofpublichealth:
Courtwright, A. (2013). Stigmatization and public
Not can we but should we. Social Science and
health ethics. Bioethics, 27(2), 74–80. https://
Medicine, 67(3), 463–472. https://doi.org/10.
doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8519.2011.01904.x
1016/j.socscimed.2008.03.017
Ehrenberg, R., & Mavros, P. (1992). Do Doctoral Stu-
Benjamin, D. J., Berger, J. O., Johannesson, M., Nosek,
dents’ Financial Support Patterns Affect Their
B.A.,Wagenmakers,E.J.,Berk,R.,&Johnson,
Times-To-DegreeandCompletionProbabilities.
V. E. (2017). Redefine Statistical Significance.
Everett,J.A.C.,&Earp,B.D.(2015).Atragedyofthe(
PsyArxiv, (July 22), 1–18. https://doi.org/10.
academic)commons:Interpretingthereplica-
17605/OSF.IO/MKY9J
tioncrisisinpsychologyasasocialdilemmafor
Bernard, H. R., Hallett, T., Iovita, A., Johnsen, E. C.,
early-careerresearchers.6(August),1–4.https:
Lyerla, R., McCarty, C., Mahy, M., Salganik,
//doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2015.01152
M.J.,Saliuk,T.,Scutelniciuc,O.,Shelley,G.A.,
Fanelli, D. (2018). Is science really facing a repro-
Sirinirund, P., Weir, S., & Stroup, D. F. (2010).
ducibilitycrisis,anddoweneeditto?Proceed-
Counting hard-to-count populations: The net-
ings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
work scale-up method for public health. Sexu-
United States of America2, in press, 1–4. https:
ally transmitted infections, 86 Suppl 2, ii11–5.
//doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1708272114
https://doi.org/10.1136/sti.2010.044446
Fiedler, K., & Schwarz, N. (2016). Questionable Re-
Bosco, F. A., Aguinis, H., Field, J. G., Pierce, C. A., &
search Practices Revisited. Social Psychological
Dalton, D. R. (2016). HARKing’s Threat to Or-
and Personality Science, 7(1), 45–52. https://
ganizational Research: Evidence From Primary
doi.org/10.1177/1948550615612150
and Meta-Analytic Sources. Personnel Psychol-
Fisher, R. J. (1993). Social desirability bias and the
ogy,69(3),709–750.https://doi.org/10.1111/
vailidity of indirect questioning. Journal of
peps.12111
ConsumerResearch,20(September1993),303–
Bourdieu, P. (1988). Homo academicus. Stanford Uni-
315.https://doi.org/10.1086/209351
versityPress.
===== PAGE 18/19 =====
18
Fiske,S.T.(2016).MobRuleorWisdomofCrowds.APS Evaluationreview,22(2),289–308.https://doi.
Observer. org/10.1177/0193841X9802200205
Fraser, H., Parker, T., Nakagawa, S., Barnett, A., & Fi- Link, B. G., & Phelan, J. C. (2001). Conceptualizing
dler,F.(2018).Questionableresearchpractices Stigma. Annual Review of Sociology, 27, 363–
in ecology and evolution. PLOS ONE, 13(7). 385. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.soc.
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1371/ 27.1.363
journal.pone.0200303 Makel, M., Hodges, J., Cook, B., & Plucker, J. (2019).
Garcia, J. A., & Crocker, J. (2008). Reasons for dis- Questionable and Open Research Practices in
closingdepressionmatter:Theconsequencesof Education Research. https://doi.org/10.
having egosystem and ecosystem goals. Social 35542/osf.io/f7srb
ScienceandMedicine,67(3),453–462.https:// Makimoto, K., Iida, Y., Hayashi, M., & Takasaki,
doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2008.03.016 F. (2001). Response Bias by Neuroblastoma
Gervais, W. M., & Najle, M. B. (2017). How Screening Participation Status and Social De-
many atheists are there? Social Psychological sirability Bias in an Anonymous Postal Sur-
and Personality Science, 1948550617707015– vey, Ishikawa, Japan. Journal of Epidemiology,
1948550617707015. 11(2),70–73.
Goffman, E. (1959). The Presentation of Self in Every- McCormick, T. H., Salganik, M. J., & Zheng, T. (2010).
day Life. Garden City NY, A 174 : So, 259–259. Howmanypeopledoyouknow?:Efficientlyes-
https://doi.org/10.2307/258197 timating personal network size. Journal of the
Goffman, E. (1963). Stigma: Notes on the management American Statistical Association, 105(489), 59–
ofspoiledidentity.Simon;Schuster. 70. https://doi.org/10.1198/jasa.2009.
Herman, N. J. (1993). Return to sender: Reintegrative ap08518
stigma-managementstrategiesofex-psychiatric Mela,C.,&Kopalle,P.(2002).Theimpactofcollinear-
patients [Place: US Publisher: Sage Publica- ity on regression analysis: The asymmetric ef-
tions]. Journal of Contemporary Ethnography, fect of negative and positive correlations [Pub-
22(3), 295–330. https://doi.org/10.1177/ lisher: Taylor & Francis Journals]. Applied Eco-
089124193022003002 nomics, 34(6), 667–677. Retrieved March 17,
Holbrook, A. L., & Krosnick, J. A. (2010). Social desir- 2020, from https://econpapers.repec.org/
abilitybiasinvoterturnoutreports:Testsusing article/tafapplec/v_3a34_3ay_3a2002_3ai_
theitemcounttechnique.PublicOpinionQuar- 3a6_3ap_3a667-677.htm
terly, 74(1), 37–67. https://doi.org/10.1093/ Qualtrics. (2005). Qualtrics Survey Software. www.
poq/nfp065 qualtrics.com
Ilic, M., Reinecke, J., Bohner, G., R??ttgers, H. O., Be- Ripley,B.(2021).Package’boot’,117.
blo, T., Driessen, M., Frommberger, U., & Cor- Salganik, M. J., Fazito, D., Bertoni, N., Abdo, A. H.,
rigan, P. W. (2014). Managing a stigmatized Mello, M. B., & Bastos, F. I. (2011). Assessing
identity-evidence from a longitudinal analysis network scale-up estimates for groups most at
aboutpeoplewithmentalillness.JournalofAp- risk of HIV/AIDS: Evidence from a multiple-
plied Social Psychology, 44(7), 464–480. https: method study of heavy drug users in Cu-
//doi.org/10.1111/jasp.12239 ritiba,Brazil.AmericanJournalofEpidemiology,
Jing,L.,Qu,C.,Yu,H.,Wang,T.,&Cui,Y.(2014).Esti- 174(10), 1190–1196. https://doi.org/10.
mating the sizes of populations at high risk for 1093/aje/kwr246
HIV: A comparison study. PLoS ONE, 9(4), 1– Salganik, M. J., & Heckathorn, D. D. (2004). Sam-
6. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone. pling and estimation in hidden populations
0095601 using respondent-driven sampling. Sociological
John, L. K., Loewenstein, G., & Prelec, D. (2012). Mea- methodology,34(1),193–240.https://doi.org/
suringthePrevalenceofQuestionableResearch 10.1111/j.0081-1750.2004.00152.x
PracticesWithIncentivesforTruthTelling.Psy- Salganik, M. J., Mello, M. B., Abdo, A. H., Bertoni, N.,
chologicalScience,23(5),524–532.https://doi. Fazito, D., & Bastos, F. I. (2012). The Game
org/10.1177/0956797611430953 of Contacts: Estimating the Social Visibility of
Killworth, P. D., McCarty, C., Bernard, H. R., Shelley, Groups. Networks, 33(1), 70–78. https://doi.
G. a., & Johnsen, E. C. (1998). Estimation of org/10.1016/j.socnet.2010.10.006.The
seroprevalence, rape, and homelessness in the Simmons,J.P.,Nelson,L.D.,&Simonsohn,U.(2011).
UnitedStatesusingasocialnetworkapproach. False-Positive Psychology. Psychological Science,
===== PAGE 19/19 =====
19
22(11),1359–1366.https://doi.org/10.1177/ Wagenmakers, E.-J., & Dutilh, G. (2016). Seven Self-
0956797611417632 ish Reasons for Preregistration. https://www.
Starosta,A.J.,&Earleywine,M.(2014).Assessingbase psychologicalscience . org / observer / seven -
rates of sexual behavior using the unmatched selfish-reasons-for-preregistration/comment-
count technique. Health Psychology and Behav- page-1
ioralMedicine,2(1),198–210.https://doi.org/ Wicherts, J. M., Veldkamp, C. L., Augusteijn, H. E.,
10.1080/21642850.2014.886957 Bakker, M., van Aert, R. C., & van Assen, M. A.
Stuber,J.,Galea,S.,&Link,B.G.(2008).Smokingand (2016). Degrees of freedom in planning, run-
the emergence of a stigmatized social status. ning, analyzing, and reporting psychological
Social Science and Medicine, 67(3), 420–430. studies: A checklist to avoid P-hacking. Fron-
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2008. tiers in Psychology, 7(NOV), 1–12. https://doi.
03.010 org/10.3389/fpsyg.2016.01832
Szumilas,M.(2010).ExplainingOddsRatios.(August), Wolter, F., & Laier, B. (2014). The Effectiveness of the
227–229. Item Count Technique in Eliciting Valid An-
Tavakol, M., & Dennick, R. (2011). Making sense of swers to Sensitive Questions. An Evaluation in
Cronbach’salpha.InternationalJournalofMed- the Context of Self-Reported Delinquency. Sur-
ical Education, 2, 53–55. https://doi.org/10. veyResearchMethods,8(3),153–168.
5116/ijme.4dfb.8dfd Zafrunnisha, N., & Pullareddy, V. (2009). Authorship
Teixeira da Silva, J. A. (2018). Freedom of Speech patternanddegreeofcollaborationinpsychol-
andPublicShamingbytheScienceWatchdogs. ogy. Annals of Library and Information Studies,
Journal of Advocacy, Research, and Education, 56(December),255–261.
5(1). Zheng, T., Salganik, M. J., & Gelman, A. (2006).
Vardanjani, H. M., Baneshi, M. R., & Haghdoost, A. How Many People Do You Know in Prison?
(2015). Cancer Visibility among Iranian Famil- Journal of the American Statistical Association,
ial Networks: To What Extent Can We Rely on 101(474),409–423.https://doi.org/10.1198/
Family History Reports? [Publisher: Public Li- 016214505000001168
braryofScience].PLOSONE,10(8),e0136038.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.
0136038