
===== PAGE 1/20 =====
Meta-Psychology,2022,vol6,MP.2020.2628 Opendata:Yes Editedby:RickardCarlsson
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2020.2628 Openmaterials:Yes Reviewedby:AdrienFillon,ArturNilsson
Articletype:ReplicationReport Openandreproducibleanalysis:Yes Analysisreproducedby:AdrienFillon
PublishedundertheCC-BY4.0license Openreviewsandeditorialprocess:Yes AllsupplementaryfilescanbeaccessedatOSF:
Preregistration:Yes https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/PF6DN
Mortality salience effects fail to replicate in
traditional and novel measures.
Bjørn Sætrevik
Operational psychology research group, Department for psychosocial science, Faculty of
Psychology, University of Bergen
Hallgeir Sjåstad
Department of Strategy and Management, Norwegian School of Economics, and SNF - Centre
for Applied Research at NHH
Abstract
Mortalitysalience(MS)effects,wheredeathremindersleadtoingroup-biasanddefensiveprotectionofone’sworld-
view, have been claimed to be a fundamental human motivator. MS phenomena have ostensibly been identified in
several hundred studies within the “terror management theory” framework, but transparent and high-powered
replicationsarelacking. Experiment1(N=101Norwegianlabparticipants)aimedtoreplicatethetraditionalMS
effect on national patriotism, with additional novel measures of democratic values and pro-sociality. Experiment
2 (N = 784 US online participants) aimed to replicate the MS effect on national patriotism in a larger sample,
with ingroup identification and pro-sociality as additional outcome measures. The results showed that neither
experiment replicated the traditional MS effect on national patriotism. The experiments also failed to support
conceptual replications and underlying mechanisms on democratic values, processing speed, psychophysiological
responses, ingroup identification, and pro-sociality. This indicates that the effect of death reminders is less robust
andgeneralizablethanpreviouslyassumed.
Keywords: Mortalitysalience,deathreminders,worldviewdefence,terrormanagement,replication.
The concept of mortality salience (MS) refers to a Pyszczynski et al., 2015). This theory emerges from a
phenomenonwhereremindersofdeathleadtosubcon- psychodynamic approach to existential questions, and
scious changes in attitudes and behaviour, typically in proposes automatic defence mechanisms that may pro-
the form of increased ingroup-bias and behaviour that tectthepersonfromconsciousdeathawareness. Specif-
may serve the role of defending one’s cultural world- ically, TMT states that cognitions related to mortality
view. The MS effect has been reported in several hun- evokeanaversivestateofexistentialanxietywhichmo-
dredexperimentssincethe1980’s,withunusuallylarge tivates to suppress thoughts of vulnerability (proximal
effect sizes (for meta-analyses, see: Burke et al., 2013; defences), or to bolster self-esteem or affirm cultural
Burke et al., 2010). The dominant theoretical frame- values to find meaning beyond death (distal defences).
work to account for MS effects has been the “terror Thishassomesimilaritiestotheconceptof“psychologi-
management theory” (TMT, Greenberg et al., 1986; caldefencemechanisms”inpsychodynamictheory. Itis
===== PAGE 2/20 =====
2
mainlytheMSeffectsofdistaldefence,oftenreferredto denceforaMSeffect(Rodríguez-Ferreiroetal.,2019).
as “cultural worldview defence”, that has been investi- This study also provided an analysis and a discussion
gatedinsocialpsychologyexperiments. Intheterminol- of the literature cited by Burke and colleagues (2010),
ogy of TMT and the writings of Ernest Becker (1973), andarguedthatthedistributionofreportedeffectsizes
thegeneralideaisthatadheringtoaculturalworldview given the sample sizes did not follow the distribution
canworkasabufferagainstthefearofdeathbyprovid- one would expect from complete reports of a true ef-
ing a form of “symbolic immortality”. The aim of the fect. Thismakesitanopenquestiontowhatextentthe
current study was to provide a high-powered and pre- MSeffectcanbereproducedandreplicatedundermore
registered replication of the MS effect using traditional restrictiveandtransparentconditions.
outcomemeasures,andtousenoveloutcomemeasures
toexaminepossiblemechanismsofMS. Mechanismsofmortalitysalience
Need for mortality salience replication. There is
MS effects are typically described in relatively gen-
anostensiblysolidempiricalbasisforMSeffectsinter-
eral terms (i.e., “threshold for awareness”, and “prox-
rormanagementresearch,withameta-analyticaleffect
imal and distal defences”), without going into details
size of d = 0.82 (Burke et al., 2010). However, the
aboutthecognitiveorpsychophysiologicalmechanisms
research tradition has also been called into doubt due
for the effects. As other priming effects, MS may be
to claimed theoretical weakness and non-falsifiability
accounted for by spreading activation in semantic net-
(Fiedleretal.,2012;MartinandBos,2014),researcher
works(MorewedgeandKahneman,2010). Ifso,cogni-
effects (Yen and Cheng, 2013), failure to replicate past
tive representations related to death are closely linked
findings (Trafimow and Hughes, 2012), and contradic-
to representations of cultural values in an associative
tory empirical findings (Hart, 2014). Given the re-
network, so that activation of one part of the network
centmethodreforminpsychologicalresearchandother
lowers the threshold for activating semantically linked
fields(Munafòetal.,2017),itshouldalsobenotedthat
parts of the network (see Arndt et al., 2002, for a sim-
therehavebeenfew,ifany,preregistereddirectreplica-
ilar account). If MS works through such a mechanism,
tionswithopendatasetsshowingrobustMSeffects.
a conceptual replication would be to expect the MS
As with other psychodynamic theories, the postula-
manipulation to lead to increased distraction when a
tion of complex subconscious processes makes it chal-
Stroop task presents words related to in-group classifi-
lenging to empirically test MS effects. Past studies
cation. This may be compared to MS studies that have
have used a variety of subtle experimental manipula-
used a lexical decision task and similar measures to es-
tions without appropriate manipulation checks. A re-
timate death thought accessibility (Hayes et al., 2010;
view (Burke et al., 2010) is sometimes cited to argue
Hayes et al., 2008). Further, it has been argued that
thattheMSeffectisthoroughlyempiricallyestablished.
MSincreases“tension”,“discomfort”or“reluctance”as-
However, the review also reveals a great deal of varia-
sociatedwithbeingremindedofdeath,whichproximal
tionintheexperimentdesigns,intermsofdifferentma-
or distal defences may reduce (Greenberg et al., 1995;
nipulations and different outcome measures, whether
Greenberg et al., 1992). If so, one may expect the MS
or not there are “delay tasks” (and their duration and
manipulation to lead to increased psychophysiological
number), and whether the MS effect relies on various
activationeitherduringstimulation,orasaresidualef-
covariates. Fewofthestudiesreportperformingmanip-
fect while the MS is in effect (see e.g. Arndt, 1999;
ulation checks or provide open data. Despite the vast
Arndt et al., 2001; Rosenblatt et al., 1989). Previous
number of studies, no standard experiment approach
research has suggested that MS effects may be moder-
forproducingtheMSeffectappearstohaveemerged.
ated by individual differences in cognitive style (Juhl
Itisnoteworthythattherearestillfewpreregistered
and Routledge, 2010) or political orientation (Burke et
replications of the basic MS effect. Hayes and Schimel
al.,2013),whichwouldindicatethatoneshouldcontrol
(2018) performed a series of three experiments, where
forsuchfactorsorexaminepossibleinteractioneffects.
Study 2 was a preregistered online experiment. This
experiment showed a decrease in self-esteem after per-
Generalizabilityofmortalitysalience.
forming a word-completion task with death related
words. However, the effect only emerged when apply- AlthoughithasbeenclaimedthatMSisafundamen-
ing an unregistered exclusion of some of the partici- tal motivator for vast aspects of the human condition
pants. Pepper and colleagues (2017) failed to replicate (Greenbergetal.,1986;Greenbergetal.,1997),ama-
the MS effects from a previous study (Griskevicius et jority of the studies (72.6% in a meta-analysis, Burke
al., 2011), and a recent preregistered replication of a etal., 2010)usedthesameoutcomemeasures, namely
much cited TMT experiment failed to observe any evi- aneffectonattitudemeasures.
===== PAGE 3/20 =====
3
Moreover,aconsiderablepartoftheMSliteraturehas (available at https://osf.io/ec4yk) described four ma-
used outcome measures that may be confounded with nipulation checks and six hypotheses, which are justi-
aggression towards out-group members in the face of fiedbelowandlistedinTable2. 1
threats (such as increase in patriotism or support for Totestthattheconstructofmortalityinterfereswith
thelocalsportsteam,seee.g. Stets,2006;Turneretal., cognitive processing, we checked (E1MC1) whether
1994). The TMT claim that MS increases adherence to the MS group were slower to respond to death-
culturalvalueswouldbebettersupportedifitcouldbe related words. To assess whether we succeeded in
shown for cultural values that cannot be construed as manipulating MS on a psychophysiological level, we
out-groupaggression. checked (E1MC2) whether the MS group had higher
Finally, although some cross-cultural work has been psychophysiological activation. Further, we checked
done(Heineetal.,2002;Routledgeetal.,2010),stud- that (E1MC3) the pro-patriotic was preferred over
ies in more diverse cultural settings are needed. Cross- the anti-patriotic essay, and whether (E1MC4) the
culturalstudiescouldindicatethewiderapplicabilityof pro-democratic essay was preferred over the anti-
a MS effect, and could also contribute to exclude com- democraticessay. Inordertodirectlyreplicatethemost
petingcausalmechanisms. IfMSeffectscouldbeshown common type of MS research where MS increases pref-
for patriotism and other values outside of North Amer- erence for national patriotism, Experiment 1 measured
ica and Central Europe, this would further support the preferenceforproandanti-Norwayessays(essayswere
argumentthatMSenhancesingroupprocesses. taken from Rosenblatt et al., 1989, with minor cultural
adjustments). Here,weexpected(E1H3)participantsin
Studyoverview theMSgrouptoshowahigherpreferencefortheessay
expressingnationalpatrioticvalues.
Asreviewedabove,therearereasonstoquestionthe
Data was collected among a Norwegian population
robustnessofMSeffectsandtheunderlyingmechanism.
wheredemocraticvaluesofprivacy,citizenshipandhu-
Toaddressconcernsregardingmechanismandgeneral-
man rights are mainstream pro-social values. On this
izability,ourExperiment1wasdoneinalabsettingand
background, the patriotic essays were supplemented
included both the traditional measure of national pa-
with essays about how the concern for democratic val-
triotism and novel measures of democratic values, pro-
uesshouldbehandledintheaftermathofaterroristat-
sociality, Stroop processing and psychophysiology. To
tack. If MS increases the relevance of ingroup cultural
address the need for high-powered direct replications,
values,onewouldexpect(E1H2)aneffectofincreased
Experiment 2 was conducted as an online experiment
preference for an essay expressing democratic values,
ofMSeffectsonameasureofnationalpatriotism,with
compared to an essay expressing anti-democratic val-
additional measures of in-group favouritism and pro-
ues. ThenovelessayswereincludedtotestwhetherMS
sociality. The sample size for main effects in Experi-
effects could be shown to be independent of outgroup
ment 1 is about twice as large as the typical study in
aggression.
thepublishedMSliterature,whereasthesamplesizein
ApossibleunderlyingmechanismofMSmaybethat
Experiment2isover17timeslargerthanthetypicalMS
existential threats make membership to social groups
study(calculatedfromthenperanalysiscellreportedin
more important, and thus make people more aware of
the meta-analysis of Burke et al., 2010). This provides
social categorization. If so, we would expect (E1H1)
sufficient power for both experiments to detect the ef-
that MS activates cognitive constructs related to “so-
fects reported in the literature. Power to detect effects
cial categorization”, and thus makes these words more
ofdifferentsizesarediscussedinalatersection. Allhy-
intrusive on Stroop processing, resulting in longer re-
potheses and analysis approaches for both experiments
sponsetimes(“RT”).
were preregistered ahead of data collection and were
While most MS studies measure attitudes (using es-
performedinaccordancewithlocalethicalguidelines.
says like the types mentioned above), it would be ben-
eficialtosupplementthiswithmeasuresofbehavioural
Experiment1background
intentions. Previous research on charitable giving has
Based on the above review, the main aim of Exper- suggested that people are more generous towards re-
iment 1 was to replicate the traditional MS effect on cipients that belong to a common ingroup (Everett et
nationalpatriotisminalabsetting. Asfurtheraims,we
also attempted to conceptually replicate the MS effect 1The study was preregistered before any of the data was
in novel but theoretically related outcome measures, inspected. Please note that different dates may be displayed
forthepreregistrationofExperiment1.Thecorrecttimestamp
whilecontrollingforindividualcognitiveandpsychoso-
is2015-10-12,asshownintheOSFregistrationdateandthe
cialsensitivitytothemanipulation. Ourpreregistration
OSFversioncontrol.
===== PAGE 4/20 =====
4
al., 2015; Grimson et al., 2020). Some studies have overlylongexperimentobscuringanyMSeffects. How-
foundMStoincreasedonationtocharities(Jonasetal., ever, there were two tasks not related to mortality fol-
2002; Roberts and Maxfield, 2019; Zaleskiewicz et al., lowing the traditional MS manipulation and preceding
2015). We included a novel measure of pro-sociality thetraditionalMSmeasurement(experimentprocedure
that asked participants how they would have shared in next section). In particular, the “social Stroop task”
a hypothetical lottery prize with individuals that were mayservetheroleofadelaytaskthatprecedesallout-
closely or more distantly related to them. This was in- comemeasures.
tendedasashortonlinemeasurethatcouldalsodistin-
guish between charity towards different groups, in or- Experiment1methods
dertobetterexplorethemotivationforthecharity(i.e.,
Experiment1outline
giving to family and relatives, as opposed to giving to
strangers). ThismeasurewaspartlyinspiredbySinger’s We conducted a laboratory experiment where the
(2011)conceptofa“moralcircle”thatmayincludepeo- predictor variable was MS vs. control manipulation
ple more or less “distant” from you. The structure of (between subjects, two conditions). The outcome vari-
the task is very similar to the “dictator game” (Kahne- ables were RT for death-related words, RT for social
man et al., 1986), where the decision-maker is asked words,preferenceforpro-democraticessays,preference
to divide a given endowment between themselves and forpro-patrioticessays,NfCandHRV.Thepreregistered
an anonymous partner, which is an established choice- experiment procedure and materials can be found on-
measureofgenerositythathaspreviouslybeenadapted lineathttps://osf.io/naxz6/. Datawascollectedinour
tocharitygivingaswell(seeSjåstad,2019). IntheTMT labbetween2015-09-29and2015-10-30.
account,onewouldexpect(E1H4)theMSgrouptoex-
press a preference for sharing more of the prize with Experiment1sample
non-relatives, in an attempt to be remembered beyond
We recruited 101 university students (44 female)
theirphysicaldeathbyalargersocialcircle. 2
through email advertising (preregistered sample was
Previous studies have claimed that MS effects are
100, one participant was replaced during data collec-
more evident in more cognitive flexible individuals
tion due to non-compliance). This sample size was set
(JuhlandRoutledge,2010). Wethusexpect(E1H5)the
in order to be larger than the typical MS experiment in
MS effects on the four measures listed above to be en-
the published literature, while also restricted by practi-
hancedforparticipantslowon“needforclosure”(NfC,
calconcernsforin-labstudies. Pleaseseethefullpower
Federico et al., 2007). Finally, one may expect individ-
analysis in the Discussion. All participants were under-
ual differences in the effectiveness of the MS stimula-
graduate psychology students, self-identified as having
tion,andthatthismaybeindexedbypsychophysiolog-
a Norwegian identity and normal colour vision. Me-
ical measures. Heart rate variability (HRV, Acharya et
dian age group was 22-25 years old. The experiment
al.,2006)maybeusedasanindexofthebody’sability
program randomized participants to the MS group or
to adapt to the changing demands of the environment.
the control group, without the experimenters knowing
HigherHRV(morehigh-frequencymodulationofheart-
whowereinwhichgroup. Duetoanadministrationer-
beat intervals) has been taken to indicate more physio-
ror, there were 52 participants in the MS group and 48
logicaladaptabilityandexecutivefunction,whilelower
participants in the control group. No participants were
HRV has been argued to indicate states of stress and
excludedinthedataanalysis.
emotional activation (Delaney and Brodie, 2000; Lane
et al., 2009). The HRV is an unobtrusive measurement
Experiment1procedure
after it has been mounted. As the TMT account states
thatMSleadstoanuncomfortableemotionalstatethat The whole experiment took about 25 minutes, and
isalleviatedthrougheitherproximalordistaldefences. was conducted in sound attenuated testing booths,
Wethusexpect(E1H6)theMSeffectsonthefourmea- on desktop computers running the E-Prime experi-
sures listed above to be enhanced for participants with mentpresentationsoftware(PsychologySoftwareTools,
lowerHRV.SeeTable1foranoverviewofmanipulation
2Note that the preregistrations distinguished between a
checksandhypotheses.
E1H4a and E1H4b. E1H4b was based on the theoretical
The TMT literature emphasizes the need for a “de-
frameworkofcoalitionpsychology,andwouldbesupportedif
lay task” to avoid conscious processing of the death re-
MSgroupparticipantsexpressedagreaterpreferencetoshare
minder (although delay tasks are not used consistently,
the prize with genetically related individuals. We have ex-
seeBurkeetal.,2010). Noexplicitdelaytaskwasused cluded this discussion since the distinction between the two
Experiment 1, to avoid the risk of fatigue effects of an accountsisunclearandneitherofthemwassupported.
===== PAGE 5/20 =====
5
2012),whereresponsesweregivenwithaPCkeyboard. length and word frequency. There were 200 trials, and
Aftersigninganinformedconsentform,allparticipants theorderofpresentationforthewordswasonlineran-
wentthroughthefollowingexperimentprocedure: domized. Participantsrespondedbyusingmouseclicks,
where the placement of the response boxes switched
1. Aseven-itemscalefor«Needforclosure»(about1
between trials (this was done to avoid preference for
minute).
left/rightsideorcentre/lateralizedresponses,andthus
each trial required a visual search for the intended re-
2. MS manipulation: Two questions where partici-
sponse). For each participant, we calculated the ratio
pants were asked to write short responses about
oftimetakentorespondtosocialwordsdividedbythe
either«death»or«toothache»(2-3minutes).
time on neutral words. Only responses with RT within
3. A«socialStroop»taskwithhalfthewordsrelated one SD of the participant’s mean were included in the
tosocialcategorization(about5minutes). analysis(applyingamorelenientcriteriaoftwoSDdid
notsignificantlychangetheresults).
4. Pro- and anti-democratic essays (order counter-
Next (stage 4 and 5), four brief essays were pre-
balanced), each followed by five questions evalu-
sented. The first two essays (about 200 words long)
atingtheessay’scontentandauthor(about5min-
were novel for the study and presented two oppos-
utes).
ing views of how Norwegian security policy should
be handled in the aftermath of a terrorist attack that
5. Pro- and anti-patriotic essay (order counterbal-
happened four years before the data collection. The
anced),eachfollowedbyfivequestionsevaluating
themesoftheseessayswerewhetherNorwegiansociety
theessay’scontentandauthor(about4minutes).
was essentially safe or under threat, whether extreme
6. Pro-socialitymeasure(1-2minutes). viewpoints should be discussed in public or censored,
whether the best safeguard against terrorism is social
7. A«deathStroop»taskwithhalfthewordsrelated
integration and prevention or surveillance and con-
todeath(2-3minutes).
trol, and whether terror measures should be balanced
against democratic rights or not. The next two essays
In the beginning of the experiment (stage 1), partici-
(about120wordslong)werepro-andanti-patriotices-
pants filled out a questionnaire for cognitive style, us-
say that are traditionally used in MS studies (Rosen-
ingasevenitemmeasureofNfC(Federicoetal.,2007,
blatt et al., 1989). In the review of MS experiments
translatedtoNorwegianbytheauthors).
Burkeetal.(2010)awiderangeoutcomevariablesare
Forthemanipulation(stage2)participantswereran-
used, but the most commonly used is that MS leads to
domized into two experimental groups, which were
a more favourable evaluation of national patriotic es-
asked two different questions. The randomization was
says(andlessfavourableevaluationofnon-patriotices-
done by the experiment presentation software and was
says). The essays had been translated into Norwegian
doubleblindedforbothparticipantsandexperimenters.
by the authors and one aspect changed to suit the Nor-
WeusedthetraditionalmanipulationofMS(Rosenblatt
wegian setting (from “picking fruits” to “work as store
et al., 1989), where both groups were asked to write
clerk”). AllfouressaysareavailableonlinebothinNor-
downtheiranswerstotwoshortquestionspresentedse-
wegian as they were used in the experiment and trans-
quentially, using the standard instructions of «respond-
lated to English (https://osf.io/d2zus/). Whether the
ing based on gut feeling». The first question asked
pro or anti essays were presented first was counterbal-
about thoughts and feelings evoked by «death» for the
anced between participants. After each of the four es-
MSgroup(or«toothache»forthecontrolgroup),while
says, participants were asked to rate on a nine-point
thesecondquestionaskedaboutwhattheythoughtwill
scalehowwelltheylikedtheauthor,howintelligentand
happen at death and after death (or toothache). This
knowledgeable they thought the author was, to which
manipulationwasusedin79.8%oftheMSstudiesina
extent they agreed with the essay and thought it made
meta-analysis(Burkeetal.,2010). Amanualinspection
an accurate assessment of the issue (higher scores in-
showedthatallparticipantsprovidedrelevantanswers.
dicating a morepositive evaluation). Essayevaluations
A Stroop task was presented (stage 3), with words
were calculated as the participant’s average score for
written in red, blue, green or yellow text against a
the answers to the five questions for each of the four
grey background, and participants were asked to indi-
essays (Cronbach’s alpha for pro-democratic essays =
cate what colour each word was written in as quickly
.92, for anti-democratic essays = .93, for pro-patriotic
as possible. 50% of the words were related to social
essay = .89, for anti-patriotic essay = .91). For each
categorization(suchas«them»,«us»,«conflict»and«co-
participant, a difference score was calculated between
operation»), and 50% neutral words matched for letter
===== PAGE 6/20 =====
6
the responses to the pro- and the anti-patriotic essays, potheses E1H1, E1H2, and E1H3. As the direction of
andsimilarlyforthedemocraticessays(forbothdiffer- the hypothesis E1H4 for the pro-sociality task was not
encescoreshighervaluesindicatedbeingmorepositive clear in the preregistration, we tested it with a two-
totheprothantheantiessays). 3 tailed test. All analyses were done in the jamovi soft-
Thereafter(stage6),anovelmeasureofpro-sociality ware (jamovi project, 2019). See Table 1 for a sum-
was applied, where the participants were asked how mary of manipulation checks, hypothesis testing and
they would have liked to share a hypothetical lottery results. Dataset (https://osf.io/2q7kp/) and analyses
prizeequivalenttoaboutUSD1.000.000betweentheir (https://osf.io/n6ysk/)areavailableonline.
(a) close family (parents and siblings), (b) relatives
(grandparents, uncles and aunts, cousins), (c) friends Manipulationcheck
and (d) with charities, and (e) what they would keep
The first manipulation check (E1MC1) gave no indi-
for themselves and any immediate family. Participants
cationthatthesemanticconstructof«death»wasmore
typed in a percentage for how much they wanted to
central for the MS participants. Neither did the second
sharewitheachparty. Alltheenteredpercentageswere
manipulation check (E1MC2) show a significant effect
displayed on screen. The participants were asked to
of MS on psychophysiological activation (HRV). An ad-
check if they were satisfied with the distribution and
ditionaltestofHRVatthetimeoftheMSmanipulation
had the option to distribute again. A ratio was calcu-
alsofailedtofindasignificanteffectofMS(one-tailedp
latedofthepercentageassignedtothelattertworecip-
= .081). The remaining manipulation checks (E1MC3
ients(friendsandcharity)overthepercentagekeptfor
and E1MC4) showed that the intended essay was pre-
self,familyandrelatives(c+d)/(a+b+e).
ferred in both pairs of essays (pro-Norway and pro-
Finally (stage 7), a second Stroop task (92 trials)
democraticvalues,respectively),confirmingthatthees-
was presented, where 50% of the words were related
say measure was successful at creating a cultural in-
to mortality (e.g., «funeral», «obituary» and «mortal»),
groupversusoutgroupscenario.
with matched neutral words. Presentation, response
and calculations were similar as in the first Stroop task
Confirmatoryanalyses
(stage3). Thisstagewasplacedlastintheexperiment,
to prevent the presentation of the death-related words TheplannedtestsofE1H1,E1H2andE1H3wereper-
to interfere with the assumed MS effect on previous formedwithone-tailedt–testsinthedirectionstatedin
stages. This is in line with the concern of Hayes and the preregistration. Each were followed up with Gen-
Schimel (2018) that activation of death-related con- eralLinearModelanalyseswithNfCscoreorHRVscore
structsmaydisruptthemeasurementofMSeffects. was included as covariates to test for interaction ef-
Throughouttheexperiment,heartratewasmeasured fects(respectivelycorrespondingtoE1H5andE1H6hy-
from all participants using Polar RS800cx waist sen- potheses in the preregistration). This approach is func-
sor and wrist recording unit. We excluded HRV data tionallyequivalenttotheGLMapproachesdescribedin
from participants with signal loss for more than 1/3 thepreregistration. TheplannedtestsforE1H1showed
of the recording. We had a preregistered approach no significant main effect of MS on the «social Stroop»
to select a 5-minute analysis window from the middle test, nor any significant interaction with NfC or HRV.
of the recording (which roughly matches when partici- E1H2 showed no significant main effect of MS on rat-
pants evaluate the essays), and the onset was adjusted ingofdemocraticessays,noranysignificantinteraction
based on data quality in the window (before identify- with NfC or HRV. E1H3 showed no significant main ef-
ing participants to their experimental condition). HRV fectofMSontheratingofpatrioticessays,noranysig-
was calculated as the root mean sum of squared dif- nificant interaction with NfC or HRV. Answer distribu-
ferences (RMSSD) of the distance between the peak of tionsonthiscentraloutcomevariableisshowninviolin
each QRS complex (RR beat-to-beat interval, a time- plotsinFigure1,indicatingnodifferenceindistribution
domain analysis). A conventional interpretation (De- between the experiment conditions. Thus, Experiment
laney and Brodie, 2000) is that lower HRV indicates 1 did not find any support for the primary hypotheses
states of stress and emotional activation (but note that oftheMSeffectsfoundintheTMTliterature.
thisinterpretationhasbeendisputed).
Experiment1results 3This pre-registered approach is consistent with the stan-
dard method in previous research on TMT. Open data and
Basedonourplanneddirectionalpredictions,weper-
code are provided in order for interested readers to perform
formedone-tailednullhypothesistestingofourmanip-
alternative analyses (e.g., using the pro-essay score as a co-
ulation checks E1MC1, E1MC2, E1C3, E1C4 and hy-
variatefortheeffectontheanti-essayscore).
===== PAGE 7/20 =====
7
Table1
Listofmanipulationchecksandhypotheses,operationalization,testsandextentofsupportinExperiment1(one-tailed
p-valueswherenototherwiseindicated).
Name Operationalization Statisticaltest Results
E1MC1: MS will make The MS group will One-tailed t–test of differ- Not supported (N = 99, MS
semanticconstructsre- show longer RT for ence between conditions in group M = 11.9 ms (SD =
latedtodeathmoreob- reporting the colour ratio of death-word RT to 66) vs. control group M =
trusiveonreading. of words with «death neutralwordRT. 7.2 ms (SD = 48.3), p =
related» content com- .345, CI = -inf. – 14.7, d =
pared to words with -0.08).
neutralcontent.
E1MC2: MS will Participants in the MS One-tailed t–test of RMMSD Not supported (N = 75, MS
increase psychophysio- group will have lower difference between condi- groupM=44.7(SD=19.9)
logicalactivation HRV than the control tionsduringessayreading. vs. control group M = 54.1
group. (SD=31.7),p=.065inex-
pecteddirection, CI=-0.8–
inf.,d=0.35).
E1MC3: The pro– Participants will show One-tailed t–test will show Supported (N = 100, pro-
democratic essay a preference for the a higher average score on essay M = 6.7 (SD = 1.3)
representsthemajority pro-democraticessay. fivequestionsaboutthepro- vs. anti-essay M = 3.7 (SD
view democratic essay than aver- =1.5),p<.001inexpected
ageofsamequestionsforthe direction, CI = 2.73 – inf., d
anti-democraticessay. =1.64).
E1MC4: The pro– Participants will show One-tailed t–test will show Supported (N = 100, pro-
patriotic essay rep- a preference for the a higher average score on essay M = 6.5 (SD = 1.25)
resents the majority pro-patrioticessay. fivequestionsaboutthepro- vs. anti-essay M = 4.1 (SD
view patriotic essay than average =1.5),p<.001inexpected
of same questions for the direction, CI = 2.08 – inf., d
anti-patrioticessay =1.37).
E1H1: MS will in- Participants in the MS At–testofexperimentgroup Not supported (N = 99, MS
crease activation of se- group will have longer (MS group vs. control group M = -2.3 ms (SD =
mantic constructs re- RT to the social words group) on Stroop effect for 40.8) vs. control group M
lated to social catego- than to the neutral social words as outcome = 11.6 ms (SD = 58.5),p=
rization wordsinaStrooptask. variable. TotesttheH5apre- .09, CI = inf. – 30.7, d =
diction, the same relation- .28). E1H5a not supported
ship was also tested with (interaction p =.44). E1H6a
a two-way ANOVA with an not supported (interaction p
added interaction of NfC =.55).
score. As predicted by H6a
prediction, the same rela-
tionshipwasalsotestedwith
a two-way ANOVA with an
added interaction HRV in-
dex.
===== PAGE 8/20 =====
8
E1H2: MS will in- Participants in the A t–test for experiment Notsupported(N=100,MS
crease support for MS group will show group (MS group vs. group M = 3.1 (SD = 1.9)
democraticvalues a higher preference control group) on pro- vs. control group M = 2.9
for the democratic /anti-democratic essays as (SD = 1.8), p = .29, CI =
essay compared to the outcome variable. To test -inf. – 0.41, d = -0.11).
anti-democraticessay. theH5bprediction,thesame E1H5b not supported (inter-
relationship was also tested action p = .87). E1H6b not
with a two-way ANOVA supported (interaction p =
with an added interaction .45).
of NfC score. To test the
H6b prediction, the same
relationship was also tested
withatwo-wayANOVAwith
an added interaction of HRV
index.
E1H3: MS will in- Participants in the A t–test for experiment Notsupported(N=100,MS
crease national patrio- MS group will show group(MSgroupvs. control group M = 2.3 (SD = 1.75)
tism a higher preference group) on patriotic essays vs. control group M = 2.4
for the patriotic essay as outcome variable. To test (SD = 1.73), p = .58, CI =
compared to the theH5cprediction,thesame -inf – 0.65, d = .04). E1H5c
anti-patrioticessay. relationship was also tested not supported (interaction p
with a two-way ANOVA = .85). E1H6c not sup-
with an added interaction ported(interactionp=.29).
of NfC score. To test the
H6c prediction, the same
relationship was also tested
withatwo-wayANOVAwith
an added interaction of HRV
index.
E1H4: MS will af- The amount shared A t–test for experiment Not supported (N = 100, M
fect the degree of pro- with friends and group(MSgroupvs. control =0.44(SD=0.71)vs. M=
sociality charitiesrelativetothe group)ontheratioofgiving 0.25(SD=0.31),two-tailed
amount shared with to friends and charities as p = .09, CI = -inf. - -0.01,
family willbe different outcome variable. To test d = 0.35). E1H5d not sup-
fortheMSgroup. the H5d and H5e predic- ported(interactionp=.22).
tions, the same relationship E1H6d not supported (inter-
was also tested with a actionp=.99).
two-way ANOVA with an
added interaction of NfC
score. To test the H6d and
H6e predictions, the same
relationship was also tested
withatwo-wayANOVAwith
an added interaction of HRV
index.
===== PAGE 9/20 =====
9
MS leading to higher ingroup identification previously
foundinanItaliansample(Castanoetal.,2002).
The second hypothesis (E2H2) was intended to di-
rectly replicate the traditional lab experiments, where
participantswhowriteshortanswerstoquestionsabout
death showed increased patriotism later in the study
(Greenbergetal., 1994; Greenbergetal., 1992; Simon
etal.,1997). Weattemptedtomakebothmanipulation
and effect measure in the online experiment as similar
aspossibletothetraditionalexperiments.
Thethirdhypothesis(E2H3)wasintendedtofurther
explore the effects of MS on the novel measure of pro-
Figure 1. Violin plot of scores on patriotic essay eval-
socialityusedinExperiment1. Thismeasuredgeneros-
uation difference score in Experiment 1, which did not
ity towards people outside your family, and is thus an
showasignificantdifferencebetweenmortalitysalience
indicator of pro-sociality. Previous studies have shown
andthecontrolcondition(N=100,Norway).
MStoleadtoincreasedpro-sociality(Jonasetal.,2002;
RobertsandMaxfield,2019;Zaleskiewiczetal.,2015).
While Experiment 1 had no explicit delay task, to
Onthemeasureofpro-sociality,theMSgroupstated
maintain similarity with the research we want to repli-
theywouldsharemore(23.1%)withfriendsandchari-
cate, Experiment 2 included a 20-item mood measure
ties than the control group (16.9%). An effect in that
toservethisfunction. Thesamedelaytaskisoftenused
direction would support the E1H4 prediction derived
intheTMTliterature. Thedelaytaskwaspresentedaf-
fromTMTthatMSshouldincreasepreferenceforshar-
tertheMSmanipulation,andbeforethethreeoutcome
ingwithnon-relatives. However,theeffectwasnotsig-
measures. Finally, we also measured political orienta-
nificant in the two-tailed test prescribed by the bidirec-
tion in order to perform a preregistered exploration of
tional hypothesis in the preregistration. The score dis-
whether political orientation moderates the predicted
tributions indicate that the difference may have been
effectofE2H1,E2H2orE2H3.
drivenby afewextreme values(seeviolin plotinanal-
ysisfilesonOSF).Nevertheless,thedifferenceinmeans
Experiment2methods
between the groups justifies a further examination of
this measure, which is performed in Experiment 2. Experiment2outline
There were no significant interactions of NfC or HRV
We conducted a high-powered online experiment on
onthepro-socialtask.
a total sample of 800 US participants. As in Experi-
ment 1, the predictor variable was MS versus control.
Experiment2background
TheoutcomevariableswereAmericaningroupidentifi-
The main aim of Experiment 2 was to directly repli- cation,nationalpatriotism,andpro-sociality.
cate the traditional effect of MS on national patriotism
in an American sample. As additional aims we wanted Experiment2sample
to test conceptual replication of MS effects on ingroup
Atotalof803USparticipantssignedupforthisstudy
identification and pro-sociality. The preregistration for
in exchange for $ 0.50 USD. After excluding 19 dupli-
Experiment2isavailableathttps://osf.io/d26fq.
cate and one incomplete responder, the final sample
As manipulation checks, we (E2MC1) verified that
consisted of 784 participants (389 randomised to the
thepro-USAessayswereinfactpreferredovertheanti-
MS condition, age M = 38, 61% female). As noted
USAessays. Inaddition,we(E2MC2)manuallyverified
earlier, this sample is more than 17 times larger per
that participants had in fact provided meaningful an-
analysiscellthanthetypicalMSexperimentintheTMT
swers to the manipulation questions about death (pre-
literature. See power-curve in Discussion. Data was
registrationofthisanalysis: https://osf.io/sw6md).
collectedonJuly12th,2019.
The first hypothesis (E2H1) tested whether MS ef-
fects involve mechanisms of ingroup identification and Experiment2procedure
group membership. This corresponds to the mecha-
nismtestedinE1H1inExperiment1(the“socialStroop The Amazon Mechanical Turk online platform
test”), but the current test has higher face-validity. (Buhrmester et al., 2011; Hauser and Schwarz, 2016)
Moreover,thetestisanattempttoreplicateaneffectof
===== PAGE 10/20 =====
10
was used to recruit participants for a study about “per- sometimesarguedtobecriticalfortheMSphenomenon
sonality and attitudes”, and the experiment was pro- toemerge.
grammed and administered on the Qualtrics platform Thereafter(stage3)participantswerepresentedwith
(available as online materials: https://osf.io/jm4uh/). ascreenwithfivestatementsabouttheirAmericaniden-
On average participants spent slightly over 8 minutes tity, based on the group identification scale (Doosje et
on the experiment. The experiment procedure was as al., 1995). Each item was rated on a seven-point scale
follows: from “Not at all” to “Totally”. The statements were: “I
perceive myself as an American”, “I feel strong ties with
1. MS manipulation: Two questions where partici-
other Americans”, “Being an American does not mean
pants were asked to write short responses about
much to me” (reversed), “I identify with American peo-
either«death»or«toothache»,(2-3minutes).
ple”, and “Being an American has nothing to do with my
identity”(reversed). Cronbach’salphafortheresponses
2. Delay task: Indicate current mood, 20 questions
was.84.
(aboutaminute).
Next (stage 4), national patriotism was measured
3. DV1: Ingroup identification, 5 questions (about withonepro-USAandoneanti-USAessaypresentedse-
halfaminute). quentiallyincounterbalancedorder. Thesewerethetra-
ditionalessaysusedinMSexperiments(seee.g. Rosen-
4. DV2: Nationalpatriotism, ratingsofpro-USAand
blatt et al., 1989) and similar to the essays used in Ex-
anti-USA essays, order counterbalanced (about 3
periment 1, except that they had not been translated
minutes)
and adapted to fit a Norwegian context. After reading
each essay, participants answered the same five ques-
5. DV3: Pro-socialtask(1-2minutes).
tions as in Experiment 1 (Cronbach’s alpha = .91 for
6. Moderator: variable: Political orientation (a few pro-USA, .95 for anti-USA). To get a score for national
seconds). patriotism,theaveragescoreontheanti-USAessaywas
subtractedfromtheaveragescoreonthepro-USAessay
When clicking through to the survey, participants were
(higherscoresindicatehigherpatriotism).
randomizedtoreceivetheMSmanipulationorthecon-
Thereafter (stage 5), the same pro-social task as in
trol task. At the beginning of the experiment (stage
Experiment 1 was applied (value of lottery win set to
1), the MS and control group were asked to write brief
USD 1.000.000). In a sequential list, participants en-
answers to the same two questions as in Experiment 1
tered the percentage they would like to share with (a)
about either “death” or “toothache”, respectively. The
self or immediate family, (b) close family, (c) extended
two questions were presented on separate pages, and
family, (d) friends, and (e) charities. The summed per-
answerswerewritteninanemptytextboxbeneatheach
centage was shown beneath, and the sum had to be
question. To avoid that participants could simply click
100%inordertocontinuetheexperiment. AsinExper-
their way through the survey without responding, the
iment 1 and as preregistered, an index for pro-sociality
answer to each of the two questions had to be at least
was calculated as (d+e) / (a+b+c), in which a higher
15 characters long before they could proceed. While
numberindicatesahigherlevelofpro-sociality.
thisapproachtoamanipulationcheckhasweaknesses,
At the end of the experiment (stage 6), participants
itshouldbenotedthatmanipulationcheckseventothis
reportedageandgender. Thenasasingle-itemmeasure
extent are rarely reported in the published MS litera-
ofpoliticalviewsthequestion“Ingeneral,whatwouldbe
ture. An advantage of this manipulation check is that
themostaccuratedescriptionofyourpoliticalviews?”was
the subsequent assessment of written responses should
answeredona7-pointscale(markedwith1=Veryleft-
notinterferewiththesubconsciousprocessingofdeath
wing/ liberal, 4 = centrist/ moderate, 7 = Very right-
remindersthatisproposedbyTMT.
wing/conservative). Theresponsesusedthefullrange,
On the next screen (stage 2), there was a delay task
withacentraltendencyinthemiddle(M=3.64,SD=
ofanswering20questionsaboutcurrentmood(PANAS;
1.8).
Watsonetal.,1988). Participantswereaskedtoratethe
extent they felt “interested”, “distressed”, “excited” etc. Experiment2results
on a five-point scale from “Not at all” to “Extremely”.
This task was included to maintain similarity to tradi- Themanipulationchecksconfirmedthatthepro-USA
tionalMSexperiments. Thesametaskisusedin47.7% essay was preferred over the anti-USA essay (E2MC1),
oftheMSliterature(Burkeetal.,2010),mosttypically indicatingthatnationalpatriotismasexpressedinthese
as the only delay task.. The inclusion of a delay task essayswasinfactthedominantculturalvalue. Further,
betweenthemanipulationandtheoutcomevariablesis almost all participants did in fact write meaningful re-
===== PAGE 11/20 =====
11
Table2
Listofmanipulationchecksandhypotheses,operationalization,testsandextentofsupportinExperiment1(one-tailed
p-valueswherenototherwiseindicated).
Name Operationalization Statisticaltest Results
E2MC1: The pro-USA Participants will show One-tailed t-¬test will show Supported (N = 784, MS
essay will be preferred a preference for the a higher average score on group M = 5.4 (SD = 1.04)
over the anti-USA es- pro-patrioticessay. fivequestionsaboutthepro- vs. control group M = 4.4
say(acrossconditions) patriotic essay than average (SD=1.62),p<.001inex-
of same questions for the pecteddirection,d=0.59).
anti-patrioticessay.
E2MC2: The manip- Participants will pro- Manual classification of all 98% provided relevant re-
ulation instructions vide meaningful an- 800responses sponses
werefollowed swer to the manipula-
tionquestions
E2H1: MS will in- Participants in the MS At–testofexperimentgroup Notsupported(N=784,MS
creaseingroupidentifi- group will have to a (MS group vs. control group M = 5.2 (SD = 1.38)
cation larger degree identify group)oningroupidentifica- vs. control group M = 5.28
asAmericans. tion score. Regression of po- (SD = 1.39), p = .46, d
liticalviewsoningroupiden- = 0.05). More conservative
tification. Moderation of po- participants showed signifi-
litical views on relationship cantlyhigheringroupidenti-
between mortality salience fication(t=9.67,p<.001).
andingroupidentification. Nosignificantmoderationof
politicalviews(Z=-0.8,p=
.425).
E2H2: MS will in- Participants in the A t–test for experiment Notsupported(N=784,MS
crease national patrio- MS group will show group(MSgroupvs. control groupM=1.15(SD=1.99)
tism a higher preference group) on patriotic essays vs. control group M = 1.17
for the patriotic essay as outcome variable. Re- (SD = 1.95), p = .91, d
compared to the gression of political views = 0.01). More conservative
anti-patrioticessay. on patriotism. Moderation participants showed signifi-
of political views on rela- cantlyhigherpatriotism(t=
tionship between mortality 11,p<.001). Nosignificant
salienceandpatriotism. moderationofpoliticalviews
on patriotism (Z = -0.04, p
=.97).
E2H3: MS will in- Participants in the A t–test for experiment Support for less sharing in
creasepro-sociality MS group will state group(MSgroupvs. control MS group (N = 781, M =
that they would share group)ontheratioofgiving 0.177(SD=0.267)vs. con-
more of a hypothetical to friends and charities as trolgroupM=0.234(SD=
money prize with outcome variable. Regres- 0.234),p=.036,d=.15).
friends and charities sion of political views on No significant effect of polit-
relative to the amount pro-sociality. Moderation ical views on pro-sociality (t
sharedwithfamilyand of political views on rela- =1.62,p=.106). Nosignif-
relatives. tionship between mortality icant moderation of political
salienceandpatriotism. viewsonsharing(Z=1.5,p
=.135).
===== PAGE 12/20 =====
12
sponsestotheMSexperimentalmanipulation(E2MC2),
indicatingthatthemanipulationwassuccessfulinevok-
ing thoughts about death versus toothache (control).
Human verification of written responses (E2MC2) also
helped ensure the data quality, since participants ran-
domly clicking their way through the survey or not un-
derstanding the instructions would be screened out in
this procedure. The written responses are described
in more detail in a separate publication (Storelv and
Sætrevik,2021).
In accordance with the preregistration we tested
E2H1, E2H2 and E2H3 as t–tests against a two-tailed
Figure2. Violinplotofdifferenceinnationalpatriotism
p-value of .05. In addition, we tested the effects of
between experiment groups in Experiment 2, which
political orientation on the outcomes as simple regres-
didnotshowasignificantdifferencebetweenmortality
sions,andwetestedtheirmoderatingeffectontherela-
salienceandthecontrolcondition(N=784,USA).
tionship between MS and outcomes. All analyses were
done in the jamovi software (2019), using the “med-
mod”moduleforthemoderationanalyses. SeeTable2
and to conceptually replicate the effect on other mea-
forresultsfromthepreregisteredconfirmatoryhypothe-
sures to explore mechanisms and boundary conditions.
ses tests (E2H1, E2H2 and E2H3). Dataset and anal-
This was tested across two preregistered experiments,
yses are available online (at https://osf.io/mejnt/ and
oneinalabandoneonline,withacombinedsampleof
https://osf.io/zpn92/).
884 participants from two different countries. Despite
Despite the successful manipulation check, the re-
ourbestefforts,wefailedtobothdirectlyandconceptu-
sults showed no significant difference between the MS
allyreplicatetheMSeffects. Neitherdidwefindindica-
and the control group on ratings of ingroup identifica-
tions of the assumed mechanism of MS (word process-
tion(E2H1). Further,therewasnosignificantdifference
ing times, psychophysiology or ingroup identification).
betweentheMSandcontrolgrouponthefocaloutcome
The second experiment showed a small but significant
measureofnationalpatriotism(E2H2). Aviolinplotof
effect on pro-sociality, where MS led to reduced pro-
thescoresisshowninFigure2. Thus,Experiment2did
sociality. This effect is in the opposite direction from
notshowanysupportfortheprimaryhypothesesabout
thepredictionderivedfromtraditionalMStheoriesand
theeffectofdeathreminders,asderivedfromTMTand
previous research. We were thus unable to obtain any
previous research. On the pro-sociality measure there
empiricalsupportfordirectorconceptualreplicationof
was a small but significant difference in the opposite
theMSeffectoritsassumedmechanismsonanyofthe
directionoftheE2H3prediction(d=.15,p=.036),of
outcome measures. As opposed to most previous re-
the MS group sharing less (12.7% of the amount) than
search on MS and TMT, in both experiments we manu-
thecontrolgroup(14.8%)withfriendsandcharities.
allyverifiedthatthemanipulationwasadheredto(that
As suggested in the preregistration, we explored the
the MS group in fact wrote relevant answers related
possiblemoderatoreffectofpoliticalorientationonthe
to “death” themes), and provide this and all other out-
outcome variables. Political orientation was signifi-
comesinpublicdatasets. Wethusseeitasunlikelythat
cantly correlated with two of the outcome measures,
thenull-resultscanbeexplainedbyafailuretomanipu-
indicating that more conservative participants identi-
late death awareness. The results are further discussed
fiedmoreasAmericansandshowedhighernationalpa-
below.
triotism, while there was no significant effect on pro-
sociality. However, there was no significant interac-
NodirectreplicationofMSeffectonpatriotism
tion between MS and political orientation on neither
of the three outcome measures (ingroup identification, Both experiments failed to directly replicate the tra-
national patriotism and pro-sociality), thus showing no ditionalMSeffectonnationalpatriotism,usingthetyp-
difference in how conservative and liberal participants icalessaymeasureinbothaNorwegian(E1H3)andan
respondedtotheMSmanipulation. American sample (E2H2). Although our manipulation
checks confirmed that the patriotic essay reflected the
Discussion dominant cultural values in our samples, the MS treat-
ment did not increase this preference. This result op-
Theaimofthecurrentstudywastodirectlyreplicate
posesmuchofthepublishedMSliterature,typicallyde-
theeffectofMSonattitudestonationalpatrioticessays,
===== PAGE 13/20 =====
13
scribed in terms of the TMT framework (Burke et al., tificationbuthaveinsteadtestedtheeffectthatMShas
2010;Greenbergetal.,1994). onexpressingtheingroup’svalues.
SinceExperiment1aimedforconceptualratherthan
direct replication, a Stroop task and a novel essay task NoeffectofMSonwordprocessingspeed
wasperformedbeforethepatrioticessay. Thepresence
There was no significant effect in the Experiment 1
ofthesetasksmaybeapossibleexplanationofthenull-
manipulationcheckofMSincreasingStroopprocessing
finding (for E1H3), although we assumed that these
times for death-related words (E1MC1). In our view,
measures would be sufficiently indirect to not interfere
this fails to support the claims of TMT (see e.g. Arndt
with the MS effect on patriotic essays. Nevertheless,
et al., 1997), as there was no indication that the MS
thehigh-poweredExperiment2hadthepatrioticessays
manipulation made concepts related to mortality more
immediately after the delay task (E2H2), which would
accessiblefortheparticipantinasubsequenttask.
constitute a direct replication of the prototypical MS
Neither did Experiment 1 find a MS effect on Stroop
study(seee.g. Greenbergetal.,1994).
processing times for words associated with social cat-
egorization (E1H1). This opposes the expectation de-
No conceptual replication of MS effect on novel es-
rivedfromTMTthatMSmakessocialidentification(or
says
cultural belonging) more relevant as a way of finding
For Experiment 1 we constructed novel essays for meaningbeyondphysicaldeath. Weproposethreepos-
measuringMSeffectsonpreferencesfordemocraticval- sible explanations for the lack of MS effects on the
ues. Amanipulationcheck(E1MC3)confirmedthatthe Stroop task. Either (1) MS does not work through a
pro-democratic essay expressed values that were domi- basic cognitive mechanism of spreading activation in
nant in the sample. Our theoretical extension (concep- a conceptual network, and can thus not be measured
tual replication) of the traditional MS effect was to ex- withaStrooptask,(2)ourStroopmethodologywasnot
pectthatMSwouldincreasethepreferenceforexpress- suitable to register changes in availability of cognitive
ing democratic values. However, the E1H2 test did not constructs, or (3) the standard MS manipulation does
showaMSeffectofincreasedpreferenceforthedemo- not robustly produce cognitive effects (at least not in
craticessay. theformdescribedintheliterature). Usingacomputer
Experiment 1 thus failed to demonstrate the MS ef- mouseforStroopresponsesmayproducesomerandom
fect to transfer to a novel and culturally adapted mea- variationinresponsetimes,butthisshouldbecompen-
sure (support of democratic values). Although this satedforbythehighnumberofStrooptrials.
replication in Experiment 1 contains novel aspects, the Tothebestofourknowledge,noformerexperiments
literature often describes MS effects as being universal have tested a direct effect of MS on processing speed
across cultures, and that the effect has wide-reaching of death-related concepts, or an indirect effect on pro-
consequencesformostaspectsofhumansociallife. Fur- cessing speed of concepts such as social words that are
ther, reviewshaveshownMSeffectsinawiderangeof assumed to be causally linked with mortality. Some
outcome variables (Burke et al., 2010), and has been studies (e.g. Gailliot et al., 2006) have suggested that
shown to transfer to defence of cultural values in both MSslowsdownStroopprocessingingeneral,butwith-
American, European and non-Western societies (e.g. out using Stroop words with relevant/irrelevant con-
Heineetal.,2002;Routledgeetal.,2010). tent. This leaves us without an established framework
to evaluate whether Stroop is a suitable approach to
NodirectreplicationofMSeffectoningroupidenti- testthemechanismsassumedtounderlietheMSeffects.
fication Weencouragefurthertestingofthisapproachinfuture
studies.
Asastraight-forwardtestofthemechanismassumed
to cause the MS effect, Experiment 2 (E2H1) tested
NoMSinteractioneffectonpsychophysiology
whether the manipulation increased social identifica-
tion with the larger ingroup (i.e., being an American). The TMT assumes that MS leads to an uncomfort-
There was no significant effect on this measure, thus able state that motivates the affirmation of one’s cul-
failingtosupportwhattheTMThasclaimedisafunda- tural values (Arndt et al., 2001; Delaney and Brodie,
mental mechanism behind MS effects. This also consti- 2000;Henryetal.,2010;Laneetal.,2009;Routledgeet
tutes a failed replication of the results from a previous al.,2010;Schuleretal.,2017;Silveiraetal.,2013). We
study in Italy, using similar measures (Castano et al., assumedthatsuchachangeofstatecouldbedetectable
2002). Toourknowledge,nootherstudieshavedirectly in psychophysiology. However, the manipulation check
testedthisassumedmechanismofMSoningroupiden- in Experiment 1 (E1MC2) failed to show a significant
effect of decreased HRV in the MS condition. An effect
===== PAGE 14/20 =====
14
ofMSonHRVmayhavebeenindicated(one-tailedp= no explicit delay task before the target measure in Ex-
.065)butdidnotmeetourpreregisteredalphalevel. periment1,whichpreviousresearchhassuggestedmay
A psychophysiological activation effect may have be necessary for MS effects to occur (Greenberg et al.,
been obscured by individual variation, measurement 2000). On the other hand, one could argue that the
noise or analysis choices. It is possible that differ- Stroop test and the democratic essays filled this role,
entHRVanalysisapproaches(suchasdifferentartefact as they were performed between the MS manipulation
smoothingordifferentanalysiswindows)couldhavein- andthepatrioticessaysmeasureandareostensiblyun-
dicated effects. However, note that there were no sig- related to both mortality and patriotism. Further, Ex-
nificanteffectsinanadditionaltestingwindow(during periment 2 used the most common type of delay task
MS stimulation), nor in the interactions between MS (a 20-item mood measure) and still failed to show a
and HRV on any of the outcome measures. Given the MS effect on national patriotism or ingroup identifica-
highvolatilityofHRVmethodstoanalyticflexibility,we tion in a large US sample. In both experiments the pa-
chose to not explore the data outside of our planned triotic essays were among the first measures following
analysis. Note that research on physiological indica- the manipulation and delay task, to ensure a sensitive
tors of MS appear to have shown mixed results, also test of the primary hypothesis. A review (Burke et al.,
within the TMT literature (Arndt, 1999; Rosenblatt et 2010)hasarguedthatMSeffectscanbeshownacrossa
al.,1989). numberofexperimentprocedures,citingexamplesthat
use zero, one, two or three delay tasks. As the TMT
EffectofMStodecreasepro-sociality claims that MS is a fundamental motivator for human
behaviour, it would be surprising if it relies on the ex-
Both experiments included our novel money-sharing
act repetition of minor variations in experimental pro-
measure of whether MS increased pro-sociality. A con-
cedure discussed here. In either case, we would argue
ceptual extension of TMT was that MS should lead to
thatExperiment2adherestothecrucialdesignfeatures
increased generosity to people outside of one’s fam-
inthepublishedliterature,inhavingonedelaytaskim-
ily, as a means to having an impact beyond one’s life
mediatelyprecedingthecentraloutcomemeasures.
(building on Jonas et al., 2002; Roberts and Maxfield,
Following previous research, our experiments also
2019;Zaleskiewiczetal.,2015). Experiment1showed
tested whether the outcome variables showed interac-
a non-significant tendency of MS leading to increased
tions with cognitive style, political orientation, or the
money-sharing with friends and charity. However, the
manipulation’s effectiveness (although these tests are
more robust test in Experiment 2 showed a significant
lower powered than the main effect tests). These tests
effect in the opposite direction, of less sharing in the
failedtoprovideanyfurthersupportfortheMSeffects.
MS group. This is difficult to align with the TMT ac-
Based on the MS literature one may argue that the
count,asbeinglessgenerouswithfriendsandstrangers
politicalorientationoftheparticipantsshouldbetaken
cannot be seen to be a culturally dominant value. One
into consideration. A meta-analysis Burke et al., 2013
couldperhapsformulateanadhocexplanationforwhy
found that in some cases MS can lead to a general
this measure showed opposite effects in the two stud-
“conservative shift”, whereas other studies have found
ies (e.g., different norm salience, different samplepop-
a polarizing response in which pre-existing political at-
ulations), or having opposite predictions from our hy-
titudes are amplified regardless of their ideological na-
pothesis (e.g., wanting to retain resources as proximal
ture (“worldview defense”). In the current replication,
defence against death). This illustrates how difficult it
we failed to find empirical support for either of these
can be to derive falsifiable predictions from the TMT
hypotheses. Specifically, we did not find a significant
(see similar issues raised by Martin and Bos, 2014).
main effect of death reminders on national patriotism.
In adherence to the hypothethico-deductive approach,
Although participants with right-leaning political views
we caution against interpreting a non-predicted result
were more supportive of the national-patriotic essay
as supportive evidence for a given hypothesis. Further,
than left-leaning liberal participants, exposure to the
oneshouldkeepinmindthatthepro-socialtaskisnovel
deathreminder(MS)didnotleadtoincreasednational
and unestablished and was included as an exploratory
patriotisminthissub-groupeither.
measure.
Samplesizeandpower
Replicationofexperimentdesign
Intermsofsamplesize, Experiment1had50partic-
Inanattempttoaccountforthecurrentnull-findings,
ipants in each condition, while Experiment 2 had 400
onemaypointtodifferencesbetweenourexperimental
ineachcondition. Thesamplesizesreportedinameta-
design and previous studies. For example, there was
analysiscoveringmorethan400experiments(Burkeet
===== PAGE 15/20 =====
15
power-curveinFigure3forthestatisticalpowerExper-
iment2wouldhavetodetectabroadrangeofdifferent
effectssizes.
Theuseofonlinesamples
To achieve this level of statistical power, Experiment
2 recruited a large online sample using Amazon’s Me-
chanicalTurk,whilemostofthepreviousliteraturehas
been done in-person in physical labs. There have been
somerecentconcernsaboutreduceddataqualitywhen
using services like Mechanical Turk (Chmielewski and
Kucker, 2019), calling for better data screening. How-
ever, closer examination has indicated that such on-
line samples may in fact be more representative for
the general population than the student samples typi-
Figure 3. Power-curve for Experiment 2, assuming a
cally used in lab experiments (Buhrmester et al., 2011;
quarter of the effect sizes reported in meta-analyses.
Buhrmester et al., 2018). Moreover, some studies have
Adaptedfromhttps://shiny.ieis.tue.nl/d_p_power/
indicated that online participants at Mechanical Turk
pay closer attention to study instructions than student
samples(HauserandSchwarz,2016)andprovidecom-
al.,2010)canbedividedbythefirstandsecondpredic- parable data quality (Kees et al., 2017). In our view,
tor variable, to reveal a median sample size per condi- thissuggeststhatinrelativelyshortandfocusedsurvey
tion to be n = 23.3. Another meta-analysis of the MS experiments online samples can be a valuable trade-off
effect on political attitudes (Burke et al., 2013) across to student samples in order to achieve high-powered
49 experiments reported an average effect size of d = studies. We recommend that future research develop
1.15, and a similarly calculated median sample size of beyond convenience samples of college students and
n = 25.9. Some of the studies may also have had ad- Mechanical Turk, by testing and replicating focal hy-
ditional, undeclared predictors (argued by John et al., potheses in large-scale representative samples. The va-
2012,tobecommoninpsychologyresearch). Wethere- liditywouldbesupportedifsimilarresultsareobtained
foreconsiderExperiment2tobeahigh-poweredtestof acrossdifferentparticipantsamplesandmethodological
the traditional MS hypothesis. For an overview, see the approaches.
power-curveinFigure3forthestatisticalpowerExper- It could also be argued that the MS phenomenon
iment2wouldhavetodetectabroadrangeofeffectsof hinges on the person-to-person interaction that arises
differentsizes. in lab-experiments. It should be noted that the litera-
Both experiments were thus respectively larger and ture does not specify that MS is restricted to such con-
considerably larger than the studies on MS effects in ditions or that aspects of the interaction with the ex-
theliterature. Thesesamplesaresufficienttodetectthe perimenter that in itself that causes the effect. If the
effects reported in the literature. However, in replica- social interaction is essential for the effect (and it can
tion studies one may be concerned that the originally beshownthattransparentandhigh-poweredin-person
reported effects are inflated, which should be compen- labprocedurescanreliablyproducetheMSeffect), the
sated for in assuming smaller actual effects. Burke and boundary condition of the need for a social interaction
colleagues (2010) reported the average MS effect size shouldbeimplementedinthetheoreticalaccountofthe
to be d = 0.82. The statistical power for Experiment phenomenon. Wearenotawareofanysuccessfulrepli-
1 had a 99% power to detect an effect of this size, and cationsatisfyingthesecriteria.
65%powertodetectaneffectofhalfthatsize. Ifoneas- A different approach to criticize the use of online
sumesthateffectsizeshasbeenseverelyoverestimated samples could be to argue that the MS manipulation
in the past, one may still consider Experiment 1 to be may not be attended to or taken seriously when pre-
underpowered. With its larger sample, Experiment 2 sented online. In response to these concerns, we con-
had chances approaching 100% to detect both the re- ducted a manual inspection of the written responses to
portedmeta-analyticeffectsizeandhalfofit, and80% the traditional MS manipulation task (see Storelv and
chancetodetecteffectsizesaquarterofthat. Wethere- Sætrevik, 2021, for details). If a notable proportion of
foreconsiderExperiment2tobeahigh-poweredtestof oursampledidnotprovidemeaningfulreflectionsabout
the traditional MS hypothesis. For an overview, see the the topic they were assigned to write about (death or
===== PAGE 16/20 =====
16
toothache), that would suggest that the overall atten- Conclusion
tionlevelandcorrespondingdataqualitywerelow. This
The current study with a Norwegian lab experiment
possibility was rejected since the manipulation check
(N = 101) and an American online experiment (N =
E2MC2 found that 98% of the online sample provided
784) aimed to directly replicate an often-reported MS
valid responses to the manipulation. We should note
effect on national patriotism, and a previous reported
that non-compliance to the manipulation may also oc-
MS effect on ingroup identification. The study further
curinin-personstudies,andincontrasttoourstudythe
aimed to conceptually replicate the MS effect on sup-
traditionalMSstudiesdonottypicallyreportmanipula-
port for democratic values, and to explore a potential
tionchecks.
MS effect on a novel measure of pro-sociality. All these
efforts failed to support the predicted MS effects. One
Failedreplicationofmortalitysalience
of the experiments found a significant MS effect of de-
A possible explanation for the current null-findings creased pro-sociality, but this effect is in the opposite
is that the MS effect is less robust than previously directionofthehypothesisderivedfromtheestablished
assumed. As with the majority of psychological re- literature. The lab experiment was unable to find any
search preceding the recent awareness of fundamental effect of MS on processing speed of concepts related to
methodological issues (Munafò et al., 2017; Simmons death or social categorization. It may have been indi-
et al., 2011), most MS research has been conducted in catedthatMSledtoincreasedpsychophysiologicalacti-
a non-transparent way without preregistration or open vation,butthisfailedtoreachthecut-offforone-tailed
data. This makes it difficult to assess the extent of un- significanceintwodifferentanalysiswindows. Wealso
published results and undisclosed flexibility in design failed to support interaction effects derived from rea-
andanalysisintheMSliterature. sonableinterpretationsoftheMSliterature.
Independently of our study, a recent “Many Labs 4” Some methodological shortcomings are discussed
project (Klein et al., 2019) has tried to replicate the above. One could claim that while being more trans-
MS effects across 21 different labs (N = 2.220). These parent and better powered than most of the cited lit-
preregistered experiments failed to replicate effects of erature, Experiment 1 is nevertheless underpowered
theoriginalstudies, bothwithandwithoutoriginalau- and has a rather complex experimental design. How-
thor involvement. Note that the initial report from this ever, Experiment 2 can be interpreted alone as a high-
project was criticised for not adhering closely to the powered attempt at directly replicating the central MS
preregistration in determining which studies to include effect (Greenberg et al., 1994). Given the claim that
(Chatard et al., 2020). However, a Bayesian multi- MSeffectsarerobustandshouldgeneralizeacrossava-
verse approach to all the Many Labs 4 studies (Haaf riety of settings and outcome measures (Burke et al.,
et al., 2020) found evidence against MS effects in the 2013; Burke et al., 2010; Pyszczynski et al., 2015), it
majority of the analyses. A recent registered report is noteworthy that both our attempts at preregistered
studyalsofailedtofindsupportforMSacrossthreeex- replications of the traditional MS effect failed. If one
periments using established measures (Schindler et al., wouldliketoarguethatthereissolidempiricalsupport
2021). Thesefindingsmirrorthecurrentresults,andin for the MS effect in the past literature, one should de-
additionindicatethatmethodologicalexpertiseinstudy fine the necessary and sufficient conditions to produce
design is not a likely explanation for the null-findings, the effect (e.g., type and duration of delay task, lab or
northattheMSeffectcanbereliablyreproducedinlab survey-based data collection, which covariates are nec-
studies. essary), and one should only count studies that fulfil
The current preregistered null-findings in a con- theseconditionsashavingsupportedtheeffect.
trolled lab study and in a large-scale online sample is In our view, the current results show that the basic
one of three independent replication projects that have MS effect is more difficult to reproduce than what is
failed to support the MS hypothesis from TMT (Klein indicated in the literature. It is possible that the MS
et al., 2019; Schindler et al., 2021). This may indi- effect hinges on methodological quirks, specific sam-
cate that the traditional MS effect may not be a robust ples or other boundary conditions that have not been
and replicable phenomenon, despite the high number reported or identified in previous research. Variations
of past publications (Burke et al., 2013; Burke et al., in theoretical, experimental or analytical approaches
2010). At the very least, the current null-findings em- may thus have provided different results in the cur-
phasizes the need for high-powered, preregistered and rent study. We welcome further research on the pro-
transparentreplicationofthetraditionalMSeffect. posed MS effect, but we will view the proposed phe-
nomenonwithscepticismuntilsuchconditionsareiden-
tified. We actively encourage attempts to replicate the
===== PAGE 17/20 =====
17
current null-findings. Divergent findings could help to Acknowledgements
identify boundary conditions for the effect (Nosek and
We were assisted in the data collection by student
Errington,2020),whereassimilarresultswouldfurther
researchers Anna Berglann, Ingrid Kleiven, Marte Lo-
strengthen the current conclusions. Note that the TMT
vise Aagaard-Nilsen, Silje Johansen, Daniel Gunstveit,
literaturehasalsobeenclaimedtobesupportedbynon-
Astrid Bergwitz, Isabella Ahlvin, Line Molander, and
experimentapproaches,suchaslongitudinalstudiesfol-
FridaÖlander.
lowing personal events of threat or loss (Ben-Zur and
Zeidner,2009). Althoughthecurrentstudyfailstorepli-
OpenSciencePractices
catethemostcommonlycitedexperimentaldemonstra-
tion of the MS effect, the overall TMT may still be sup-
portedbyotherapproaches.
We find it uncontroversial that avoidance of death
can be a powerful motivator, and that human psychol-
This article earned the Preregistration+, Open Data
ogy is embedded with instincts to favour and support
andtheOpenMaterialsbadgeforpreregisteringthehy-
the ingroup. However, it is less obvious that an ab-
potheses and analyses before data collection, and for
stract awareness of mortality could account for a vast
making the data and materials openly available. It has
arrayofbehavioursnotassociatedwithdeath,orthata
been verified that the analysis reproduced the results
subtledeathreminderissufficienttomotivatecomplex
presented in the article. The entire editorial process,
behaviourthroughsubconsciousprocesses. Despiteour
includingtheopenreviews, arepublishedintheonline
original intention to verify and further explore the na-
supplement.
ture of MS effects, we found no empirical support for
thishypothesisinthepresentstudy.
References
AuthorContact Acharya, U., Joseph, K., Kannathal, N., Lim, C., & Suri,
J.(2006).Heartratevariability:Areview.Med-
Bjørn Sætrevik (corresponding author), Department
ical and biological engineering and computing,
of psychosocial science, Faculty of psychology, Univer-
44(12),1031–1051.
sity of Bergen, Christies gate 12, 5015 Bergen, Nor-
Arndt,J.(1999).Searchingfortheterrorinterrorman-
way. Email: bjorn.satrevik@uib.noORCID:0000-0002-
agement: Mortality salience and physiological
9367-6987. HallgeirSjåstad,NorwegianSchoolofEco-
indicesofarousalandaffect.
nomics. ORCID:0000-0002-8730-1038.
Arndt, J., Allen, J., & Greenberg, J. (2001). Traces of
terror:Subliminaldeathprimesandfacialelec-
ConflictofInterestandFunding
tromyographicindicesofaffect.Motivationand
The authors have no financial or non-financial com- Emotion,25(3),253–277.
peting interests to report. No benefits impinge on the Arndt, J., Greenberg, J., & Cook, A. (2002). Mortal-
publication of this article, apart from the expectation ity salience and the spreading activation of
thattheauthorsshouldcontributetoobjectivescientific worldview-relevant constructs: Exploring the
disseminationaspartoftheirprofessionalrole. Thein- cognitive architecture of terror management.
terpretation of the results is not biased by the authors’ Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
previousprofessionalorscientificwork. 131(3),307.
Experiment 2 of this research was supported by the Arndt, J., Greenberg, J., Solomon, S., Pyszczynski, T.,
Research Council of Norway through its Centres of Ex- & Simon, L. (1997). Suppression, accessibility
cellenceScheme,FAIRprojectno262675. of death-related thoughts, and cultural world-
viewdefense:Exploringthepsychodynamicsof
AuthorContributions terror management. Journal of personality and
socialpsychology,73(1),5.
Both authors were involved in developing hypothe-
Becker,E.(1973).TheDenialofDeath.TheFreePress.
ses and designing both experiments. Author BS con-
Ben-Zur, H., & Zeidner, M. (2009). Threat to life and
ducted Experiment 1, while author HS conducted Ex-
risk-taking behaviors: A review of empirical
periment 2. Author BS has performed analyses and
findings and explanatory models. Personality
beeninchargeofwritingthemanuscript,whileHShas
andSocialPsychologyReview,13(2),109–128.
contributedtotheprocess. Authornamesarerankedto
reflecttheirlevelofcontribution.
===== PAGE 18/20 =====
18
Buhrmester,M.,Kwang,T.,&Gosling,S.(2011).Ama- and trait self-control on thoughts and fears of
zon’s Mechanical Turk: A new source of inex- dying.Journalofpersonalityandsocialpsychol-
pensive, yet high-quality, data? Perspectives on ogy,91(1),49.
PsychologicalScience,6(1),3–5. Greenberg, J., Arndt, J., Simon, L., Pyszczynski, T., &
Buhrmester, M., Talaifar, S., & Gosling, S. (2018). An Solomon, S. (2000). Proximal and distal de-
evaluation of Amazon’s Mechanical Turk, its fenses in response to reminders of one’s mor-
rapid rise, and its effective use. Perspectives on tality:Evidenceofatemporalsequence.Person-
PsychologicalScience,13(2),149–154. ality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 26(1), 91–
Burke, B., Kosloff, S., & Landau, M. (2013). Death 99.
goes to the polls: A meta-analysis of mortality Greenberg, J., Porteus, J., Simon, L., Pyszczynski, T., &
salience effects on political attitudes. Political Solomon, S. (1995). Evidence of a terror man-
Psychology,34(2),183–200. agement function of cultural icons: The effects
Burke, B., Martens, A., & Faucher, E. (2010). Two of mortality salience on the inappropriate use
decadesofterrormanagementtheory:Ameta- of cherished cultural symbols. Personality and
analysis of mortality salience research. Person- SocialPsychologyBulletin,21(11),1221–1228.
ality and Social Psychology Review, 14(2), 155– Greenberg, J., Pyszczynski, T., & Solomon, S. (1986).
195. Thecausesandconsequencesofaneedforself-
Castano, E., Yzerbyt, V., Paladino, M.-P., & Sacchi, S. esteem:Aterrormanagementtheory.Publicself
(2002). I belong, therefore, I exist: Ingroup andprivateself (pp.189–212).Springer.
identification,ingroupentitativity,andingroup Greenberg, J., Pyszczynski, T., Solomon, S., Simon, L.,
bias. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, & Breus, M. (1994). Role of consciousness and
28(2),135–143. accessibility of death-related thoughts in mor-
Chatard,A.,Hirschberger,G.,&Pyszczynski,T.(2020). talitysalienceeffects.Journalofpersonalityand
A word of caution about Many Labs 4: If you socialpsychology,67(4),627.
fail to follow your preregistered plan, you may Greenberg, J., Simon, L., Pyszczynski, T., Solomon, S.,
failtofindarealeffect. & Chatel, D. (1992). Terror management and
Chmielewski,M.,&Kucker,S.(2019).AnMTurkCrisis? tolerance:Doesmortalitysaliencealwaysinten-
Shifts in data quality and the impact on study sify negative reactions to others who threaten
results [Publisher: In]. Social Psychological and one’sworldview?Journalofpersonalityandso-
PersonalityScience,11,464–473. cialpsychology,63(2),212.
Delaney, J., & Brodie, D. (2000). Effects of short-term Greenberg, J., Solomon, S., & Pyszczynski, T. (1997).
psychological stress on the time and frequency Terror management theory of self-esteem and
domainsofheart-ratevariability.Perceptualand culturalworldviews:Empiricalassessmentsand
MotorSkills,91(2),515–524. conceptualrefinements.Advancesinexperimen-
Doosje,B.,Ellemers,N.,&Spears,R.(1995).Perceived talsocialpsychology(pp.61–139).Elsevier.
intragroupvariabilityasafunctionofgroupsta- Grimson, D., Knowles, S., & Stahlmann-Brown, P.
tus and identification. Journal of Experimental (2020).Howclosetohomedoescharitybegin?
SocialPsychology,31(5),410–436. AppliedEconomics,52(34),3700–3708.
Everett,J.,Faber,N.,&Crockett,M.(2015).Preferences Griskevicius, V., Tybur, J., Delton, A., & Robertson, T.
and beliefs in ingroup favoritism. Frontiers in (2011). The influence of mortality and socioe-
behavioralneuroscience,9,15. conomic status on risk and delayed rewards: A
Federico,C.,Jost,J.,Pierro,A.,&Kruglanski,A.(2007). life history theory approach. Journal of person-
Theneedforclosureandpoliticalattitudes:Final alityandsocialpsychology,100(6),1015.
report for the ANES pilot. ANES Pilot Study Re- Haaf,J.,Hoogeveen,S.,Berkhout,S.,Gronau,Q.,&Wa-
port. genmakers,E.-J.(2020).ABayesianmultiverse
Fiedler, K., Kutzner, F., & Krueger, J. (2012). The long analysis of Many Labs 4: Quantifying the evi-
way from -error control to validity proper: denceagainstmortalitysalience.
Problemswithashort-sightedfalse-positivede- Hart, J. (2014). Toward an Integrative Theory of Psy-
bate.PerspectivesonPsychologicalScience,7(6), chologicalDefense.PerspectivesonPsychological
661–669. Science,9(1),19–39.https://doi.org/10.1177/
Gailliot, M., Schmeichel, B., & Baumeister, R. (2006). 1745691613506018
Self-regulatory processes defend against the Hauser, D., & Schwarz, N. (2016). Attentive Turkers:
threatofdeath:Effectsofself-controldepletion MTurk participants perform better on online
===== PAGE 19/20 =====
19
attention checks than do subject pool partici- fectWithandWithoutOriginalAuthorInvolve-
pants. Behavior research methods, 48(1), 400– ment.https://psyarxiv.com/vef2c
407. Retrievedfrom
Hayes, J., & Schimel, J. (2018). Unintended effects Lane, R., McRae, K., Reiman, E., Chen, K., Ahern, G.,
of measuring implicit processes: The case of & Thayer, J. (2009). Neural correlates of heart
death-thoughtaccessibilityinmortalitysalience rate variability during emotion. NeuroImage,
studies. Journal of Experimental Social Psychol- 44(1),213–222.
ogy,74,257–269. Martin, L., & Bos, K. (2014). Beyond terror: Towards
Hayes,J.,Schimel,J.,Arndt,J.,&Faucher,E.(2010).A a paradigm shift in the study of threat and
theoretical and empirical review of the death- culture. European Review of Social Psychology,
thoughtaccessibilityconceptinterrormanage- 25(1),32–70.
ment research. Psychological Bulletin, 136(5), Morewedge, C., & Kahneman, D. (2010). Associative
699. processes in intuitive judgment. Trends in Cog-
Hayes, J., Schimel, J., Faucher, E., & Williams, T. nitiveSciences,14(10),435–440.
(2008). Evidence for the DTA hypothesis Munafò, M., Nosek, B., Bishop, D., Button, K., Cham-
II: Threatening self-esteem increases death- bers,C.,Sert,N.,&Ioannidis,J.(2017).Aman-
thought accessibility. Journal of Experimental ifesto for reproducible science. Nature Human
SocialPsychology,44(3),600–613. Behaviour,1,0021.
Heine,S.,Harihara,M.,&Niiya,Y.(2002).Terrorman- Nosek, B., & Errington, T. (2020). What is replication?
agement in Japan. Asian Journal of Social Psy- PLoS Biology, 18(3). https://doi.org/10.
chology,5(3),187–196. 31222/osf.io/u4g6t.
Henry, E., Bartholow, B., & Arndt, J. (2010). Death on Whatisreplication?
the brain: Effects of mortality salience on the Pepper, G., Corby, D., Bamber, R., Smith, H., Wong, N.,
neural correlates of ingroup and outgroup cat- & Nettle, D. (2017). The influence of mortality
egorization.Socialcognitiveandaffectiveneuro- and socioeconomic status on risk and delayed
science,5(1),77–87. rewards:AreplicationwithBritishparticipants.
jamovi project, T. (2019). The jamovi project [Type: PeerJ,5,3580.
(Version0.9)].https://www.jamovi.org Psychology Software Tools, I. (2012). E-Prime 2.0
Retrievedfrom [Pages:–20].https://www.pstnet.com
John, L., Loewenstein, G., & Prelec, D. (2012). Mea- Retrievedfrom
suring the prevalence of questionable research Pyszczynski, T., Solomon, S., & Greenberg, J. (2015).
practices with incentives for truth telling. Psy- Thirty years of terror management theory:
chologicalScience,0956797611430953. From genesis to revelation. Advances in exper-
Jonas, E., Schimel, J., Greenberg, J., & Pyszczynski, T. imentalsocialpsychology,52,1–70.
(2002).TheScroogeeffect:Evidencethatmor- Roberts, J., & Maxfield, M. (2019). Mortality Salience
tality salience increases prosocial attitudes and andAgeEffectsonCharitableDonations.Amer-
behavior. Personality and Social Psychology Bul- icanBehavioralScientist,0002764219850864.
letin,28(10),1342–1353. Rodríguez-Ferreiro, J., Barberia, I., González-Guerra,
Juhl,J.,&Routledge,C.(2010).Structuredterror:Fur- J., & Vadillo, M. (2019). Are we truly spe-
ther exploring the effects of mortality salience cial and unique? A replication of Goldenberg
and personal need for structure on worldview et al.(2001. Royal Society open science, 6(11),
defense.Journalofpersonality,78(3),969–990. 191114.
Kahneman, D., Knetsch, J. L., & Thaler, R. H. (1986). Rosenblatt, A., Greenberg, J., Solomon, S., Pyszczyn-
Fairness and the assumptions of economics. ski, T., & Lyon, D. (1989). Evidence for terror
Journalofbusiness,S285–S300. management theory: I. The effects of mortal-
Kees, J., Berry, C., Burton, S., & Sheehan, K. (2017). ity salience on reactions to those who violate
Ananalysisofdataquality:Professionalpanels, orupholdculturalvalues.Journalofpersonality
student subject pools, and Amazon’s Mechan- andsocialpsychology,57(4),681.
ical Turk. Journal of Advertising, 46(1), 141– Routledge,C.,Ostafin,B.,Juhl,J.,Sedikides,C.,Cathey,
155. C., & Liao, J. (2010). Adjusting to death: The
Klein, R., Cook, C., Ebersole, C., Vitiello, C., Nosek, B., effects of mortality salience and self-esteem on
Chartier, C., & Ratliff, K. (2019). Many Labs psychological well-being, growth motivation,
4: Failure to Replicate Mortality Salience Ef-
===== PAGE 20/20 =====
20
and maladaptive behavior. Journal of personal- Stets,J.(2006).IdentityTheory.InP.Burke(Ed.),Con-
ityandsocialpsychology,99(6),897. temporary social psychological theories (pp. 88–
Schindler, S., Reinhardt, N., & Reinhard, M.-A. (2021). 110).StanfordUniversityPress.
Defending one’s worldview under mortality Storelv,S.,&Sætrevik,B.(2021).Nothingiscertainex-
salience: Testing the validity of an established cept taxes and the other thing: Searching for
idea.JournalofExperimentalSocialPsychology, death anxiety in a large online sample. https:
93,104087. //doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/3tkzq
Schuler, E., Mlynski, C., & Wright, R. (2017). Influence Trafimow, D., & Hughes, J. (2012). Testing the death
of mortality salience on effort-related cardio- thought suppression and rebound hypothesis:
vascular response to an identity-relevant chal- Death thought accessibility following mortality
lenge.MotivationScience,3(2),164–171. saliencedecreasesduringadelay.SocialPsycho-
Silveira, S., Graupmann, V., Agthe, M., Gutyrchik, E., logicalandPersonalityScience,3(5),622–629.
Blautzik,J.,Demirçapa,I.,&Reiser,M.(2013). Turner,J.,Oakes,P.,Haslam,S.,&McGarty,C.(1994).
Existential neuroscience: Effects of mortality Self and collective: Cognition and social con-
salienceontheneurocognitiveprocessingofat- text. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin,
tractive opposite-sex faces. Social cognitive and 20(5),454–463.
affectiveneuroscience,9(10),1601–1607. Watson, D., Clark, L., & Tellegen, A. (1988). Develop-
Simmons,J.,Nelson,L.,&Simonsohn,U.(2011).False- ment and validation of brief measures of pos-
positive psychology: Undisclosed flexibility in itive and negative affect: The PANAS scales.
data collection and analysis allows presenting Journal of personality and social psychology,
anything as significant. Psychological science, 54(6),1063.
22(11),1359–1366. Yen, C.-L., & Cheng, C.-P. (2013). Researcher effects
Simon, L., Greenberg, J., Harmon-Jones, E., Solomon, onmortalitysalienceresearch:Ameta-analytic
S., Pyszczynski, T., Arndt, J., & Abend, T. moderatoranalysis.DeathStudies,37(7),636–
(1997). Terror management and cognitive- 652.
experiential self-theory: Evidence that terror Zaleskiewicz, T., Gasiorowska,A., & Kesebir, P.(2015).
managementoccursintheexperientialsystem. The Scrooge effectrevisited: Mortality salience
Journal of personality and social psychology, increases the satisfaction derived from proso-
72(5),1132. cial behavior. Journal of Experimental Social
Singer,P.(2011).Theexpandingcircle:Ethics,evolution, Psychology,59,67–76.
andmoral.PrincetonUniversityPress.
Sjåstad, H. (2019). Short-sighted greed? focusing on
the future promotes reputation-based generos-
ity.Judgment DecisionMaking,14(2).