
===== PAGE 1/13 =====
Meta-Psychology,2022,vol6,MP.2020.2718 Opendata:NotApplicable Editedby:RickardCarlsson
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2020.2718 Openmaterials:Yes Reviewedby:Nordström,T.,Rohrer,J.,Zigerell,L.J.
Articletype:Tutorial Openandreproducibleanalysis:Yes Analysisreproducedby:LucijaBatinovi´c
PublishedundertheCC-BY4.0license Openreviewsandeditorialprocess:Yes AllsupplementaryfilescanbeaccessedatOSF:
Preregistration:No https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/W98S6
Multiverse analyses in the classroom
Tom Heyman
MethodologyandStatisticsUnit,InstituteofPsychology,LeidenUniversity
Wolf Vanpaemel
FacultyofPsychologyandEducationalSciences,KULeuven
Abstract
Mostempiricalpapersinpsychologyinvolvestatisticalanalysesperformedonaneworexistingdataset. Sometimes
the robustness of a finding is demonstrated via data-analytical triangulation (e.g., obtaining comparable outcomes
across different operationalizations of the dependent variable), but systematically considering the plethora of al-
ternative analysis pathways is rather uncommon. However, researchers increasingly recognize the importance of
establishing the robustness of a finding. The latter can be accomplished through a so-called multiverse analysis,
which involves methodically examining the arbitrary choices pertaining to data processing and/or model building.
In the present paper, we describe how the multiverse approach can be implemented in student research projects
within psychology programs, drawing on our personal experience as instructors. Embedding a multiverse project
in students’ curricula addresses an important scientific need, as studies examining the robustness or fragility of
phenomena are largely lacking in psychology. Additionally, it offers students an ideal opportunity to put various
statistical methods into practice, thereby also raising awareness about the abundance and consequences of arbi-
trary decisions in data-analytic processing. An attractive practical feature is that one can reuse existing datasets,
whichprovesespeciallyusefulwhenresourcesarelimited,orwhencircumstancessuchastheCOVID-19lockdown
measuresrestrictdatacollectionpossibilities.
Keywords: multiverseanalysis;robustness;education;pedagogy;openscience
Animportantpartofmanypsychologystudents’(un- comeawaywithawrongimpressionofwhatpsycholog-
der)graduateprogramsareresearch-methodsclassesin icalresearchentails,anditmighteveninstillbadhabits
whichstudentsareaskedtocompletetheirown(small- inprospectiveresearchers. Inthepresentpaper,wesug-
scale) research project (e.g., Kierniesky, 2005). Typ- gestanalternativeimplementationofresearch-methods
ically, the goal is to run through the entire empiri- classes that addresses these concerns. In particular, we
cal cycle, thus putting knowledge gained from previ- propose that completing a multiverse analysis project
oustheory-focusedcoursesintopractice. However, this aspartofsuchresearchmethodsclasseshasseveralim-
can be quite challenging, as time and resources are of- portant benefits. First, we explain what a multiverse
ten limited in such projects. As a consequence, stu- analysisentails(seeSteegenetal.,2016). Then,wede-
dents and instructors might (begrudgingly) take short- scribe the two main ingredients of a multiverse-in-the-
cuts, resulting in ill-designed or underpowered studies, classroomproject: asuitabledatasetandasolid(meta-
poorly-motivated research questions, sloppy measure- )scientificbackground. Next,wegiveaworkedexample
ment practices, and so on. Perhaps the most devastat- of such a project, based on our personal experience as
ingconsequenceofthisapproachisthatstudentscould instructors. Finally, we discuss the benefits and chal-
===== PAGE 2/13 =====
2
lengesofthemultiverse-in-the-classroom. ducedasignificanteffect.
Theimportanceofamultiverseanalysisisalsonicely
WhatisaMultiverseAnalysis? illustrated by the study of Silberzahn et al. (2018),
in which 29 research teams independently examined
Most empirical papers in psychology involve some
whether referees in soccer are more likely to give red
kindofdataanalysis. Typically,thereisnouniquepath
cards to players with a darker skin tone compared
from the raw data to the eventual conclusions of a pa-
to light-skin-toned players. All teams used the same
per. Researchers need to make a number of decisions
datasettoanswerthisquestion,yettheconclusionsvar-
along the way, such as whether and how to deal with
ied considerably: 20 out of 29 teams (69%) found a
outliers and missing data, whether and how to trans-
positiverelation(i.e.,dark-skin-toned-playerstendedto
form variables, and so on. In some cases, theoretical
receive more red cards), whereas 9 teams obtained a
considerations provide a clear solution to such ques-
nulleffect,whichwasevennumericallynegativeintwo
tions, yet, at times, researchers have little to go on,
cases. Theseresultsunderscorethatthereareoftensev-
so they turn to their gut feeling, lab habits, or field-
eral ways to process and analyze a given dataset, and
specificstandards,whichareoftenpoorlymotivated. As
thatpickingasinglepathwaymightbedeceiving,which
aresult,whenprocessingandanalyzingempiricaldata,
is why conducting a multiverse analysis can be very in-
researchers regularly face certain choices that are ar-
formative.
bitrary in nature. These researcher degrees of freedom
Ideas similar to that of a multiverse analysis have
(Simmonsetal.,2011)leadtoagardenofforkingpaths
been proposed under different names, such as specifi-
(Gelman&Loken,2014).
cation curve analysis (Simonsohn et al., 2020), vibra-
Asanexample,supposethat,foragivendataset,are-
tion of effects analysis (Patel et al., 2015), multimodel
searcheridentifiesfourplausiblewaystodealwithout-
analysis(YoungandHolsteen,2017),andthemanyan-
liers,threeapproachestohandlemissingdata,andtwo
alysts approach by Silberzahn et al. (2018) discussed
reasonable options to transform a particular variable.
above(though,incontrastwiththeotherapproaches,in
Assumingallcombinationsaresensible,thiswouldlead
thelatterapproachthedifferentchoicesaredistributed
to4*3*2=24uniquepaths,eachwithitsownoutcome
over research teams rather than being performed by
(see also Bishop, 2016). However, researchers usually
the same team). Multiverse-style analyses are increas-
reporttheresultsforjustoneorafewofthesepaths,by
inglybeingrecognizedasprovidingcrucialinformation,
pickingonlyoneorafewoptionsoutofthepoolofplau-
and researchers have also proposed various extensions
sible alternatives (e.g., deleting observations 2.5 stan-
andrefinements. Forinstance,multiverseanalyseshave
darddeviationsabovethemean,listwisedeletionwhen
been applied in the context of meta-analyses (Voracek
encountering missing values, and log-transforming a
et al., 2019), suggested as an approach to deal with
positively skewed variable; see also Elson, 2016, for a
differentrandomeffectstructuresofmulti-levelmodels
practicalillustration).
(Harder,2020),andusedincombinationwithso-called
Incontrast,theideaofamultiverseanalysis(Steegen
explorable explanations allowing readers of a paper to
etal.,2016)istoexploreandreportonawidearrayof
dynamicallymovethroughthemultiverse(Dragicevicet
imaginable (combinations of) reasonable alternatives,
al.,2019). Inaddition,Liuetal.(2020)recentlydevel-
eachofwhichprovidingananswertothesameresearch
oped a programming tool called Boba, which helps re-
question. Byexplicitlyconsideringtheresultsofseveral
searchers to conduct and visualize multiverse analyses,
reasonable analyses, a multiverse analysis can give an
whereas others have developed specific R packages to
idea about the robustness or fragility of a certain find-
facilitate multiverse analyses (e.g., Masur & Scharkow,
ing, and might even point to moderators of the effect
2019;Sarma&Kay,2019).
in question (i.e., key choices regarding data process-
ingand/oranalysisthattheconclusiondependson). A
TeachingMultiverseAnalyses
multiverse analysis can be applied to newly collected
data(e.g.,Kalokerinosetal.,2019),butalsoretrospec- The key message of this paper is that multiverse
tively using existing data (e.g., Moors & Hesselmann, analyses are ideally suited to be included in laboratory
2019). For instance, Credé and Phillips (2017) con- or research-methods classes. In line with its general
ductedamultiverseanalysisondatafromCarneyetal. theme, there are a multitude of ways in which multi-
(2010) examining the power pose effect, which is the verseanalysescanbeincorporatedinresearch-methods
(controversial) finding that holding a high-power body classes, taking into account the available time, place in
pose affects hormone levels. Their multiverse analysis thecurriculum,andlearningobjectives. Yet,theyallre-
revealedthatmostalternativepathwaysyieldednullef- quire two essential ingredients: a suitable dataset and
fects,whereastheoriginalsingle-pathwayanalysispro- a solid (meta-)scientific background. Both of these el-
===== PAGE 3/13 =====
3
ements will be discussed in turn, including some guid- and obtaining the same results). Ideally, one selects
ancebasedonpersonalexperience. a study of which the (most important) results are re-
producible, or, at minimum, that the reason for non-
Asuitabledataset reproducibility is clear. This requirement restricts the
pool of possible target studies even further, as analytic
A multiverse analysis can be conducted on newly
reproducibility within psychological research has been
gathered data, or one could reuse an existing dataset.
shown to be far from ideal. For example, Hardwicke
Fromaneducationalpoint-of-view,theformeroptionis
etal.(2018)wereabletoindependentlyreproducethe
fairly comparable to a typical student research project,
keyresultsfromonly11outof35articleswithreusable
thoughtheeventualstatisticalanalyseswillbeconsider-
data published in the journal Cognition. More surpris-
ablymoreelaborate,sophisticatedandtime-consuming.
ingly, even with the help of the original authors, key
Focusing on existing data is perhaps more unusual in
results of 13 articles could not be reproduced. Artner
the context of a research methods class, in that it in-
et al. (2021) describe similar struggles in their attempt
volves finding a suitable dataset and isolating the hy-
toreproduce232keystatisticalclaimsfrom46articles,
potheses of interest, rather than designing a study to
based on the raw data, without help from the original
testahypothesisandcollectingdata. Forshortprojects
authors (see also Wicherts et al., 2011). Although re-
or when students are relatively inexperienced, the in-
producibilityisnotstrictlynecessaryinordertoconduct
structor could select one or a few suitable studies, thus
amultiverseanalysis,itdoesprovidesomereassurance
assuring that students can hit the ground running. Al-
thatthedatawereprocessedandinterpretedintheway
ternatively, students with a stronger background could
intended by the authors. For example, before conduct-
be given the opportunity to find a suitable study them-
ing their multiverse analysis, Steegen et al. (2016) had
selves.
tocorrectvariousminorreportingerrorsintheoriginal
Selectingastudyfromtheliteratureforamultiverse
data,whichwerediscoveredonlybyfirstattemptingto
analysis comes with several challenges. One obvious
reproduce the results (see their supplemental materi-
requirementforsuchastudyisthatitshouldhavepub-
als).
lically available data, or that the original authors share
Iftheoriginalresultsarenot(entirely)reproducible,
their data for the agreed-upon purposes. This already
but the source of the inconsistencies is easily identifi-
narrows down the pool of studies, as psychological sci-
able(e.g.,useofdummycodingratherthaneffectcod-
entists are often not able or willing to share research
ing or correctable typos in the data file), one can still
data (Vanpaemel et al., 2015; Wicherts et al., 2006),
be reasonably confident in one’s understanding of the
though since the start of the open science movement
data-analysis, and the study might be a suitable target
and its various initiatives (e.g., Morey et al., 2016),
for the type of research project described here. In fact,
there has been an increase in data availability (Kidwell
such cases can be especially interesting from an educa-
etal.,2016). Furthermore,evenifdataareavailable,it
tional point of view, as they demonstrate the project’s
does not necessarily imply that they are amenable to a
relevance, and illustrate that even accomplished re-
multiverse analysis. It might, for instance, be unclear
searchers might struggle with data analysis at times.
what a certain variable measures, or how a data file
Yet, when there is no discernable explanation for non-
is structured (Hardwicke et al., 2018). Obviously, the
reproducible results, undertaking a multiverse analysis
multiverse-using-existing-data-approachisonlyfeasible
is potentially fruitless, especially when the discrepan-
whenonehasaccesstoreusabledata.
cies are substantial, because one might have misinter-
Another important criterion is that the study should
preted the data. Of course, it is also possible that the
affordplausiblealternativedata-analyticpathways,tai-
original authors made a mistake, but it can be time-
loredtothestudents’capabilities,totestthehypothesis
consumingtofigurethisout,andtheauthorsmightnot
of interest. We suspect that many studies in psychol-
beableorwillingtohelpclearupanydiscrepancies.
ogy meet this requirement, by for example focusing on
Finding a study meeting all these requirements can
outlier detection, dichotomization of variables, covari-
bequitechallenging, forstudentsandinstructorsalike.
ate inclusion, and so on. However, the data need to be
A useful starting point for this search process is the
availableatalevelrawenoughtoallowtheconstruction
article library on curatescience.org, which provides
ofdifferentpathways. Ifoneonlyhasaccesstothepro-
the possibility of filtering articles based on the avail-
cesseddata(e.g.,afterdichotomization),ratherthanto
ability of data (LeBel et al., 2018). Furthermore,
the raw data, certain reasonable alternative processing
one could browse repositories like the Open Science
andanalysisoptionscannotbeexplored.
Framework (Soderberg, 2018) for articles with open
A final issue to consider is analytical reproducibility
data. Consulting recent issues of journals using badges
(i.e.,conductingthesameanalysesonthesamedataset
===== PAGE 4/13 =====
4
to signal articles with open data and open materi- some potentially relevant or remarkable choices. Stu-
als (https://www.cos.io/our-services/badges; Kidwell dents could (or should) also try to reproduce the orig-
et al., 2016) is another excellent option. Of course, inal findings, if they haven’t done so already as part
the instructor could provide a dataset of their own or of the process to select the target study (see above).
onetheyarealreadyfamiliarwith. Thiscouldeitherbe That way, students familiarize themselves with the tar-
theprimaryoronlyoption(seeExampleApplicationbe- getstudyanditsdata,whichmightgivethemideasfor
low), or as a back-up in case (some) students wouldn’t theireventualmultiverse.
be able to find a suitable dataset themselves. Based on Throughouttheproject,strongguidanceisneeded. It
ourexperience,bothoftheseapproachesworkwell. is critical to inform students about the expectations re-
gardingamultiverseanalysis,andtotacklemisconcep-
Asolid(meta-)scientificbackground tions. For one, the goal should not be to merely devise
as many paths as possible. The key is that the alter-
It is important to build a solid meta-scientific frame-
natives are properly motivated — quality over quantity
work, and provide students with sufficient background
(Del Giudice & Gangestad, 2021). Furthermore, when
information about multiverse analyses at the begin-
multiple students use the same dataset, it is perfectly
ning of the project (unless they are already familiar
plausible to end up with different paths, and thus po-
with these concepts from other courses). For exam-
tentially a seemingly-contradicting answer to the same
ple, one could cover some insightful meta-scientific ar-
research question. This does not mean that someone
ticles such as Simmons et al. (2011) about researcher
madeamistake,ratheritshowstheubiquityofarbitrary
degrees of freedom and their effect on the false posi-
decisions. Clear communication about these issues is
tive rate, Gelman and Loken (2014), which describes
importanttoavoidanyconfusionamongstudents. Pro-
howdata-analysiscanbeconceivedasagardenoffork-
vidingfeedbacktostudents,particularlywhenitcomes
ing paths, and Steegen et al. (2016), which introduces
to the construction and implementation of the multi-
multiverse analyses. That way, students are gently in-
verse analysis, is also instrumental to make the project
troduced to the concept of a multiverse analysis and
asuccess. Somestudentsmaycomeupwithpoorlymo-
the rationale behind it. In addition, it serves to foster
tivatedalternativepathways,inwhichcasethesupervi-
criticalthinkinganddemonstratestherelevanceofsuch
sor should steer them in the right direction or encour-
(meta-)scientificstudies,includingtheirown.
agethemtocarefully(re)considertherationalefortheir
Besides these more general meta-scientific articles,
choices. Feedback could also take the form of a group
students could benefit from several (published) exam-
discussionat alater stageof theproject, to addressthe
ples of a multiverse analysis (e.g., Credé & Phillips,
differentpathwaysstudentscameupwithandcompare
2017; Moors & Hesselmann, 2019), to give them an
theiroutcomes.
idea of what it concretely entails. This serves two pur-
Though not strictly necessary, basic knowledge of R
poses. One, it provides guidance on how to summa-
(i.e., a programming language primarily used for data
rize and interpret the outcome of a multiverse analy-
analysisandvisualization;RCoreTeam,2016),oreven
sis (e.g., plotting a distribution of p-values, or creating
R Markdown (i.e., an environment to create dynamic,
a heatmap with p-values as a function of the various
reproduciblereports;Allaireetal.,2016),canhelpstu-
analytic pathways). Two, it stimulates students in rec-
dents in running their analyses and reporting their re-
ognizingpotentiallyarbitrarychoices,thusgivingthem
sults, yet there is quite a steep learning curve. Multi-
inspirationfortheirownmultiverse.
verseanalysesinvolvecombiningdifferentoptions(e.g.,
Still, it can be quite challenging and overwhelming
different outlier criteria for different dependent vari-
for students to generate alternative data-analytic path-
ables that are transformed in various ways). Especially
ways. A useful source, besides the papers mentioned
whenthisamountstomanyindividualpathways,itwill
above, is the work of Wicherts et al. (2016), which of-
be more efficient to integrate them instead of perform-
fersacomprehensiveoverviewofresearcherdegreesof
ingeachanalysisseparately,yetthatdoesrequiresome
freedom. Moreover, one could also encourage students
programmingexperienceortraining.
tolookforalternativepathwaysinrelatedwork. Inpar-
ticular, when the project involves re-analysis of a pub-
ExampleApplication
lished study, students could critically assess the ratio-
nalebehindthearticle’sdata-analyticchoices,orexam- This section describes an actual implementation of
inepaperscitedinthetargetarticleaswellasprevious the multiverse-in-the-classroom approach in the con-
publications from the same authors on the same topic. text of an undergraduate research project (see Table
Tofacilitatethis,theinstructorcouldorganizea(group) 1 for a summary of the syllabus). Besides illustrating
discussion about the paper in question and point out the viability of the approach, we hope that it can in-
===== PAGE 5/13 =====
5
Table1
SummaryoftheSyllabusfortheUndergraduateResearchProjectInvolvingaMultiverseAnalysis
Timing Activity Primarylearningobjective(s)
Week1 Generalintroduction Understandthetopicofthethesis
Week2 Group discussion of target article (i.e., Smith et Engageincriticalthinkingaboutthetargetarticle
al.,2019)
Classonethics,datasharing,andreproducibility Understand the importance of data sharing and
reproducibility
Week3 GroupdiscussionofWichertsetal. (2011) Understand the importance of data sharing and
reproducibility
GroupdiscussionofHardwickeetal. (2018) Understand the importance of data sharing and
reproducibility
Week4 GroupdiscussionofSimmonsetal. (2011) Recognize researchers’ degrees of freedom and
realizetheirimpact
GroupdiscussionofSteegenetal. (2016) Understand what a multiverse analysis entails,
how to conduct one, and see how the results
couldbepresented
Week5 Rintro Perform data processing, visualization, and plot-
tinginR
Week6 RMarkdownintro Writereproducibleanddynamicreport
Week7-17 Conductmultiverseanalysisandwritethesis(in- Writeathesisincorporatingrelevantfeedback
cluding four opportunities for individual feed-
back)
spire instructors, course coordinators, and program di- theirprojectfollowingthetypicalIntroduction-Method-
rectorswhowouldconsiderincludingmultiverseanaly- Results-Discussion structure. The resulting products
ses in their research-methods classes. Of course, there were evaluated on the same criteria as other research
aremanyalternativewaystoimplementthemultiverse- projects within the course by two independent graders
in-the-classroom approach, taking into account aspects (including the instructor). In addition, the instructor
such as timing, group size, students’ prior knowledge, alsogradedtheprocessasawhole.
learningobjectives,andsoon. The project involved the re-analysis of an existing
The project took place in the 2020 spring semester dataset, which was provided by the instructor. The se-
with thefirst authoras theinstructor, and wasinspired lectedtargetarticlewasastudybySmithetal.(2019),
by a course jointly-taught by both authors in previous examining the influence of acute stress on semantic
years. ItwasembeddedinacoursecalledBachelorpro- memory retrieval. Smith et al. found that participants
ject, which spans 17 weeks, and is organized for stu- performedbetteronanopen-endedtriviaquestionnaire
dents in the final year of their undergraduate psychol- afterexperiencingacutestress,andwhentheyshoweda
ogyprogram. Thesestudentshavealreadyfollowedsev- strongerstressresponse. Thestudymetalloftheabove
eralstatisticsandmethodscourses,typicallyamounting criteria: reusable processed data were available in de-
to30EuropeanCredits(EC). tailedenoughformat(theunderlyingrawdatawere,at
The Bachelorproject represents a study load of 15 thetime,availableuponrequest,andarenowpublically
EC, during which students need to write an individual available; see Smith, 2020); the results were repro-
thesis describing the outcomes of a research project. ducible (except for one easily-identifiable deviation);
The course is mandatory for all undergraduate psy- andthedataprocessingandanalysisstepsaffordedvar-
chology students, but they are divided in small groups ious alternative pathways. In a first meeting with the
eachwithadifferentinstructorandadifferentresearch studentsof+-1hourthegeneraltopicofthethesiswas
topic (e.g., mental health in university students, exam- introduced by the instructor. This included a short de-
iningpeople’sinterestinpsychedelics,individualdiffer- scription of the target study as well as a brief introduc-
ences in the attentional bias towards emotion,....). The tiontotheconceptofamultiverseanalysis. Inthenext
multiverse-in-the-classroom approach described here meeting (+- 2 hours), the target article was examined
was used in one such group, consisting of eight stu- indetailthroughajournalclub,inwhichtheinstructor
dents. Students ultimately had to write a thesis about led the discussion. Students were expected to read the
===== PAGE 6/13 =====
6
article in advance, and were encouraged to pay special thesis in R Markdown, or even use R for their eventual
attentiontomethodologicalanddata-analyticalchoices. analyses. In the end, all eight students conducted their
Furthermore, any aspects of the paper that were un- multiverse analysis in R, and two of them wrote their
clear to the students were addressed during the meet- finalpaperusingRMarkdown.
ing. From this point onwards, students were encour- From that point onwards, each student had four in-
aged to start thinking about alternative analysis path- dividualfeedbackmeetingswiththeinstructorinwhich
ways,inspiredbythegroupdiscussion,throughsearch- their research proposal (i.e., rationale for the different
ingforliteraturearoundthesametopic,etc. pathways), analysis plan, code, results, and write-up
The third meeting (+- 1.5 hours) consisted of an in- were discussed. Seventeen weeks after the start of the
teractive lecture on data sharing (including ethical is- course, they were expected to submit their final thesis
sues such as protecting the privacy of participants), re- andaccompanyinganalysisscript.
producibility,andscientificintegrity(includingadiscus- An exhaustive overview of all the alternatives stu-
sion of questionable research practices). The idea is to dents came up with would take us too far, but the
introduce some concepts that are directly relevant for following examples serve to illustrate the versatility
theirthesis(e.g.,reproducibility)aswellastogivestu- of a multiverse approach to (under)graduate research
dentsabroadoverviewofmeta-scientifictopics. projects. For instance, Smith and colleagues consid-
The next four meetings (+- 2 hours each) involved ered responses to a trivia questionnaire as being cor-
journalclubsaroundarticleson,respectively,datashar- rectiftheycompletelymatchedthecorrectanswer,were
ing and reproducibility (i.e., Hardwicke et al., 2018; misspelledbuteasilyextrapolated,wereinappropriately
Wicherts et al., 2011), researcher degrees of freedom pluralized or capitalized, were common synonyms of
(i.e., Simmons et al., 2011), and multiverse analysis the correct answer, or if the first four or more letters
(Steegen et al., 2016). Each time, two students led matched the correct answer. However, students con-
the discussion, but everyone was supposed to read the sidered various reasonable alternatives to this coding
paper in advance and take part in the discussion. The scheme,suchastreatingincompleteresponsesasincor-
instructorintervenedsporadicallyifsomethingwasun- rect,regardlessofhowmanylettersmatchedthecorrect
clear or to point out relevant aspects. The purpose of answer(Boere,2020;DeJong,2020;Hoogeterp,2020;
these meetings was three-fold. First, it served to build Kraaijenbrink, 2020; Kuipers, 2020; Van Dijk, 2020;
asolidmeta-scientificbackground,andtogivestudents Van Rijn, 2020; Van Wijk, 2020). Exploring this vari-
inspiration for their own multiverse analysis. Second, ation was only possible because students had access to
writingtheintroductionsectionforathesisaboutmulti- therawdata(i.e.,responsesofeachparticipanttoeach
verseanalysescanbechallengingasitdifferssomewhat question), as the processed data only contained accu-
from that of a “regular” empirical study. Hence, dis- racyscoresperparticipantbasedontheoriginalcoding
cussing a few key articles puts them on the right track. scheme.
Finally, thesejournalclubswerealsomeanttoimprove Furthermore, some students redefined the construct
students’presentationanddiscussionskills. reactivity to stress. In the original paper, it was opera-
The four final collective meetings (+- 2 hours each) tionalized as the change in cortisol levels relative to a
servedtointroducethestudentstoRandRMarkdown. baseline, whereas students also considered the change
Students were guided through a custom-made script in the psychological stress response measured through
showing how to read in data, transform and combine theState-TraitInventoryforCognitiveandSomaticAnx-
datasets, use conditional statements and loops, make iety, described in Grös et al., 2007 (Hoogeterp, 2020;
graphs, and perform all the analyses that were used in VanRijn,2020). Additionally,somestudentsaddedco-
the target paper. The script already used the data from variatestotheanalyses(e.g.,age;Kraaijenbrink,2020),
thetargetpapertomakesurethatstudentsunderstood or removed covariates (i.e., gender; Hoogeterp, 2020;
what the variables meant. Even though the script in- Kuipers,2020;VanWijk,2020). Yetotherpathwaysin-
troduced all the procedures needed to reproduce the volved imputing missing values (Kraaijenbrink, 2020),
results of the target paper, they were illustrated using or removing observations (e.g., excluding participants
different variables. As a take-home exercise, students who did not display an elevated cortisol level after
thentriedtoindependentlyreproducethekeyoutcomes stress-induction;Boere,2020;VanDijk,2020).
ofthetargetpaperusingR,whichtheylaterembedded Although there was some overlap in data-analytic
in an R Markdown document. This guaranteed that all choices between students, each individual project fea-
studentswere(eventually)abletofollowtheprocessing tured unique pathways, which were based on existing
and analysis pathways outlined by Smith et al. (2019). literature(e.g.,Merzetal.,2016),statisticalarguments,
Notethatitwasn’trequiredfromstudentstowritetheir and/or a critical appraisal of the original study. The
===== PAGE 7/13 =====
7
breadthofoptionsisillustratedinFigure1,showingthe to pay participants,...). Therefore, it is ideal for situa-
distribution of p-values for Smith and colleagues’ main tionswherecollectingnewdataisimpracticalorimpos-
finding resulting from each students’ multiverse analy- sible,forinstance,becausespecialequipmentorexper-
sis(seehttps://osf.io/rtayk/fortheunderlyingRcode). tiseisrequired,gettingethicalapprovaltakestoomuch
Onaverage,students’multiverseanalysescomprised78 time, or when one does not have access to a partici-
paths(minimum18,maximum160). pant pool or money to pay participants. This proved to
This outcome highlights the feasibility and potential be especially relevant in the lockdown situation due to
of undergraduate research projects incorporating mul- COVID-19 in spring 2020. Indeed, the lockdown mea-
tiverse analyses. We hasten to add that it does not sures, which involved suspending all in-vivo data col-
serve as a way to evaluate the robustness of Smith and lection and required classes to be taught online, had
colleagues’ main finding, because certain data-analytic very little impact on the project discussed above, with
choicesexploredbythestudentswereinsufficientlymo- allstudentsmeetingtheoriginaldeadline.
tivated. Theworkdonebythestudents,however,offers Theflexibilityalsoappliestotheselectionofatarget
an ideal starting point for a more thorough multiverse study. Each student could focus on a separate paper,
analysisofthefinding(seeHeymanetal.,2022). or, as was the case in the example above, each student
independently construes their own data-analytic path-
BenefitsoftheMultiverse-in-the-Classroom waysforthesamedataset. Thelatteroptioniscompa-
Approach rable to the many-analysts-one-dataset approach used
by Silberzahn et al. (2018), augmented with the ad-
Incorporating multiverse analyses in (un-
ditional requirement that every analyst (i.e., student)
der)graduate research projects (or other courses) has
should consider several plausible alternatives rather
many benefits for students as well as (psychological)
than a single one. We believe the many-multiverses-
scienceingeneral.
one-datasetoptionisthemostinterestingofthetwo,be-
One strength of the multiverse-in-the-classroom ap-
cause any given multiverse will rarely (if ever) exhaust
proach is that it can be flexibly adapted to the course’s
all reasonable options, hence it makes sense to adopt
learning objectives, classroom size, time frame, back-
a form of data-analytic triangulation. In other words,
ground of the students, and so on. For instance, one
there is a multiverse of multiverse analyses, which can
can conduct a multiverse analysis reusing an existing
becapturedtosomedegreebyaskingdifferentstudents
dataset, like in the example described above, or one
tofocus(semi-)independentlyonthesameoverarching
could use newly gathered data. Because the latter op-
topic. Although it is unrealistic to expect that every in-
tion involves an additional step compared to a typical
dividual project will be of the same quality, it can be
research project, it is well-suited for situations where
enlightening to see the variability, or lack thereof, in
something extra is required from students (e.g., stu-
outcomes. Indeed,asFigure1shows,itispossiblethat
dents enrolled in an honours program), whereas the
somemultiverseanalysessuggesttheeffectinquestion
formeroptioncanbeappliedmorebroadly. Importantly,
to be quite robust, whereas others suggest the effect to
as there is no need to design a new study, or to collect
beratherfragile.
any data, the students’ overall time-investment is com-
Despite bridging an important gap in psychological
parabletothatofaregularresearchproject. Moreover,
science by showing the robustness or fragility of find-
an adapted version of such a multiverse project can be
ings,multiverseanalysesarerelativelyrare,owingper-
used in a more statistics-oriented course rather than a
haps to their apparent complexity and/or their per-
research-methods-oriented course. Both authors have
ceived lack of novelty. In that sense, one can draw
used a similar approach as part of a 13-week gradu-
a parallel to replication studies: once rare in psychol-
atestatisticscoursewithinapsychologyresearchmaster
ogy (Makel et al., 2012), they are now becoming more
track for a number of years. There, the +- 40 students
mainstream through various initiatives (see Zwaan et
were instructed to write a report about the multiverse
al., 2018). Moreover, Frank and colleagues (Frank &
analysis they conducted in small groups using existing
Saxe,2012;Hawkinsetal.,2018)promotedconducting
data. Because these graduate students are well-versed
replicationstudiesinstudentresearchprojects(seealso
instatisticalanalysesandprogramming,andduetothe
Grahe et al., 2012; Wagge et al., 2019). The current
group-natureoftheproject,itcaneasilyfitina13-week
proposal seeks to accomplish a similar goal for multi-
course as compared to the 17-week undergraduate re-
verse analyses. Note that both approaches can comple-
searchprojectdescribedabove.
ment each other, in that one can conduct a multiverse
As a multiverse project does not necessarily require
analysis on replication data, either as part of the same
collecting new data, one could effectively save a lot of
projectoracrossdifferentiterationsofthecourse(e.g.,
resources(i.e.,timeofparticipantsandstudents,money
===== PAGE 8/13 =====
8
Figure1. DistributionofP-valuesforSmithandColleagues’MainFindingResultingfromEachStudents’Multiverse
Analysis.
Histogram of Student 1 (N = 160)
p−value
ycneuqerF
Histogram of Student 2 (N = 140)
20
15
10
5
0
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
p−value
ycneuqerF
Histogram of Student 3 (N = 48)
30
20
10
0
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
p−value
ycneuqerF
Histogram of Student 4 (N = 36)
10
8
6
4
2
0
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
p−value
ycneuqerF
25
20
15
10
5
0
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Histogram of Student 5 (N = 78)
p−value
ycneuqerF
Histogram of Student 6 (N = 18)
10
8
6
4
2
0
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
p−value
ycneuqerF
Histogram of Student 7 (N = 110)
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
p−value
ycneuqerF
Histogram of Student 8 (N = 36)
15
10
5
0
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
p−value
ycneuqerF
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Note. Thereddottedlineindicatesap-valueof.05. Thefigureinbracketsindicatesthenumberofpathwaysineachstudent’s
multiverse. Remarkthatnotallpathwayswereproperlymotivated,sotheseresultsshouldnotbeconsideredanevaluationof
therobustnessofSmithandcolleagues’mainfinding.
onegroupconductingthereplicationstudy,andanother sources which then get synthesized and applied to the
group performing multiverse analyses, possibly the fol- data - can even yield more comprehensive and less bi-
lowingsemesteroracademicyear). asedresultscomparedtoaregularmultiverseanalysis.
Another major benefit of adopting the multiverse-in- The multiverse in the classroom approach also pro-
the-classroom approach, besides its flexibility, is that vides ample pedagogical opportunities. Conducting a
it gives students the opportunity to make a tangible multiverse analysis typically requires students to per-
contribution to psychological science, something that form a number of different statistical analyses. It
might not always occur with (under)graduate research thereby addresses an often-heard complaint from psy-
projects. Moreover, under some conditions, the work chology students regarding the relevance of statistics.
done by students and instructor(s) can be solidified in Even though most research projects involve the prac-
a joint research paper, suitable for publication, as was tical application of statistics, it rarely is a focal point
the case for the example application. The classroom (insomecases,theanalysispartmightactuallybecon-
phase then serves as an elicitation step of possible rea- sidered a nuisance). Furthermore, a multiverse project
sonable variations, which, in a second step, are evalu- may help students to better understand the intricacies
ated for adoption in a multiverse analysis by a domain of statistical analyses. Importantly, it is not a purely
expert. Such a two-step multiverse analysis - where methodological or statistical project, as it also involves
data-analyticalpathwaysarefirstelicitedfromdifferent an empirical research question such as “to what extent
===== PAGE 9/13 =====
9
does power posing have an effect on hormone levels” across projects within the same (under)graduate pro-
or “what is the effect of stress on semantic memory”. gram. Morefundamentally,accreditationguidelinesfor
Hence, there is still the thrill of discovery, which helps researchprojectsinpsychologyoftenexplicitlymention
fuelstudents’engagement. thepossibilitytoconductsecondarydataanalyses(e.g.,
Atamoreabstractlevel,amultiverseprojectalsoal- AustralianPsychologyAccreditationCouncil,2019;The
lowsstudentstogainfirst-handexperiencewiththeim- BritishPsychologicalSociety,2019).
portance of open science, reproducibility, proper docu- Another challenge of conducting a multiverse anal-
mentation of data, and so on. In addition, it teaches ysis is that it requires combining various alternatives
themtocriticallyevaluatetherationalebehindastudy, (e.g., three different outlier criteria and four different
especially its methodology, and it gives them an idea data transformations yield 12 outcomes). In principle,
abouttheimperfectionsofpsychologicalscience. Asfu- everyanalysiscanbeconductedseparately,butthisbe-
ture consumers of research, it is relevant to recognize comesunwieldyquitequickly,soonecoulduseascript
thatarbitrarydecisionsaboundinresearch,andtoreal- toincreaseefficiency. Dependingonthestudents’back-
ize their consequences. A multiverse-in-the-classroom ground,thelatteroptionmightprovetobeunattainable
project really drives this point home. Moreover, for unlessonewouldincludesomeprogrammingclassesin
those students aspiring to become producers of re- thecurriculum(e.g.,teachingthelanguageR).
search, it is paramount to adopt responsible research Another potential hurdle for students (and instruc-
practices, such as assessing the robustness of key out- tors alike) revolves around the interpretation of a mul-
comes. Infact,studentsspontaneouslymentionedthese tiverseanalysis. Incontrasttoatypicalresearchproject,
aspectsinaninformalevaluationofthecourse(e.g.,“it one does not end up with a single outcome, but with a
has really changed my perspective on research... and collection of outcomes. This elicits questions such as
sparked my interest” or “it was interesting to see what when should a finding be considered robust, when is
happenstothep-valueswhenconductingdifferentanal- it presumably a fluke, and how should the results be
yses”). One could argue that typical research projects, summarized and presented. Indeed, published papers
in which students are required to develop a new hy- involving multiverse analyses typically eyeball the pat-
pothesis, design a new study and collect data, teaches ternofresults, forinstance,byplottingthedistribution
thembadhabitsorevenquestionableresearchpractices of p-values. Steegen et al. (2016) tentatively suggest
asitisratherdifficulttoaccomplishallthisinarigorous to focus inference on the average p-value, but beyond
mannerwithinthe,usuallylimited,timeframe. that, there is little guidance as to how to synthesize a
multiverseanalysis(butseeSimonsohnetal.,2020).
ChallengesandObjections A more fundamental objection could be that ap-
proaches such as pre-registration are more desirable,
Amultiverse-in-the-classroomprojectcaninvolvede-
sothatstudentsshouldspendtheirtimelearningabout
signing a new study, but that might not be feasible
pre-registration rather than about multiverse analyses.
within the confines of a single semester, because de-
Pre-registration entails that one specifies the analysis
veloping and conducting such an analysis in itself is
plan before knowing its results, if possible even before
rather time-consuming. The option involving existing
starting the data collection (Nosek et al., 2018). As
dataismorereadilyapplicable,yetonepotentialobjec-
such, pre-registration makes transparent which choices
tionisthatsuchaprojectdoesnotcovertheentireem-
could be data-driven and which are not. However, if a
pirical cycle. Although a multiverse project requires a
researcher pre-registers one or few analytic pathways,
thorough literature search, motivating a research ques-
one is still left in the dark about how robust or fragile
tion, and a comprehensive data-analysis of which the
theeffectis,oraboutwhethercertainchoicesaremore
results ought to be interpreted and discussed, students
criticalthanothers(forasimilarargumentseeSteegen
may miss out on learning specific skills(e.g., regarding
et al., 2016). To that end, one would need to conduct
data collection). When the development of such skills
a multiverse-style analysis. Of course, one could pre-
is a central objective of the course, one might need to
register a multiverse analysis to combine the strengths
look for a creative solution. For instance, in the exam-
ofbothapproaches,butthisincreasesthecomplexityof
ple application described above, the absence of a data
theproject.
collection phase was addressed by having students re-
Finally, one should be cautious that students do not
code the participants’ responses to the trivia question-
completelylosefaithin(psychological)science. Indeed,
naire. Note though that one can raise similar concerns
whereasthegoalistomakestudentscriticalconsumers
about more widely-applied projects such as those in-
of scientific output, and, as a result, careful producers
volving online data collection. In fact, there is often
of scientific output, they should not come away with
quiteabitofvariabilityinwhatisdemandedofstudents
===== PAGE 10/13 =====
10
the idea that science is inherently flawed or that all re- This article earned the Open Materials badge for
searchers are opportunistic or fraudulent. Along the makingthe materialsopenlyavailable. It hasbeenver-
same lines, students should be made aware that not ified that the analysis reproduced the results presented
all hypotheses can necessarily be tested in a myriad inthearticle. Theentireeditorialprocess,includingthe
of ways. Based on the informal evaluation mentioned openreviews,arepublishedintheonlinesupplement.
above, studentsdid not comeaway with suchincorrect
notions, but future research on the effectiveness of the References
multiverse-in-the-classroomapproachshoulddetermine
Allaire,J.,Cheng,J.,Xie,Y.,McPherson,J.,Chang,W.,
whetherthisisindeedthecase.
Allen,J.,Wickham,H.,Atkins,A.,&Hyndman,
R.(2016).rmarkdown:DynamicDocumentsfor
Conclusion
R [R package version 1.6]. https://CRAN.R-
Thepresentpaperproposestoimplementmultiverse project.org/package=rmarkdown
analyses in student research projects, and provides a Artner, R., Verliefde, T., Steegen, S., Gomes, S., Traets,
practical demonstration that we hope will encourage, F.,Tuerlinckx,F.,&Vanpaemel,W.(2021).The
help and inspire instructors to adopt it in their own reproducibility of statistical results in psycho-
courses. Because multiverse analyses speak to the ro- logicalresearch:Aninvestigationusingunpub-
bustness of a (published) finding, it can fulfill an im- lished raw data. Psychological Methods, 26(5),
portant need in psychological science, thus making the 527–546. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 /
results of such projects truly relevant. Furthermore, it met0000365
is an excellent way to put statistics in practice, it fos- Australian Psychology Accreditation Council. (2019).
ters critical thinking, and raises awareness about the Accreditation Standards for Psychology Pro-
prevalence and consequences of arbitrary data-analytic grams Evidence Guide (Version 1.2). https://
decisions. Finally, the flexibility of the multiverse-in- psychologycouncil . org . au / wp - content /
the-classroom approach makes it suitable for all kinds uploads/2021/03/APAC-Evidence-guide_v1.2.
ofprojects,evenwhendatacollectionisnotfeasible. pdf
Bishop, D. (2016). Open research practices: Unin-
AuthorContact tendedconsequencesandsuggestionsforavert-
ing them.(commentary on the peer reviewers’
Correspondence concerning this article should be
opennessinitiative).RoyalSocietyOpenScience,
addressed to Tom Heyman, Methodology and Statis-
3(4), 160109. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsos.
tics Unit, Institute of Psychology, Leiden University,
160109
Wassenaarseweg52,2333AKLeiden,TheNetherlands.
Boere, R. (2020). Het belang van reproduceerbare en
E-mail: t.d.p.heyman@fsw.leidenuniv.nl. ORCID TH
transparante wetenschap: Een multiverse be-
0000-0003-0565-441XWV0000-0002-5855-3885.
nadering. [Unpublished bachelor’s thesis]. Lei-
denUniversity.
ConflictofInterestandFunding
Carney, D. R., Cuddy, A. J., & Yap, A. J. (2010). Power
Theauthorsdeclarethattherewerenoconflictsofin- posing:Briefnonverbaldisplaysaffectneuroen-
terestorspecificfundingwithrespecttotheauthorship docrine levels and risk tolerance. Psychological
orthepublicationofthisarticle. Science, 21(10), 1363–1368. https://doi.org/
10.1177/0956797610383437
AuthorContributions Credé,M.,&Phillips,L.A.(2017).Revisitingthepower
poseeffect:Howrobustaretheresultsreported
Both authors conceptualized the idea. TH wrote the
byCarney,Cuddy,andYap(2010)todataana-
firstdraftofthemanuscriptandWVprovidedextensive
lytic decisions? Social Psychological and Person-
feedback. Both authors approved the final version for
ality Science, 8(5), 493–499. https://doi.org/
submission.
10.1177/1948550617714584
OpenSciencePractices De Jong, S. (2020). Het effect van stress op het seman-
tisch geheugen: Een multiverse benadering. [Un-
publishedbachelor’sthesis].LeidenUniversity.
DelGiudice,M.,&Gangestad,S.W.(2021).Atraveler’s
guide to the multiverse: Promises, pitfalls, and
aframeworkfortheevaluationofanalyticdeci-
sions.AdvancesinMethodsandPracticesinPsy-
===== PAGE 11/13 =====
11
chologicalScience,4(1),1–15.https://doi.org/ Heyman,T.,Boere,R.,deJong,S.,Hoogeterp,L.,Kraai-
10.1177/2515245920954925 jenbrink,J.,Kuipers,C.,vanDijk,M.,vanRijn,
Dragicevic, P., Jansen, Y., Sarma, A., Kay, M., & Cheva- L.,&vanWijk,T.(2022).Theeffectofstresson
lier, F. (2019). Increasing the transparency semantic memory retrieval: A multiverse anal-
of research papers with explorable multiverse ysis. Collabra: Psychology, 8(1), 35745. https:
analyses. Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Confer- //doi.org/10.1525/collabra.35745
ence on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Hoogeterp,L.(2020).Heteffectvanstressophetseman-
1–15. tisch geheugen: Een multiverse benadering. [Un-
Elson, M. (2016). Flexibility in methods & measures of publishedbachelor’sthesis].LeidenUniversity.
social science. https://www.flexiblemeasures. Kalokerinos, E. K., Erbas, Y., Ceulemans, E., & Kup-
com/ pens, P. (2019). Differentiate to regulate:
Frank, M. C., & Saxe, R. (2012). Teaching replica- Low negative emotion differentiation is asso-
tion. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 7(6), ciated with ineffective use but not selection of
600–604. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / emotion-regulationstrategies.PsychologicalSci-
1745691612460686 ence, 30(6), 863–879. https://doi.org/10.
Gelman, A., & Loken, E. (2014). The statisticalcrisis in 1177/0956797619838763
science.AmericanScientist,102(6),460–465. Kidwell, M. C., Lazarevi´c, L. B., Baranski, E., Hard-
Grahe, J. E., Reifman, A., Hermann, A. D., Walker, M., wicke, T. E., Piechowski, S., Falkenberg, L.-S.,
Oleson, K. C., Nario-Redmond, M., & Wiebe, Kennett, C., Slowik, A., Sonnleitner, C., Hess-
R. P. (2012). Harnessing the undiscovered re- Holden, C., Errington, T. M., Fiedler, S., &
sourceofstudentresearchprojects.Perspectives Nosek, B. A. (2016). Badges to acknowledge
on Psychological Science, 7(6), 605–607. https: open practices: A simple, low-cost, effective
//doi.org/10.1177/1745691612459057 method for increasing transparency. PLoS Biol-
Grös,D.F.,Antony,M.M.,Simms,L.J.,&McCabe,R.E. ogy, 14(5), e1002456. https://doi.org/10.
(2007). Psychometric properties of the State- 1371/journal.pbio.1002456
Trait Inventory for Cognitive and Somatic Anx- Kierniesky, N. C. (2005). Undergraduate research in
iety (STICSA): Comparison to the State-Trait small psychology departments: Two decades
Anxiety Inventory (STAI). Psychological Assess- later. Teaching of Psychology, 32(2), 84–90.
ment, 19(4), 369–381. https://doi.org/10. https://doi.org/10.1207/s15328023top3202_
1037/1040-3590.19.4.369 1
Harder, J. A. (2020). The multiverse of methods: Ex- Kraaijenbrink, J. (2020). The effect of stress on the se-
tendingthemultiverseanalysistoaddressdata- manticmemory:Amultiverseapproach.[Unpub-
collection decisions. Perspectives on Psychologi- lishedbachelor’sthesis].LeidenUniversity.
calScience,15(5),1158–1177.https://doi.org/ Kuipers, C. (2020). The effect of stress on the semantic
10.1177/1745691620917678 memory: A multiverse approach. [Unpublished
Hardwicke, T. E., Mathur, M. B., MacDonald, K., Nil- bachelor’sthesis].LeidenUniversity.
sonne,G.,Banks,G.C.,Kidwell,M.C.,Hofelich LeBel, E. P., McCarthy, R. J., Earp, B. D., Elson, M., &
Mohr,A.,Clayton,E.,Yoon,E.J.,HenryTessler, Vanpaemel,W.(2018).Aunifiedframeworkto
M.,Lenne,R.L.,Altman,S.,Long,B.,&Frank, quantifythecredibilityofscientificfindings.Ad-
M. C. (2018). Data availability, reusability, and vancesinMethodsandPracticesinPsychological
analytic reproducibility: Evaluating the impact Science, 1(3), 389–402. https://doi.org/10.
of a mandatory open data policy at the jour- 1177/2515245918787489
nalCognition.RoyalSocietyOpenScience,5(8), Liu, Y., Kale, A., Althoff, T., & Heer, J. (2020). Boba:
180448.https://doi.org/10.1098/rsos.180448 Authoring and visualizing multiverse analyses.
Hawkins, R. X., Smith, E. N., Au, C., Arias, J. M., Cata- IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Com-
pano, R., Hermann, E., Keil, M., Lampinen, A., puterGraphics,27(2),1753–1763.https://doi.
Raposo,S.,Reynolds,J.,Salehi,S.,Salloum,J., org/10.1109/TVCG.2020.3028985
Tan, J., & Frank, M. C. (2018). Improving the Makel,M.C.,Plucker,J.A.,&Hegarty,B.(2012).Repli-
replicability of psychological science through cations in psychology research: How often do
pedagogy. Advances in Methods and Practices in they really occur? Perspectives on Psychological
Psychological Science, 1(1), 7–18. https://doi. Science, 7(6), 537–542. https://doi.org/10.
org/10.1177/2515245917740427 1177/1745691612460688
===== PAGE 12/13 =====
12
Masur,P.,&Scharkow,M.(2019).specr:Statisticalfunc- Simmons,J.P.,Nelson,L.D.,&Simonsohn,U.(2011).
tions for conducting specification curve analyses. False-positive psychology: Undisclosed flexibil-
https://github.com/masurp/specr ity in data collection and analysis allows pre-
Merz, C. J., Dietsch, F., & Schneider, M. (2016). The senting anything as significant. Psychological
impact of psychosocial stress on conceptual Science, 22(11), 1359–1366. https://doi.org/
knowledge retrieval. Neurobiology of Learning 10.1177/0956797611417632
and Memory, 134, 392–399. https://doi.org/ Simonsohn,U.,Simmons,J.P.,&Nelson,L.D.(2020).
10.1016/j.nlm.2016.08.020 Specificationcurveanalysis.NatureHumanBe-
Moors,P.,&Hesselmann,G.(2019).Unconsciousarith- haviour, 4, 1208–1214. https://doi.org/10.
metic: Assessing the robustness of the results 1038/s41562-020-0912-z
reportedbyKarpinski,Briggs,andYale(2018). Smith, A. M. (2020). Acute stress enhances general-
ConsciousnessandCognition,68,97–106.https: knowledge semantic memory. https://doi.org/
//doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.2019.01.003 10.17605/OSF.IO/EQ8SY
Morey, R. D., Chambers, C. D., Etchells, P. J., Harris, Smith, A. M., Hughes, G. I., Davis, F. C., & Thomas,
C. R., Hoekstra, R., Lakens, D., Lewandowsky, A. K. (2019). Acute stress enhances general-
S., Morey, C. C., Newman, D. P., Schönbrodt, knowledgesemanticmemory.Hormonesandbe-
F. D., Vanpaemel, W., Wagenmakers, E.-J., havior,109,38–43.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
& Zwaan, R. A. (2016). The Peer Review- yhbeh.2019.02.003
ers’ Openness Initiative: Incentivizing open re- Soderberg, C. K. (2018). Using OSF to share data:
searchpracticesthroughpeerreview.RoyalSo- A step-by-step guide. Advances in Methods
ciety Open Science, 3(1), 150547. https://doi. and Practices in Psychological Science, 1(1),
org/10.1098/rsos.150547 115–120. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 /
Nosek, B. A., Ebersole, C. R., DeHaven, A. C., & Mel- 2515245918757689
lor, D. T. (2018). The preregistration revolu- Steegen, S., Tuerlinckx, F., Gelman, A., & Vanpaemel,
tion.ProceedingsoftheNationalAcademyofSci- W. (2016). Increasing transparency through a
ences, 115(11), 2600–2606. https://doi.org/ multiverse analysis. Perspectives on Psychologi-
10.1073/pnas.1708274114 cal Science, 11(5), 702–712. https://doi.org/
Patel,C.J.,Burford,B.,&Ioannidis,J.P.(2015).Assess- 10.1177/1745691616658637
ment of vibration of effects due to model spec- TheBritishPsychologicalSociety.(2019).Standardsfor
ification can demonstrate the instability of ob- the accreditation of undergraduate, conversion
servationalassociations.JournalofClinicalEpi- and integrated Masters programmes in psychol-
demiology,68(9),1046–1058.https://doi.org/ ogy. https://www.psychologicalsociety.ie/
10.1016/j.jclinepi.2015.05.029 source/Undergraduate%5C%20Accreditation%
RCoreTeam.(2016).R:Alanguageandenvironmentfor 5C%20Guidelines%5C%202019update_file_
statistical computing. R Foundation for Statisti- 674.pdf
cal Computing. Vienna, Austria. https://www. Van Dijk, M. (2020). Acute stress enhances semantic
R-project.org/ memory:TherobustnessofthefindingsofSmith,
Sarma,A.,&Kay,M.(2019).multiverse:ExplorableMul- Hughes, Davis, and Thomas (2019). [Unpub-
tiversedataanalysisandreportsinR[Rpackage lishedbachelor’sthesis].LeidenUniversity.
version 0.1.4]. https://CRAN.R-project.org/ VanRijn,L.(2020).Theeffectofstressonsemanticmem-
package=multiverse ory:Amultiverseapproach.[Unpublishedbach-
Silberzahn, R., Uhlmann, E. L., Martin, D. P., Anselmi, elor’sthesis].LeidenUniversity.
P., Aust, F., Awtrey, E., Bahnik, S., Bai, F., Ban- Van Wijk, T. (2020). Het effect van stress op semantisch
nard, C., Bonnier, E., Carlsson, R., Cheung, F., geheugen: Een multiverse benadering. [Unpub-
Christensen, G., Clay, R., Craig, M. A., Dalla lishedbachelor’sthesis].LeidenUniversity.
Rosa, A., Dam, L., Evans, M. H., Flores Cer- Vanpaemel, W., Vermorgen, M., Deriemaecker, L., &
vantes,I.,Nosek,B.A.,etal.(2018).Manyan- Storms, G. (2015). Are we wasting a good cri-
alysts, one data set: Making transparent how sis? The availability of psychological research
variations in analytic choices affect results. Ad- data after the storm. Collabra, 1(1), 3. https:
vancesinMethodsandPracticesinPsychological //doi.org/10.1525/collabra.13
Science, 1(3), 337–356. https://doi.org/10. Voracek, M., Kossmeier, M., & Tran, U. S. (2019).
1177/2515245917747646 Which data to meta-analyze, and how? A
specification-curve and multiverse-analysis ap-
===== PAGE 13/13 =====
13
proachtometa-analysis.ZeitschriftfürPsycholo- gist,61(7),726–728.https://doi.org/10.1037/
gie, 227(1), 64–82. https://doi.org/10.1027/ 0003-066X.61.7.726
2151-2604/a000357 Wicherts, J. M., Veldkamp, C. L., Augusteijn, H. E.,
Wagge,J.R.,Baciu,C.,Banas,K.,Nadler,J.T.,Schwarz, Bakker, M., Van Aert, R., & Van Assen, M. A.
S., Weisberg, Y., IJzerman, H., Legate, N., & (2016). Degrees of freedom in planning, run-
Grahe, J. (2019). A demonstration of the Col- ning, analyzing, and reporting psychological
laborative Replication and Education Project: studies: A checklist to avoid p-hacking. Fron-
Replicationattemptsofthered-romanceeffect. tiers in Psychology, 7, 1832. https://doi.org/
Collabra: Psychology, 5(1), 5. https://doi.org/ 10.3389/fpsyg.2016.01832
10.1525/collabra.177 Young, C., & Holsteen, K. (2017). Model uncertainty
Wicherts,J.M.,Bakker,M.,&Molenaar,D.(2011).Will- and robustness: A computational framework
ingness to share research data is related to the formultimodelanalysis.SociologicalMethods&
strength of the evidence and the quality of re- Research, 46(1), 3–40. https://doi.org/10.
porting of statistical results. PloS ONE, 6(11), 1177/0049124115610347
e26828. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal. Zwaan, R. A., Etz, A., Lucas, R. E., & Donnellan, M. B.
pone.0026828 (2018).Makingreplicationmainstream.Behav-
Wicherts, J. M., Borsboom, D., Kats, J., & Molenaar, D. ioral and Brain Sciences, 41, e120. https://doi.
(2006). The poor availability of psychological org/10.1017/S0140525X17001972
researchdataforreanalysis.AmericanPsycholo-