
===== PAGE 1/15 =====
Opendata:NotApplicable Editedby:ErinBuchanan
Meta-Psychology,2022,vol6,MP.2020.2741 Openmaterials:NotApplicable Reviewedby:DorothyBishop,EikoFried
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2020.2741 Openandreproducibleanalysis:NotApplicable Analysisreproducedby:NotApplicable
Articletype:Tutorial Openreviewsandeditorialprocess:Yes AllsupplementaryfilescanbeaccessedatOSF:
PublishedundertheCC-BY4.0license Preregistration:No https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/2F73H
A meta-analytic approach to evaluating the
explanatory adequacy of theories
Alejandrina Cristia
Laboratoire de Sciences Cognitives et de Psycholinguistique, Département d’études cognitives,
ENS, EHESS, CNRS, PSL University, France
Sho Tsuji
International Research Center for Neurointelligence, Institute for Advanced Studies, The
University of Tokyo, Japan
Christina Bergmann
Language Development Department, Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, The
Netherlands
Abstract
How can data be used to check theories’ explanatory adequacy? The two traditional and most widespread ap-
proachesusesinglestudiesandnon-systematicnarrativereviewstoevaluatetheories’explanatoryadequacy;more
recently, large-scale replications entered the picture. We argue here that none of these approaches fits in with
cumulativesciencetenets. WeproposeinsteadCommunity-AugmentedMeta-Analyses(CAMAs), which, likemeta-
analysesandsystematicreviews,arebuiltusingallavailabledata;likemeta-analysesbutnotsystematicreviews,can
rely on sound statistical practices to model methodological effects; and like no other approach, are broad-scoped,
cumulativeandopen. WeexplainhowCAMAsentailaconceptualshiftfrommeta-analysesandsystematicreviews,a
shiftthatisusefulwhenevaluatingtheories’explanatoryadequacy. Wethenprovidestep-by-steprecommendations
for how to implement this approach – and what it means when one cannot. This leads us to conclude that CAMAs
highlight areasof uncertaintybetter than alternativeapproaches thatbring data tobear ontheory evaluation, and
can trigger a much needed shift towards a cumulative mindset with respect to both theory and data, leading us to
doandviewexperimentsandnarrativereviewsdifferently.
Keywords: meta-analysis, variability, replication, sample size, effect size, quantitative, open science, cumulative
science,theoryadjudication,explanatoryadequacy
===== PAGE 2/15 =====
2
Introduction well as those found in many areas of cognitive science
(butnotall,e.g.,aspectsofdecision-making,Palminteri
Ascognitivescientistsandpsychologists,westrivefor
et al., 2017) are purely verbal or narrative, tending to
generality, trying to see beyond individual data points
also be underspecified and ambiguous. Current rec-
and experiments. Theories are key in this process.
ommendations are thus to strive for further precision,
Ranging from broad frameworks to implemented com-
leadingBorsboometal.(2021)toproposethatthefirst
putationalmodels,theoriesarethetoolsweusetocap-
three phases of theory development involve 1. identi-
ture observed patterns, and to generate new predic-
fying a domain, 2. constructing a proto-theory, and 3.
tions. Giventhiscrucialrole,theoriesneedtobeevalu-
formalizing the theory (note that alternative proposals
ated,updated,andwhentherearecompetingaccounts,
for steps have been laid out, for instance in Robinaugh
compared. Inthiscontext,animportantquestionarises:
et al., 2021; divergences on this are immaterial to the
Howcanwebestevaluatetheoriesagainstempiricalev-
claimsandproposalsinthepresentarticle). Identifying
idence, particularly in the age of the replicability cri-
a domain involves specifying the boundary of applica-
sis (e.g., Vazire, 2018)? In this paper, we argue that
tion of the theory, including the definition of its scope
usualstrategiesareatoddswithcumulativescience(de-
(i.e., when the theory applies or not). Constructing a
fined as the endeavor to optimally integrate findings
proto-theory involves specifying what the "parts" of the
into the web of knowledge); and we propose a novel
theory are, as well as what their "relationships" are. In
approach, based on open community-augmented meta-
the formalization phase, the relationship between the
analyses (CAMAs; Tsuji et al., 2014). We first discuss
partscomestobedefinedpreciselyinmathematicalno-
the ways in which this approach more closely fits the
tation. Thenextphaseinvolvesacheckontheexplana-
desideratafromcumulativescience,whichrecommends
tory adequacy of the theory, a step that involves com-
an integrative approach to empirical studies. We then
paringthetheory-implieddataagainstempiricalobser-
providestep-by-stepinstructionshow,inthefuture,we
vations,whichtypicallyrequiresauxiliaryhypotheses.
can work towards letting the evidence decide: Rather
Thepresentpaperisfocusedonthephasewhereex-
than checking a theory’s explanatory adequacy via in-
planatoryadequacyisevaluated. Thisphasehasalready
dividualstudies(whichcannotbythemselvescoverthe
been a focus of attention, with for instance some work
whole potential scope of a theory) or narrative reviews
explaining that this is not identical to simply fitting a
(where result integration is verbal), we propose a shift
statistical model to data (see Fried, 2020, pp. 274 and
inmindsetsupportedbymeta-analytictools.
ss.) and arguing that instead this step will involve re-
lating statistical modeling to data generated from for-
Theoriesandcumulativescience
malized theories (see saliently Robinaugh et al., 2021,
The psychological sciences saw a sea change as re- section 4.2). Our proposal is conceptually independent
ports of relatively low levels of replication bubbled to from these recommendations, as they do not specify
the surface (e.g., Klein et al., 2014; Open Science Col- which data bears on a theory’s evaluation. We here ar-
laboration, 2015). A first reaction was to blame our guethatthisoperationshouldintegrateallrelevantand
data collection and reporting practices: A great deal accessible information, rather than partial or select in-
of writing has been done to quantify questionable re- formation. Wedetailourargumentsinthenextsection.
search practices (John et al., 2012), estimating their
causal impact on replication (Ulrich and Miller, 2020), Howdataarecurrentlyusedintheoryevaluation
andevaluatingalternativeresearchapproaches(Scheel
In this section, we review two commonly employed
et al., 2021). More recently, attention turned to the-
approaches to checking the explanatory adequacy of
ory, with the realization that lack of replication is at
one or more theories, against which we compare our
least partially due to what we may call questionable
own proposal. We assume that prior to checking ex-
theoretical practices. This young body of writing is al-
planatory adequacy, the scope of the theory has been
readytooextensivetobereviewedhere(seee.g.,Fried,
defined,andthetheoryitselfhasbeenclarifiedandide-
2020, and replies in the same issue), but for our pur-
allyformalized(seeGuestandMartin,2021;Robinaugh
poses, the most important insights include a definition
etal.,2021forfurtherinformationonthesesteps). For
ofwhattheoryis,andwhatthestepsoftheorydevelop-
ourpurposes,whatisimportantisthatonehasclarified
ment are. We follow Robinaugh et al. (2021) in defin-
the factors in the theory and how they can potentially
ing theories as models of the world, meaning that they
bemeasured.
represent in a simplified abstract manner a portion of
To explain our proposal, we will use a running ex-
the complexity of the world. Several researchers are in
ampleofhowinfants’learningofthesoundsandwords
agreementaboutthefactthatpsychologicaltheoriesas
of their native language may be linked. The preceding
===== PAGE 3/15 =====
3
workthen,willhavedefinedwhatitmeansby"sounds", acquisitionorderinthenextstages.
"words", "infants", "native language", and "learn". In Stage IV is quantitatively controlling for study differ-
our running example, we will discuss three alterna- ences, which may be integrated with the fifth stage dis-
tive (verbal) theories: top-down (stating that infants cussed next, but conceptually it is closer to the third
learn words first, and then use them to learn sounds; stage discussed just above. At this stage, we ask our-
e.g., Kuhl, 1983); bottom-up (stating that infants learn selves how to conceptually combine studies, given that
sounds first, and then use them to learn words; e.g., the body of literature considered will often not be a
Feldman et al., 2013); and parallel (stating that in- string of strict replications or systematic variations of
fants learn sounds and words independently from each single factors. Some of the questions that arise require
other). ustoconsiderwhat todowithstudiesthatvaryinpre-
Evaluating explanatory adequacy will involve five cision(orsamplesize)and/orthatvaryinmethods(al-
stages. These are listed in Table 1, and we provide beitwithinconceptualandmethodologicalscope,given
information on how each stage is addressed via differ- decisions made during the first and second stage). In
ent methods in subsequent sections. Stage I is scope our running example, this will entail considering what
determination, deciding which studies in the literature to do with studies from the 1980s and 1990s, which
bear on a given theory or group of theories that are oftenhadsamplesizesof6-8infants(e.g.,Kuhl,1983),
evaluated. For instance, in our running example, the versus the 2010s, which have seen some studies with
research may decide that sound discrimination studies over100infants(Newmanetal.,2016).
are relevant, as are word recognition studies, whereas Stage V is result integration, where we try to draw a
studieswhereonecheckswhetherinfantspreferdiffer- comprehensive picture based on the assembled corpus
entprosodicpatternsarenot,becausetheydonotrefer of data. When doing so, we may need to control for
toeithersoundsorwords. study differences (for instance, if several different pro-
Stage II is design space sampling, which refers to the cedures should fall within the scope of a theory, and if
types of procedures, stimuli, populations, etc. that are theseleadtodifferentresults,whatwearetoconclude).
relevantforthattheory. Inourrunningexample,there- At a minimum, this will require statistical modeling of
searchermaydecidethat,giventheirdefinitionoflearn- the body of data, in which case the tools can be again
ing as changing one’s behavior, behavioral studies are borrowed from the meta-analytic literature. When the-
relevant,whereasneuroimagingstudiesarenot. Atthis ories are sufficiently specified, they may constitute the-
point, thecorpusofdatatobeconsideredhasbeende- oriesofprocesses,inwhichcaseassessingresultsatthe
fined: itisallthestudieswherethe"parts"ofthetheory levelofstudiesmaybeinsufficientorinappropriate. In
areinvoked,andwherethe"relationships"betweenthe this case, the researcher will need additional modeling
partscanbestudied. steps, forinstanceusingthebodyofpreviousliterature
Stage III involves checking previous literature in in a rawer form. Tools at this stage include Individ-
terms of the quality of the data. There are several indi- ual Participant Data (IPD) meta-analyses (Riley et al.,
vidual steps in this stage, which will be detailed below. 2020;Verhageetal.,2020);mega-analyses(Sungetal.,
The majority of checks are borrowed directly from the 2014);andhybridmeta-andmega-analysesorpseudo-
meta-analytic literature, and they may be involved in IPD meta-analyses (Koile and Cristia, 2021; Papadim-
assessingthequalityofindividualstudies(checking,for itropoulouetal.,2019). Allpointsdiscussedhereapply
instance, for evidence of selective reporting of results), to these different formats of quantitatively aggregating
as well as collections of studies (checking for publica- evidence, but for simplicity we limit our considerations
tionbias). Inourrunningexample,theresearchermay tosummarizinggroup-leveldata. Inourrunningexam-
checkthequalityofeachbodyofliteraturetheyarerely- ple,thiswouldbewhenwecheckforevidencethatthe
ing on (sound discrimination studies, word recognition public body of literature is consistent with top-down,
studies). Other checks are more specific to the evalu- bottom-up,orparalleltheoriesofearlylanguageacqui-
ation of explanatory adequacy, and they involve check- sition.
ing whether the whole scope of the theory is already
representedintheliterature,orwhethertherearegaps Individualstudies
in the design space that could eventually reveal inap-
Probablythemostcommonwaytoevaluatetheories’
propriategeneralization. Inourrunningexample,large
explanatory adequacy is by means of individual stud-
agegapsanddifferencesintheagesamplingforsound
ies, i.e., a single experiment or manipulation (so not
discrimination,whichhasbeenassessedfrombirth,and
a paper or a series of experiments). Typically, specific
wordrecognitionstudies,whichisnottestedbeforethe
predictions are empirically tested (either with human
seventh month, could prevent appropriate modeling of
participants or computational models), and the result-
===== PAGE 4/15 =====
4
Table1
Stages when evaluating a theory’s explanatory adequacy using a single study (including large-scale replications), nar-
rative (non-systematic) review, meta-analyses, and CAMA approaches. N/A* = does not represent the whole body of
literature.
Stage Single Narrativereview Meta-analyses CAMA
study
I.Scopedetermination N/A* subjective,static static dynamic
II.Designspacesampling onepoint subjective comprehensive,narrow comprehensive,broad
III.Checksfor N/A* subjective bias at study/literature- bias at study/literature-
literaturequality level,poweranalysis level, addition of file-
drawerstudies
IV.Quantitatively impossible impossible moderatoranalysis, moderatoranalysis,
controllingforstudy weighting weighting
differences
V.Resultintegration irrelevant narrative; meta-regression replicable,reproducible,
votecounting extendablemeta-
regression
ing data are taken to support only one of the compet- proportion of results are misleading because of our in-
ing accounts. For instance, in our running example, a ferentialtools,whichallowfalsepositivesandnegatives
prominent individual study often invoked as support- to seep into the literature. Even in this idealized case,
ing the bottom-up proposal is Werker and Tees (1984), itisimpossibletodeterminewhetherasingleresultac-
whodocumentedadeclineinthediscriminationofnon- curately reflects reality as there are no mechanisms to
native sounds between 6 and 12 months of age, before detectfalsepositivesornegativesatthestudy-level. To
childrenbuiltavocabulary. Orsopeoplethoughtatthe drawfromourrunningexample,datainameta-analysis
time: Tincoff and Jusczyk (1999) found that children forinfantvoweldiscrimination(TsujiandCristia,2014)
did know some words by 6 months, which put the top- shows that individual studies yield a wide array of re-
down and parallel theories back in the race. But we sults: Acrossdifferentstudies,infantsdiscriminatevow-
argue that an individual study cannot be used to thor- els well, barely, or not at all. However, the situation
oughly check a theory’s explanatory adequacy by itself, is even more complex in a realistic scenario, because
foratleastthefollowingtworeasons. it is not the case that the literature accurately reflects
First, each study is very specific: it employs one ex- all findings. Indeed, extant literature (and any single
perimental setting, including stimuli, implementation, study in it) may be misleading because of question-
andsample,andresultsmaynotgeneralizetootherset- ableresearchpractices,whichareeminentlydifficultto
tings that vary along one or more dimensions (Brown eradicate (Scheel et al., 2021), and because of publi-
et al., 2014). When theorizing, we disregard the speci- cation bias skewed towards significant results and thus
ficity of studies unless there is some other study that potentially over-representing false positives (Ferguson
proves that a given setting mattered. We may then re- andHeene,2012).
vise the theory to now predict this difference (which A special case of single studies: Large-scale repli-
givesenormousweighttothatresult);orwemayargue cations. Recent years have seen the rise of cross-
againstthevalidityofthatresulttoavoidchangingour laboratory replications, which address several weak-
theory. This exception aside, most of the time absence nesseswehighlightedinthecontextofindividualstud-
of evidence of a methodological or population-specific ies (a good set of proposals in this direction is found
effect is implicitly taken as evidence of absence: Each in Uhlmann et al., 2019). In particular, initiatives
theory is as general as it can be given the extant ev- like "Many Labs" (e.g., Klein et al., 2018; Open Sci-
idence and, in return, each empirical result is taken to enceCollaboration,2015)couldaddressboththeover-
beasgeneralizableaspossiblebarringcounterevidence. specificity and the noisiness of single studies. When
WeagreewithYarkoni(2020)aboutthefactthatthisis many labs collect data on a given phenomenon using
notsoundtheoreticalevaluationpractice. largelythesameexperimentalproceduretheyarevary-
Second, single studies are always a noisy window ing experimenter identity and increasing sample diver-
into reality. The best case scenario is that a predictable sity, which already contributes to a greater trust in the
===== PAGE 5/15 =====
5
likelihood of the study generalizing to a new sample researcher interpreting these data may argue that the
collected by a new experimenter. Their larger sample latter two studies failed to find an effect because they
sizesalsoreducethechanceofobservingfalsenegatives werepoorlydesignedorunderpowered(soonepieceof
through their greater precision. Such studies are typi- datasupportsthebottom-upaccount,andtheothertwo
callyalsomoretrustworthybecauseanalysesareusually areignored);ortheymayarguethatthesounddiscrim-
pre-registered, and data are open, allowing correction ination study was poorly designed, loading on lexical
ofanyanalyticjudgmenterrorthatmayhaveoccurred. skills, and thus this is a spurious correlation (allowing
However, these collaboration efforts have not yet gone thebodyofresultstobeconsistentwiththeparallelthe-
so far as to vary methodological parameters systemati- ory).
cally (but see Baribault et al., 2018; ManyBabies Con- This is because narrative reviews lack a framework
sortium, 2020). As a result, they still provide a single for quantitative evaluation and comparison, and thus
datum localized to one specific region in methodologi- inherit some of the issues with single studies. Some-
calspace,andthustheycannotspeaktobroadgeneral- times, authors of narrative reviews do attempt to take
izability(seealsoMachery,2020).1 intoaccountabodyofevidencewithheterogeneousre-
Narrative reviews. Narrative reviews seem to pro- sults–butthisishardtodoinnarrativeterms: Authors
vide a framework to weave together multiple studies. may produce a table summarizing the studies, with a
We talk here about non-systematic qualitative reviews, columntaggingwith+or-(oreven0)studiesdepend-
which are the prevalent form of evidence integration, ing on whether they support a conclusion or not. This
often as part of the introduction and/or discussion of entailsmakingadecisionofwhatconstitutesa"+"–isit
an experimental paper, or in invited submissions. As a a significant result, and does the direction of the effect
result, such evaluations of the empirical evidence are matter? Is it a result that is numerically in the "right"
often not peer-reviewed independently. Moreover, nar- direction? What is the threshold for deciding that the
rativereviewsauthoredbyprominentresearcherscome evidence aligns one way or another? This method is
withanimpliedstampofapprovalandarehardtocon- even more impractical in the case of theoretically rel-
testwithoutalsoappearingtoattacktheauthor–which evant and/or methodological moderators that are sus-
makes the absence of appropriate peer review all the pected of having a major effect. Verbally postulating
moreproblematic. thembasedondivergingoutcomesisnotgoodscientific
The first major shortcoming of narrative reviews is practicebecauseitamountstosayingthereisa"signifi-
the fact that data selection is not done in an overt and cant"differencewithouttestingforit.
transparentway,withnoobligationtoobjectivelycheck The final reason why narrative reviews are the most
for quality and bias. In fact, despite the author’s best perniciousisthatthereisnoprocedurefordecidingthat
intentions, the procedure whereby a narrative review there is enough evidence. Often, a single study will be
is put together is fraught with occasions for biases to consideredasenough,againreflectingthe"singlestudy
seepin,includingdataandoutcomeselection(foraself- isdecisive"assumption.
reflective account of how this may happen, see Bishop, Meta-analyses. The criticisms we leveraged
2020). A documented example of this comes from a against single studies have motivated a push towards
recent study of reviews on a potential link between de- systematic reviews and meta-analyses in many fields,
pression and nutrition: Thomas-Odenthal et al. (2020) including psychology. The detailed procedures that
found strong conclusions and recommendations were have been laid down to guide systematic reviews and
eight times more common in narrative reviews as com- meta-analyses (e.g., PRISMA, Moher et al., 2009; Page
pared to meta-analyses, despite the fact that narrative etal.,2021;Shamseeretal.,2015)canhelpuscounter
reviews relied on fewer studies than meta-analyses. It our selection biases, overtly report quality judgments,
maybeinterestingtoreplicatesuchastudyfocusingon and use objective and quantitative methods for study
amoretheoreticaltopicinpsychology. weighing and moderator tests. Moreover, a range of
The second shortcoming of narrative reviews is that tools can be used to deal with heterogeneous data,
single-study interpretation and narrativization can iron and to check for bias in the field as a whole (e.g.,
out discrepancies. For instance, going back to our run- Egger et al., 1997). Of course, meta-analyses are not
ning example, imagine that we find a study where in- perfect(Ioannidis,2016),andrecentinvestigationsinto
fants’ sound discrimination correlates with their word the transparency and reproducibility of meta-analyses
recognitionabilities,andtwostudieswherethecorrela-
tionbetweenthetwoiszero(thisisbasedonobserved
1Wedon’tdiscussourrunningexampleherebecausethere
have not been any large-scale efforts to replicate sound dis-
patterns: Cristia et al., 2014; Wang et al., 2021). De-
criminationand/orwordrecognitionyet(butseeManyBabies
pendingonhowtheyfeelabouttheparalleltheory, the
Consortium,2021).
===== PAGE 6/15 =====
6
revealed considerable issues (Maassen et al., 2020; (opennessanddynamicity), thestageissetforlaborto
Polanin et al., 2020). This makes sense: no tool can be distributed and decision-making democratized. Ex-
forceitshandlertouseitwisely. tant CAMAs also suggest additional benefits. Indeed,
Meta-analyses are often done to check whether a communities are created around the resource for in-
statementistrueorfalse–e.g.,towhatextentacertain stancetoprofitfromthosedataduringexperimentplan-
treatment can reduce depression (e.g., Cuijpers et al., ning, leading to agreements for standardized formats
2013). Considerations of moderating factors are less to be used when extending extant CAMAs or creating
common (although certainly not to be ignored, see Ri- new ones. This facilitates the re-use of analysis scripts
ley et al., 2020 for the importance of integrating pa- and enables meta-meta-analyses.2 Additionally, the dy-
tientcharacteristicsinindividualparticipantdatameta- namicnatureofaCAMAsupportstheconstantintegra-
analyses). This mindframe is appropriate for a simple tion and evaluation of new evidence, naturally hijack-
hypothesis-testing,dichotomousreadingofwhattheev- ing binary readings. We have an interesting anecdote
idence has to tell us. As a result, heterogeneity is often onthiswhichbearsonourrunningexample: Whenthe
seenasathreattointerpretationvalidity(althougheti- meta-analysis on vowel discrimination was published,
ology is complex, e.g., Engels et al., 2000), meaning it was taken to support the conclusion that vowels be-
thatsomeresearcherswillbetemptedtokeepthescope cameattunedtothenativelanguagebyabout6months,
oftheirmeta-analysisnarrow(e.g.,Lietal.,2015). based on discrimination trajectories that were different
In the context of checking explanatory adequacy, fornativethannon-nativecontrasts,withsignificantin-
such traditional meta-analyses have clear advantages creases for native ones and non-significant decreases
over the alternative two approaches, including system- for non-native contrasts. Since publication, the meta-
aticinclusionofpreviousliteratureandovertmodeling analysis has become a CAMA hosted within the Meta-
of study differences. Our running example was chosen Labplatform(Bergmannetal.,2018),andlasttimewe
because,infact,therearemeta-analysesforbothsound checked neither the native or non-native trends were
discrimination (Tsuji and Cristia, 2014) and the recog- significant.
nition of word forms (Bergmann and Cristia, 2016), Although CAMAs share many features with meta-
which thus provide information on the timeline of ac- analyses based on systematic reviews, and we can thus
quisition of these two levels considering all previous build on insights and methods developed (largely) in
evidence, and statistically accounting for, e.g., method- themedicalsciences,theirapplicationinthecontextof
ological factors thought to be irrelevant to the theory cognitivesciencesandfortheoryevaluationspecifically
beingtested(althoughtheyaccountforsignificantvari- does entail an important mind shift. We noted above
ance in effect sizes; cf. Bergmann et al., 2018). Meta- a preference for meta-analyses to be based on a nar-
analysesare,however,limitedinwaysthatwillbecome row scope, with heterogeneity interpreted as a validity
clearinthenextsection,whereweexplainourproposed threat. In contrast, theories in cognitive science that
approach. aim for generality will need to adopt a broader scope,
whichmaymakeitburdensomeforthemeta-analyst(as
Ourproposal: CAMAs itentailsinputtingmoredata). Theuniquefeaturesofa
CAMA,however,helpwiththis: Democratizationofthe
We have proposed community-augmented meta-
dataentryprocessallowsotherresearcherstoaddmore
analyses (henceforth CAMAs; Tsuji et al., 2014) as a
datapoints.
way to further improve on the already powerful meta-
analytic approach in two key ways. First, in CAMAs
Astep-by-stepmanualforusingCAMAstocheckthe-
the meta-analytic procedures for screening, inclusion,
ories’explanatoryadequacy
qualitative,andquantitativeanalyses,aswellasthere-
sulting data and scripts, are public and open, allowing In this section, we provide 10 steps you can take to
community members to detect and correct any prob- check theories against extant data in a cumulative sci-
lemsatarelativelylowcost. Second,communitymem-
berscanrescuemeta-analysesfrompost-publicationde- 2See metalab.stanford.edu and PsychOpen CAMA in
leibniz-psychology.org/en/services/forimplementedCAMAs.
terioration by adding data points which emerged after
WealsowouldliketopointtoLivingSystematicReviews(El-
the meta-analysis was originally carried out; in fact,
liottetal.,2014),which,asfaraswecanjudge,areconceptu-
we have seen that CAMAs provide a natural home for
allyequivalenttoCAMAsandweredevelopedinparallel. In
unpublished studies, which helps counter publication
whatfollows,wecontinueusingthenameCAMAasthisisthe
bias. Users can also add new variables of interest that nameunderwhichwehadproposedthisidea,whichhasbeen
the original meta-analyst might not have been aware pickedupbyothersinthecognitivesciences(Burgardetal.,
of or interested in. As a result of these two features 2021;IJzermanetal.,2021).
===== PAGE 7/15 =====
7
entific framework, with an extra step that is based on processingofnativewords.
fosteringeducationalsynergiesinresearchtraining(see Step 2: Find (CA)MAs that fall within the scope
Figure1). defined in Step 1. Look for meta-analyses or CAMAs
Step 0: Consider educational opportunities. By that match the scope you defined in the previous step.
tryingtouseCAMAstobringdatatobearduringtheory Today, this will probably involve combining multiple
evaluation, you will learn a great deal not only about meta-analyses to fully occupy that scope, since most
meta-analyses, but also about how challenging it is to meta-analyses today are phenomenon-driven and in-
evaluate a theory against data in the age of cumulative sufficiently broad (see Step 4), and then turning your
science when you have not been trained for it. Con- broad, composite meta-analysis into a CAMA. Meta-
sidering educational opportunities means that you will analysescanbeturnedintoCAMAs,by:
make this easier for future generations of researchers,
• Ifapplicableandpossible,formattingrawdataac-
andifyouthinkaboutitinadvance,itmayalsolighten
cordingtocommonstandards(seeFootnote1)
yourload. Althoughitwouldbeidealtointegrateearly
career researchers in any and all steps, the steps lead-
• Providing a codebook for all columns in the raw
ing to the highest synergies are Steps 3, 4, 6, and 9.
data
In a nutshell, these are steps in which either data are
enteredintoaCAMA(Step4;noticealsothatSteps5-7 • Sharingmeta-analyticrawdata(asextractedfrom
alsoinvolveaddinginformationtoanextantCAMA);or papers or received from authors) and search pro-
when you have realized data are incomplete and more tocols in an open format (e.g., .csv spreadsheets
needstobecollected(Steps3, 6, 9). Wehaveinvolved and .txt files) as well as code to compute effect
undergraduateandgraduatestudentsindataentrydur- sizesandperformanalyses
ing workshops at international conferences and in our
• Devisingaprotocolforaddingdata(e.g., aform)
teaching (e.g. Tsuji et al., 2016; now integrated in
andqualitycontrol(e.g.,adedicatedcurator)
BlackandBergmann,2017). Regardingcollectingaddi-
tionaldata,wesupportthecallforinvitingearlycareer
Astimegoesby,thebroad-scopeCAMAsproposedin
researchers to be involved in replication (Hawkins et
Step 4 will be more and more prevalent. Readers of
al.,2018),whichwouldbeusefultoincreasestatistical
the future: look for extant CAMAs in your fields before
power (Steps 3 and 9), except that we propose a twist:
starting one. If you don’t find one, proceed to the next
Instead of only engaging in strict replication, students
step;ifyoudo,skiptoStep5. Inourrunningexample,
could be involved in expanding the coverage of extant
wefoundameta-analysisonvowelsandseveralrelated
studiesbyvaryingmethodologyinwayspredictedtobe
towordprocessinginMetaLab. Thisisagoodstart,but
irrelevant by the theory being evaluated (Step 6). If
given the scope that was defined based on theoretical
you are teaching a data analysis course, consider using
concernsinStep1,wewouldconcludethatwearemiss-
CAMAs to train students to attempt to consider data in
ing a meta-analysis on native consonant and tone pro-
the framework of theory evaluation statistically (using
cessing. It would also be ideal to have a meta-analysis
meta-regression), but also to critique extant data (by
on individual measures of sound and word processing
e.g. checkingfordesigndiversity,quality,heterogeneity,
(i.e.,thecorrelationbetweenthetwo).
andpower;Steps8-10).
Step3: StopbeforeyoustartanewCAMA.
Step 1: Define the scope of data your theory is
You haven’t found relevant CAMAs and you are un-
supposed to explain. Reflect on what you need to
certain whether CAMA (as an approach) is useful be-
evaluate your theory (see Table 1): What is the range
causethereisonlyoneorafewstudieswithinthescope
of study types the theory is thought to cover? Is your
defined in Step 1. At this point, you should in fact di-
candidate theory large in scope ("how children learn")
rectly conclude that more research is needed: If there
or narrow ("how adults in visual object tracking de-
arenotenoughdatapointstocheckforgeneralizability,
ploy overt attention")? Are there specific quality fea-
how can we trust them (or it) to tell us general facts
tures that your theory predicts to be crucial (using a
about psychological phenomena? Come back to this
specifictypeofeye-tracker,removinginattentivepartic-
manual when there seems to be enough evidence. If
ipants)? This is also a good point at which to consider
you do find enough studies, then continue to the next
pre-registering your meta-analysis (Watt and Kennedy,
step. In our running example, we established in Step
2017). As mentioned previously, for our running ex-
2thattherewereafewrelevantmeta-analyses,butone
ampleonhowlearningsoundsandwordsrelatetoeach
estimatingcorrelationsinindividualvariationforsound
otherininfancy,areasonablescopewouldincludestud-
andwordprocessingwasmissing. Ourownknowledge
iesonnativesounddiscriminationaswellasstudieson
of the literature suggests that there are fewer than 5
===== PAGE 8/15 =====
8
1
Define
theory's
scope
2 3
Lit contains
Relevant
N enough N
(CA)MA exists?
studies?
Y
Y
4
Build
CAMA
5
Code CAMA
0
studies for theory Consider
relevance educational
opportunities
6
Do CAMA studies sample
N
generalization space?
Y
7
Code quality in
CAMA studies
8 Incorporate 9 N 10
Do you have
controls for Evaluate theory
enough power?
heterogeneity Y
Figure 1. Workflow for using CAMAs to evaluate theories. The number in the black circle refers to the Step in the
manual. (CA)MAstandsfor(community-augmented)meta-analyses.
studies on this topic, and thus it may be too soon to any broader. In the meta-analyses we are considering
attemptameta-analysisonthistopicprecisely. for our running example, Tsuji and Cristia (2014) in-
Step4: Setupabroadmeta-analyticscope. You’ve cluded all infant vowel discrimination studies (includ-
defined your scope, failed to find CAMAs that cover ing both behavioral and neuroimaging methods, and
it completely, but believe there are enough studies to diverse populations ranging from normative to a vari-
check for generalizability of the theory you are inter- etyoflesscommonlystudiedinfantgroups);Bergmann
estedin,soyoudecidetoperformameta-analysis. Typ- and Cristia (2016) included all infant word segmenta-
icalmeta-analysesarebuilttoevaluatewhetherthereis tionstudies.
sufficientevidenceforaspecificphenomenon,andthus Step 5: Code CAMA studies for scope. By either
dataentryislimitedtothescopedefinedbythetheory. finding, combining, and augmenting existing (CA)MAs
However,thismeansthatcriteriaofrelevance(Step5), (Step 2) or constructing your own (Steps 3-4), you are
methodologicalcoverage(Step6),andquality(Step7) now in possession of a body of data that probably in-
are folded into one, which will make it harder to spot cludes studies outside of the scope defined in Step 1.
and recover from subjective judgments on any of these Add a field to the CAMA defining relevance for your
points. (Incidentally, this also limits the reusability of particular theory or programmatically exclude them in
the data entered, and thus is in contradiction with cu- analysiscode,forexamplebyselectingforspecificstudy
mulativescienceprinciples.) SothinkinsteadinCAMA or population characteristics. Notice that this trans-
terms: define your scope as broad as you can, and not parencywillallowfuturereviewersandreaderstoeval-
===== PAGE 9/15 =====
9
uate whether inclusion was subjective or principled. In Step 8: Check for heterogeneity and control for
our running example, the above-mentioned CAMAs on orthogonalvariance. InStep1,youdefinedscope,de-
vowelandwordprocessingweresubsequentlyusedfor sign space, and quality based on the theory being eval-
testing theories with a narrow scope Bergmann and uated. This theory may incorrectly predict homogene-
Cristia(2016)andTsujiandCristia(2017)andabroad ity of results within this whole space. Check whether
scopeBergmannetal.(2017). Thelatterwasinfactan thisistrueusingtraditionalmeta-analytictools,includ-
attempttodeterminetherelativetimelineofacquisition ing heterogeneity checks (Huedo-Medina et al., 2006)
of sounds and words. In that study, we revisited inclu- andincorporatingstatisticalcontrolsformethodological
sion decisions: we could only find significant effects of (Step6)andquality(Step7)dimensionsviaweighting
ageaspredictedbythetheorywhenwesubsettostudies or as fixed or random factors, as appropriate. In our
ontypically-developingmonolingualinfants,andwhich running example, we systematically control for differ-
hadmultipleagegroupsinthesamepaper. ences in sample size by inverse variance weighting; we
Step 6: Code CAMA studies for generalizability. declaremethod(i.e.,specificmethodologiesamongbe-
Even after subsetting to relevant studies, the CAMA havioral and neuroimaging ones) as a fixed effect; and
you are using may contain data collected with many check for heterogeneity (Bergmann and Cristia, 2016;
methodologies. This is not a weakness. The belief that TsujiandCristia,2017).
a single study can focus on a phenomenon by isolating Step9: Considerpower.
it presumes that methodological variation goes away – At this point, you will have a CAMA covering pre-
whichisbasicallyanopticaltrick: wedon’tseethevari- ciselythestudieswithinscope,samplingthroughoutthe
ation because we are focusing on one point. In con- designspacewithnoconfounds,andtakingqualityinto
trast,broadly-definedCAMAsgiveusanopportunityto account. You are ready to integrate results using stan-
overtlyconsiderthatvariability: Askyourselfrather,has dard meta-analytic regressions, and as in such work,
the theory’s full design space (set in Step 1) been thor- youshouldconsiderwhetheryouhavesufficientpower
oughly sampled without confounds? If so, you can use (Pigott, 2020). If you find that you do not, you can
statisticaltoolstoaccountforthis(Step8); ifthereare estimate how much more work is needed and recom-
regionsofthespacethathavenotbeensampled,orhave mend a roadmap for future work, where you also may
been sampled with confounds, consider first collecting highlightlimitsongeneralizabilitypresentintheextant
more data. In our running example, the fact that we bodyofliteratureyourCAMAdescribes. Inourrunning
could only retrieve the predicted age effects in a sub- example, we found both power limitation and system-
set of data generated some concern. At present, we do aticgapsintheliterature;e.g.,TsujiandCristia(2014)
notknowwhetherthisimpliesatruelimittogeneraliz- found few studies on the timeline for non-native vow-
ability of the theories, or merely a failure in statistical els, and studies since have addressed those gaps (e.g.,
power, due to the fact that effects measured in infancy Mazukaetal.,2014).
tendtobeverysmall(Bergmannetal.,2018). Step 10: Continue the work of evaluating your
Step 7: Code CAMA studies for quality. As in the theory.
previous step, make sure you apply your pre-defined You have made tremendous progress in evaluat-
qualitycriteriafromStep1. Insomeresearch,thismay ing your theory in a cumulative-scientific framework
mean coding whether data points come from double- – which is all the more reason to not stop now. Be
blind randomized control trials as opposed to correla- extremely careful about how you interpret your meta-
tional research (e.g., Armijo-Olivo et al., 2015). For regression,avoidingconclusionslike"thetheoryis(not)
experimental research, you as an expert can develop right because the mean effect size is (not) significant".
field-specific criteria to code studies, ideally by crafting This is once again binomial reading rearing its ugly
the definitions, and then asking a third party to apply head, now treating a meta-analysis as if it were a sin-
them. An important next step is to statistically test for gle study, with a focus on strict significance. Apply to
potential effects that confirm differences in data qual- meta-analyses, including CAMAs, the same lessons you
ity do exist. Reviewers and readers can then make an learned from improved statistical practices in analyz-
informedjudgmentofwhethertheseexplicitandtrans- ing single experiments (see also Moreau and Gamble,
parent criteria were subjective or principled. Regard- 2020). In our running example, we felt that evidence
ingourrunningexample,wemadeanattempttocheck at the time was most consistent with a sounds-first,
whether measures of data quality defined in advance than a words-first, theoretical explanation (Bergmann
explained significant variance in the meta-analyses we et al., 2017), but recognized several limitations of the
were considering, and found they did not (Tsuji et al., evidence, including the fact that this merely indicated
2020). a difference in timelines between vowel and word pro-
===== PAGE 10/15 =====
10
cessing but not a causal relationship. In any case, at and Saxe, 2012; Hawkins et al., 2018; Roettger and
this point, only one aspect of theory evaluation has oc- Baer-Henney, 2019). If collected as a student project,
curred, andasdescribedintheIntroductionanddevel- the sample may be too small to warrant independent
oped further below, there are many other procedures publication. Nonetheless, the study would still be in-
that we can apply to not only check but also develop cludedinCAMAsandthuscontributetothebodyofev-
andimproveourtheories. idence(seeStep7-8foradequateintegrationofstudies
potentiallyvaryinginquality).
Howthisapproachmaychangehowyouusesingle
studiesandnarrativereviews UseCAMA-informedstudiestoreplicate-and-extend
We believe that CAMAs are the most promising tool Alternatively, you may be able to design your study
for transparently bringing data to bear during evalu- in such a way that you both collect data that in-
ation of theories’ explanatory adequacy in the age of creasespoweronanestablishedphenomenon,andadd
cumulative science. In this section, we briefly discuss novel conditions, for instance to extend the coverage
theplaceotherapproacheshaveinthescientificprocess of methodological variables predicted to be irrelevant
(seeFigure2). by the theory (see Steps 0 and 6). When writing up
the results, it is then possible to emphasize the impor-
UseCAMAstodecidenottorunanewstudy tanceofthenovelcomponent(whichopensthewayto
generating knowledge in a new direction), while call-
AsCAMAsbecomemoreprevalent,itwillbeincreas-
ingformoreworkonthatsametopicwithreferenceto
ingly easy to use them to decide whether to run a
the CAMA results. This way, an author can both signal
new study – or not. A good example comes from our
the importance of cumulativity all the while writing a
CAMA of word segmentation (Bergmann and Cristia,
compellingarticle(Rabagliatietal.,2019).
2016), which documented an effect size so small that
new studies have a recommended sample size of over
Breaknewgroundwithsinglestudies
twohundredinfants,whichisnotcurrentlyfeasiblefor
single labs. Another example comes from a CAMA on You may have come up with a novel hypothesis for
phonotactic learning (Cristia, 2018), collecting labora- which no suitable previous data exists. Or, you may
tory experiments in which infants were briefly exposed havefoundthatextantempiricaldataasintegratedina
tosoundsequences. Thereweremanysuchstudies,fol- CAMA contradict predictions of current theoretical ac-
lowing essentially the same method and all published counts, and you have subjectively interpreted this con-
as supporting the theory that prelinguistic infants can tradiction, developing a new hypothesis about which
learn sound sequences after brief exposure. However, factors have caused the observed discrepancy. Perhaps
the meta-analysis revealed an effect of zero, strongly you decided that the method is flawed and/or the the-
suggesting that the phenomenon was not reliable be- ory is false, so you would like to launch a new line of
cause(significant)oppositeeffectsweresometimesob- research to explore different kinds of methods and/or
served within the same lab with nearly identical meth- alternativetheories. Wedonotwanttodiscourageyou
ods. This should lead at a minimum to changing the fromrunningthistypeofstudy. However,wehopeyou
technique (habituating the child to the pattern, rather will remember that the role of this new study cannot
than using brief fixed exposures); and could promote betoproveordisproveatheory(seeSinglestudiessec-
an abandonment of the theory (perhaps humans can tion), but to propose an idea that can then serve as a
only learn sound sequences much later, after we start startingpointforanewcumulativeresearchendeavor.
talking).
Use narrative reviews to inform other stages of the-
UseCAMA-informedsinglestudiestoefficientlysam- oryevaluation,adaptation,anddevelopment
plethedesignspace
We have focused here on explanatory adequacy, but
CAMAs are useful to reveal gaps in the literature. If assummarizedintheIntroduction,buildingsolidtheo-
gatheringmoredataalongasimilarlinejusttoincrease ries takes much more than that. Some experts on this
power (see Steps 0, 3, and 9), you may worry about broader view of theory development recommend for-
beingabletopublishit. Althoughwedohopethereisa malization for the precision which it brings to theoret-
change in attitude towards this kind of study (see also ical discussions (e.g., Robinaugh et al., 2021). With-
Zwaan et al., 2018), we acknowledge that such work out discounting these important ideas, Guest and Mar-
might be most plausibly done in the context of student tin (2021) highlight the value of considering a wide
training,orasafirststepduringaPhDprogram(Frank
===== PAGE 11/15 =====
11
determine
clarify concepts
components
Narrative
establish scope reviews propose
& bounds mechanisms
highlight
contradictions
provide data on
between data &
new topics
theory
CAMAs Single studies
integrate results add data to
on extant theories increase precision
suggest critical data add data to
needed for extant increase coverage
theories' coverage
Figure2. ProposedkeyrolesofCAMAs,singlestudies,andnarrativereviewsinthecontextofcumulativescience.
rangeoflevelsofspecificitywhendescribingpsycholog- CAMAs’ role in the explanatory adequacy phase. We
ical phenomena, ranging from very specific hypotheses thus say little about other phases, and notably to the
made in the context of one study to abstract theories question of when one should abandon a theory alto-
inwhichplausiblemechanismshavebeenspecified(see gether, which one of our reviewers cogently pointed
saliently their Figure 2). In this context, narrative re- out may be behind wasted research efforts. We believe
views still play a role as we try to clarify concepts and this is an important topic that should be revisited, at
phenomena,andtheirrelationtoeachother(crucialfor which point CAMAs may be found useful in two par-
theorydevelopment,e.g.,Borsboometal.,2021). ticular ways. First, CAMAs may reveal that a theory’s
scope is so narrow, and/or the proportion of variance
Limitationsofthepresentpaper explainedissosmall,astobeoflittleuseinexplaining
psychological phenomena in the real world. Second,
Beforeclosing,wewouldliketohighlightsomeshort-
having open meta-analytic repositories where data are
comingsofthispaper,thefirstbeingthatwefocusedon
===== PAGE 12/15 =====
12
more easily integrated into the body of literature can AuthorContact
help provide a home for studies that would otherwise
We are grateful to Caroline Rowland, Dorothy
be destined to the file drawer, and thus CAMAs could
Bishop, and Eiko Fried for invaluable feedback on an
helpusmeasurewastedscientificeffort.
earlierversionofthismanuscript. Allerrorsremainour
Another limitation of the present paper is that the
own. Authorcontact:
types of examples we have discussed are based on
group-level effect sizes, typically averaged across tri- • AlejandrinaCristia 0000-0003-2979-4556,
als and conditions, and this type of approach may be alecristia@gmail.com
suboptimal in the quest for shedding light on cognitive
• ShoTsuji 0000-0001-9580-4500,
processes. Hainesetal.(2020)recentlydrewattention
tsujish@gmail.com
to this issue, and provided recommendations for data
analyses. We would like to stress that systematicity, • ChristinaBergmann 0000-0003-2656-9070,
openness,anddynamicity,thethreefeaturesthatmake chbergma@gmail.com
CAMAsparticularlypowerfulfortestingexplanatoryad-
equacy,shouldcarryovertothiscontext. Ofcourse,lay- ConflictofInterestandFunding
ing out how to engage in CAMAs using more granular
The authors declare no conflict of interest related
data(atthetriallevelandbelow)willrequireadditional
to the contents of this manuscript. The authors ac-
work,whichwehopewillbeundertakeninthefuture.
knowledgegrantsfromtheBerkeleyInitiativeforTrans-
parency in the Social Sciences, a program of the Cen-
Conclusion
ter for Effective Global Action (CEGA), with support
In this paper, we have considered traditional ways from the Laura and John Arnold Foundation. The
of bringing data to bear when evaluating theories, and authors were further supported by the H2020 Euro-
concluded that none of them is perfect in the current pean Research Council [Marie Skłodowska-Curie grant
ageofcumulativescience. Specifically, consideringsin- Nos. 659553 and 660911], Agence Nationale de
gle studies in isolation (including large-scale collabo- la Recherche (ANR-17-CE28-0007 LangAge, ANR-16-
ration) as well as weaving together single studies in DATA-0004, ANR-14-CE30-0003, ANR-17-EURE-0017),
a narrative non-systematic review both suffer from se- the Fetzer-Franklin Fund, and the James S. McDonnell
lection biases and inappropriate sampling of the space Foundation Understanding Human Cognition Scholar
of possibilities. We have instead provided a step-by- Award.
stepinstructionforusingmeta-analysesbasedonrigor-
ous systematic reviews, particularly open, community- AuthorContributions
augmented meta-analyses (CAMAs). Note that they
AC: Conceptualization, Investigation, Methodology,
stillrequirethepersonusingameta-analysisfortheory
Project administration, Visualization, Writing – origi-
evaluation to have a clear mind about what the theory
nal draft, Writing – review & editing; ST: Conceptual-
states, what its key concepts are, and what reasonable
ization, Investigation, Methodology, Writing – original
implementationsofthoseconceptsare.
draft, Writing – review & editing; CB: Conceptualiza-
Are CAMAs perfect? We suspect no, because CAMAs
tion, Investigation, Methodology, Visualization, Writing
stillrelyonextantliterature,andthusflawsintheliter-
–originaldraft,Writing–review&editing
aturecanbecarriedover. Althoughasmeta-analystswe
haveafewtoolsinourkittodealwithimperfection(see
OpenSciencePractices
Step 8), the result of the CAMA is still bounded by the
overallqualityandquantityoftheunderlyingliterature, This article is theoretical and does not have accom-
butwewanttoemphasizethatCAMAsmaketheextant panying data and materials, nor was it pre-registered.
empiricalboundariesclearer. Thus it was not eligible for the Open Science badges.
Being a scientist means standing on the shoulders of Theentireeditorialprocess,includingtheopenreviews,
giants. Wehopethatourproposalprovidesguidancein ispublishedintheonlinesupplement.
how to stand firmly on these shoulders, and how oth-
ers can in turn stand on ours. We look forward to a References
new generation of psychologists that cumulatively and
Armijo-Olivo,S.,daCosta,B.R.,Cummings,G.G.,Ha,
systematically build on previous work, and approaches
C., Fuentes, J., Saltaji, H., & Egger, M. (2015).
data collection and theory construction with this novel
Pedro or cochrane to assess the quality of clin-
lens,makingoursasustainabledisciplinethatevercon-
ical trials? a meta-epidemiological study. PloS
tinuestoapproachthetruth.
one,10(7).
===== PAGE 13/15 =====
13
Baribault, B., Donkin, C., Little, D. R., Trueblood, J. S., adultdepression,aloneandincomparisonwith
Oravecz,Z.,VanRavenzwaaij,D.,White,C.N., other treatments. The Canadian Journal of Psy-
De Boeck, P., & Vandekerckhove, J. (2018). chiatry,58(7),376–385.
Metastudies for robust tests of theory. Pro- Egger, M., Smith, G. D., Schneider, M., & Minder, C.
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, (1997). Bias in meta-analysis detected by a
115(11),2607–2612. simple, graphical test. British Medical Journal,
Bergmann, C., & Cristia, A. (2016). Development of 315(7109),629–634.
infants’ segmentation of words from native Elliott,J.H.,Turner,T.,Clavisi,O.,Thomas,J.,Higgins,
speech:Ameta-analyticapproach.Developmen- J. P., Mavergames, C., & Gruen, R. L. (2014).
talScience,19(6),901–917. Living systematic reviews: An emerging op-
Bergmann, C., Tsuji, S., & Cristia, A. (2017). Top- portunity to narrow the evidence-practice gap.
down versus bottom-up theories of phonologi- PLoSmedicine,11(2).
calacquisition:Abigdataapproach.Interspeech Engels,E.A.,Schmid,C.H.,Terrin,N.,Olkin,I.,&Lau,
2017,2103–2107. J. (2000). Heterogeneity and statistical sig-
Bergmann,C.,Tsuji,S.,Piccinini,P.E.,Lewis,M.L.,Bra- nificance in meta-analysis: An empirical study
ginsky, M., Frank, M. C., & Cristia, A. (2018). of 125 meta-analyses. Statistics in medicine,
Promoting replicability in developmental re- 19(13),1707–1728.
search through meta-analyses: Insights from Feldman,N.H.,Myers,E.B.,White,K.S.,Griffiths,T.L.,
language acquisition research. Child Develop- &Morgan,J.L.(2013).Word-levelinformation
ment,89(6),1996–2009. influences phonetic learning in adults and in-
Bishop, D. V. (2020). The psychology of experimen- fants.Cognition,127(3),427–438.
tal psychologists: Overcoming cognitive con- Ferguson,C.J.,&Heene,M.(2012).Avastgraveyardof
straintstoimproveresearch:The47thSirFred- undead theories: Publication bias and psycho-
ericBartlettLecture.QuarterlyJournalofExper- logical science’s aversion to the null. Perspec-
imentalPsychology,73(1),1–19. tivesonPsychologicalScience,7(6),555–561.
Black, A., & Bergmann, C. (2017). Quantifying infants’ Frank, M. C., & Saxe, R. (2012). Teaching replication.
statisticalwordsegmentation:Ameta-analysis. PerspectivesonPsychologicalScience,7(6),600–
39thAnnualMeetingoftheCognitiveScienceSo- 604.
ciety,124–129. Fried, E. I. (2020). Lack of theory building and testing
Borsboom, D., van der Maas, H. L., Dalege, J., Kievit, impedesprogressinthefactorandnetworklit-
R.A.,&Haig,B.D.(2021).Theoryconstruction erature.PsychologicalInquiry,31(4),271–288.
methodology: A practical framework for build- Guest, O., & Martin, A. E. (2021). How computational
ing theories in psychology. Perspectives on Psy- modeling can force theory building in psycho-
chologicalScience,16,756–766. logicalscience.PerspectivesonPsychologicalSci-
Brown,S.D.,Furrow,D.,Hill,D.F.,Gable,J.C.,Porter, ence,16(4),789–802.
L.P.,&Jacobs,W.J.(2014).Adutytodescribe: Haines, N., Kvam, P. D., Irving, L., Smith, C.,
Better the devil you know than the devil you Beauchaine, T. P., Pitt, M. A., & Turner,
don’t.PerspectivesonPsychologicalScience,9(6), B. (2020). Theoretically informed generative
626–640. models can advance the psychological and
Burgard, T., Bošnjak, M., & Studtrucker, R. (2021). brain sciences: Lessons from the reliability
Community-Augmented Meta-Analyses (CA- paradox. https : / / psyarxiv. com / xr7y3 /
MAs) in psychology. Zeitschrift für Psychologie, download?format=pdf
229,15–23. Hawkins, R. X., Smith, E. N., Au, C., Arias, J. M., Cat-
Cristia, A. (2018). Can infants learn phonology in the apano, R., Hermann, E., Keil, M., Lampinen,
lab? a meta-analytic answer. Cognition, 170, A., Raposo, S., Reynolds, J., et al. (2018). Im-
312–327. proving the replicability of psychological sci-
Cristia, A., Seidl, A., Junge, C., Soderstrom, M., & Ha- ence through pedagogy. Advances in Methods
goort,P.(2014).Predictingindividualvariation and Practices in Psychological Science, 1(1), 7–
inlanguagefrominfantspeechperceptionmea- 18.
sures.ChildDevelopment,85(4),1330–1345. Huedo-Medina, T. B., Sánchez-Meca, J., Marin-
Cuijpers, P., Berking, M., Andersson, G., Quigley, L., Martinez, F., & Botella, J. (2006). Assessing
Kleiboer, A., & Dobson, K. S. (2013). A meta- heterogeneityinmeta-analysis:QstatisticorI2
analysis of cognitive-behavioural therapy for index?PsychologicalMethods,11(2),193–206.
===== PAGE 14/15 =====
14
IJzerman, H., Hadi, R., Coles, N., Paris, B., Elisa, S., Improvement without exposure. Developmental
Fritz,W.,Klein,R.A.,&Ropovik,I.(2021).So- Psychobiology,56(2),192–209.
cial thermoregulation: A meta-analysis. https: Moher, D., Liberati, A., Tetzlaff, J., Altman, D. G., &
//psyarxiv.com/fc6yq/download?format=pdf Group, P. (2009). Preferred reporting items
Ioannidis, J. P. (2016). The mass production of redun- for systematic reviews and meta-analyses: The
dant, misleading, and conflicted systematic re- PRISMAstatement.PLoSmedicine,6(7).
views and meta-analyses. The Milbank Quar- Moreau, D., & Gamble, B. (2020). Conducting a meta-
terly,94(3),485–514. analysis in the age of open science: Tools, tips,
John, L. K., Loewenstein, G., & Prelec, D. (2012). Mea- and practical recommendations. Psychological
suring the prevalence of questionable research Methods. https://psycnet.apa.org/fulltext/
practices with incentives for truth telling. Psy- 2020-66880-001.pdf
chologicalscience,23(5),524–532. Newman,R.S.,Rowe,M.L.,&Ratner,N.B.(2016).In-
Klein,R.A.,Ratliff,K.A.,Vianello,M.,AdamsJr,R.B., putanduptakeat7monthspredictstoddlervo-
Bahnık,Š.,Bernstein,M.J.,Bocian,K.,Brandt, cabulary:Theroleofchild-directedspeechand
M. J., Brooks, B., Brumbaugh, C. C., et al. infant processing skills in language develop-
(2014). Investigating variation in replicability. ment. Journal of Child Language, 43(5), 1158–
Socialpsychology,45,142–152. 1173.
Klein, R. A., Vianello, M., Hasselman, F., Adams, B. G., OpenScienceCollaboration.(2015).Estimatingthere-
Adams Jr, R. B., Alper, S., Aveyard, M., Axt, producibility of psychological science. Science,
J.R.,Babalola,M.T.,Bahnık,Š.,etal.(2018). 349(6251).
Many labs 2: Investigating variation in replica- Page,M.J.,Moher,D.,Bossuyt,P.M.,Boutron,I.,Hoff-
bility across samples and settings. Advances in mann, T. C., Mulrow, C. D., Shamseer, L., Tet-
Methods and Practices in Psychological Science, zlaff, J. M., Akl, E. A., Brennan, S. E., et al.
1(4),443–490. (2021). PRISMA 2020 explanation and elab-
Koile,E.,&Cristia,A.(2021).Towardscumulativecog- oration: Updated guidance and exemplars for
nitive science: A comparison of meta-analysis, reporting systematic reviews. British Medical
mega-analysis, and hybrid approaches. Open Journal,372.
Mind,5,154–173. Palminteri,S.,Wyart,V.,&Koechlin,E.(2017).Theim-
Kuhl, P. K. (1983). Perception of auditory equivalence portance of falsification in computational cog-
classesforspeechinearlyinfancy.InfantBehav- nitive modeling. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
iorandDevelopment,6(2-3),263–285. 21(6),425–433.
Li, S.-j., Jiang, H., Yang, H., Chen, W., Peng, J., Sun, Papadimitropoulou, K., Stijnen, T., Dekkers, O. M., &
M.-w., Lu, C. D., Peng, X., & Zeng, J. (2015). le Cessie, S. (2019). One-stage random effects
The dilemma of heterogeneity tests in meta- meta-analysisusinglinearmixedmodelsforag-
analysis: A challenge from a simulation study. gregatecontinuousoutcomedata.Researchsyn-
PLoSOne,10(5),e0127538. thesismethods,10(3),360–375.
Maassen, E., van Assen, M. A., Nuijten, M. B., Olsson- Pigott, T. D. (2020). Power of statistical tests for sub-
Collentine, A., & Wicherts, J. M. (2020). Re- group analysis in meta-analysis. N. Ting, JC
producibility of individual effect sizes in meta- Cappelleri,S.Ho,(Din)D.-G.Chen(editors),De-
analysesinpsychology.PloSone,15(5). signandAnalysisofSubgroupswithBiopharma-
Machery,E.(2020).Whatisareplication?Philosophyof ceuticalApplications,347–368.
Science,87(4),545–567. Polanin,J.R.,Hennessy,E.A.,&Tsuji,S.(2020).Trans-
ManyBabies Consortium. (2020). Quantifying sources parencyandreproducibilityofmeta-analysesin
of variability in infancy research using the psychology:Ameta-review.PerspectivesonPsy-
infant-directed-speech preference. Advances in chologicalScience,15(4),1026–1041.
Methods and Practices in Psychological Science, Rabagliati,H.,Ferguson,B.,&Lew-Williams,C.(2019).
3(1),24–52. Theprofileofabstractrulelearningininfancy:
ManyBabies Consortium. (2021). MB-AtHome: Online Meta-analytic and experimental evidence. De-
Infant Data Collection. https://manybabies. velopmentalScience,22(1).
github.io/MB-AtHome/ Riley, R. D., Debray, T. P., Fisher, D., Hattle, M., Mar-
Mazuka, R., Hasegawa, M., & Tsuji, S. (2014). De- lin, N., Hoogland, J., Gueyffier, F., Staessen,
velopment of non-native vowel discrimination: J.A.,Wang,J.,Moons,K.G.,etal.(2020).Indi-
vidual participant data meta-analysis to exam-
===== PAGE 15/15 =====
15
ine interactions between treatment effect and Tsuji, S., Cristia, A., Frank, M. C., & Bergmann, C.
participant-level covariates: Statistical recom- (2020). Addressing publication bias in meta-
mendationsforconductandplanning.Statistics analysis.ZeitschriftfürPsychologie,228,50–61.
inmedicine,39(15),2115–2137. Tsuji,S.,Lewis,M.,Bergmann,C.,Frank,M.,&Cristia,
Robinaugh,D.J.,Haslbeck,J.M.,Ryan,O.,Fried,E.I., A. (2016). Tutorial: Meta-analytic methods for
& Waldorp, L. J. (2021). Invisible hands and cognitivescience.InA.Papafragou,D.Grodner,
fine calipers: A call to use formal theory as a D.Mirman,&J.Trueswell(Eds.),Roceedingsof
toolkit for theory construction. Perspectives on the 38th annual conference of the cognitive sci-
PsychologicalScience,16(4),725–743. ence society (pp. 33–34). Cognitive Science So-
Roettger, T. B., & Baer-Henney, D. (2019). Toward a ciety.
replicationculture:Speechproductionresearch Uhlmann, E. L., Ebersole, C. R., Chartier, C. R., Erring-
in the classroom. Phonological Data and Analy- ton,T.M.,Kidwell,M.C.,Lai,C.K.,McCarthy,
sis,1,13. R. J., Riegelman, A., Silberzahn, R., & Nosek,
Scheel, A. M., Schijen, M. R., & Lakens, D. (2021). An B. A. (2019). Scientific utopia iii: Crowdsourc-
excess of positive results: Comparing the stan- ing science. Perspectives on Psychological Sci-
dard psychology literature with registered re- ence,14(5),711–733.
ports.AdvancesinMethodsandPracticesinPsy- Ulrich,R.,&Miller,J.(2020).Meta-research:Question-
chologicalScience,4(2),1–12. ableresearchpracticesmayhavelittleeffecton
Shamseer,L.,Moher,D.,Clarke,M.,Ghersi,D.,Liberati, replicability.Elife,9.
A., Petticrew, M., Shekelle, P., & Stewart, Vazire, S. (2018). Implications of the credibility revo-
L. A. (2015). Preferred reporting items for lution for productivity, creativity, and progress.
systematic review and meta-analysis protocols Perspectives on Psychological Science, 13(4),
(PRISMA-P) 2015: Elaboration and explana- 411–417.
tion.BritishMedicalJournal,349. Verhage,M.L.,Schuengel,C.,Duschinsky,R.,vanIJzen-
Sung, Y. J., Schwander, K., Arnett, D. K., Kardia, S. L., doorn, M. H., Fearon, R. P., Madigan, S., Rois-
Rankinen, T., Bouchard, C., Boerwinkle, E., man,G.I.,Bakermans–Kranenburg,M.J.,Oost-
Hunt, S. C., & Rao, D. C. (2014). An empir- erman,M.,&onAttachmentTransmissionSyn-
ical comparison of meta-analysis and mega- thesis,C.(2020).TheCollaborationonAttach-
analysisofindividualparticipantdataforiden- ment Transmission Synthesis (CATS): A move
tifying gene-environment interactions. Genetic tothelevelofIndividual-Participant-Datameta-
epidemiology,38(4),369–378. analysis.CurrentDirectionsinPsychologicalSci-
Thomas-Odenthal, F., Molero, P., van der Does, W., & ence,29(2),199–206.
Molendijk,M.(2020).Impactofreviewmethod Wang, Y., Seidl, A., & Cristia, A. (2021). Infant speech
ontheconclusionsofclinicalreviews:Asystem- perception and cognitive skills as predictors of
atic review on dietary interventions in depres- later vocabulary. Infant Behavior and Develop-
sionasacaseinpoint.PloSone,15(9). ment,62.
Tincoff, R., & Jusczyk, P. W. (1999). Some beginnings Watt, C. A., & Kennedy, J. E. (2017). Options for
of word comprehension in 6-month-olds. Psy- prospective meta-analysis and introduction of
chologicalscience,10(2),172–175. registration-based prospective meta-analysis.
Tsuji, S., Bergmann, C., & Cristia, A. (2014). FrontiersinPsychology,7,2030.
Community-augmentedmeta-analyses:Toward Werker, J. F., & Tees, R. C. (1984). Cross-language
cumulativedataassessment.PerspectivesonPsy- speech perception: Evidence for perceptual re-
chologicalScience,9(6),661–665. organization during the first year of life. Infant
Tsuji, S., & Cristia, A. (2014). Perceptual attunement BehaviorandDevelopment,7(1),49–63.
in vowels: A meta-analysis. Developmental psy- Yarkoni, T. (2020). The generalizability crisis. Behav-
chobiology,56(2),179–191. ioralandBrainSciences,1–37.
Tsuji, S., & Cristia, A. (2017). Which acoustic and Zwaan, R. A., Etz, A., Lucas, R. E., & Donnellan, M. B.
phonological factors shape infants’ vowel dis- (2018).Makingreplicationmainstream.Behav-
crimination? exploiting natural variation in in- ioralandBrainSciences,41.
phondb.INTERSPEECH,2108–2112.