
===== PAGE 1/20 =====
Opendata:NotApplicable Editedby:ErinMBuchanan
Meta-Psychology,2022,vol6,MP.2021.3078 Openmaterials:NotApplicable Reviewedby:NatalyBeribisky,DanielBaker
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2021.3078 Openandreproducibleanalysis:NotApplicable Analysisreproducedby:NotApplicable
Articletype:Tutorial Openreviewsandeditorialprocess:Yes AllsupplementaryfilescanbeaccessedatOSF:
PublishedundertheCC-BY4.0license Preregistration:No https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/J5V26
Power to the People: A Beginner’s Tutorial to
Power Analysis using jamovi
James E Bartlett
SchoolofPsychologyandNeuroscience,UniversityofGlasgow,UK
Sarah J Charles
DepartmentofPsychology,InstituteofPsychiatry,Psychology&Neuroscience,King’sCollegeLondon,UK
Abstract
Authors have highlighted for decades that sample size justification through power analysis is the exception rather
than the rule. Even when authors do report a power analysis, there is often no justification for the smallest effect
size of interest, or they do not provide enough information for the analysis to be reproducible. We argue one
potential reason for these omissions is the lack of a truly accessible introduction to the key concepts and decisions
behind power analysis. In this tutorial targeted at complete beginners, we demonstrate a priori and sensitivity
power analysis using jamovi for two independent samples and two dependent samples. Respectively, these power
analyses allow you to ask the questions: “How many participants do I need to detect a given effect size?”, and
“WhateffectsizescanIdetectwithagivensamplesize?”. Weemphasisehowpoweranalysisismosteffectiveasa
reflective process during the planning phase of research to balance your inferential goals with your resources. By
theendofthetutorial,youwillbeabletounderstandthefundamentalconceptsbehindpoweranalysisandextend
themtomoreadvancedstatisticalmodels.
Keywords: Poweranalysis,effectsize,tutorial,apriori,sensitivity,jamovi
Introduction not the only way to justify your sample size (see Lak-
ens,2022),butdespiteincreasedattentiontostatistical
“Ifheisatypicalpsychologicalresearcher,notonlyhas
power, it is still rare to find articles that justified their
he exerted no prior control over his risk of committing a
samplesizethroughpoweranalysis(Chen&Liu,2019;
typeIIerror,buthewillhavenoideawhatthemagnitude
Guo et al., 2014; Larson & Carbine, 2017). Even for
ofthisriskis.”(Cohen,1965,pg. 96)1
those that do report a power analysis, there are often
Fordecadesresearchershavehighlightedthatempir-
other problems such as poor justification for the effect
icalresearchhaschronicallylowstatisticalpower(But-
size, misunderstandingstatisticalpower, ornotmaking
ton et al., 2013; Cohen, 1962; Sedlmeier & Gigeren-
the power analysis reproducible (Bakker et al., 2020;
zer 1989). This means that the study did not include
Beribisky et al., 2019; Collins & Watt, 2021). There-
enough participants to reliably detect a realistic effect
fore,wepresentabeginner’stutorialwhichoutlinesthe
size (see Table 1 for a definition of key terms). One
method to avoid low statistical power is to calculate 1We are aware of the problem with using gendered lan-
how many participants you need for a given effect size guage like in the original quote. Despite this issue, we think
in a process called “power analysis”. Power analysis is thequotestillresonates.
===== PAGE 2/20 =====
2
key decisions behind power analysis and walk through Brysbaert, 2019; Perugini et al., 2018), but from our
how it applies to t-tests for two independent samples perspective, previous tutorials move too quickly from
andtwodependentsamples. Weexpectnobackground beginner to advanced concepts. In research methods
knowledgeaswewillexplainthekeyconceptsandhow curricula, educators only briefly cover power analysis
tointeractwiththesoftwareweuse. acrossintroductoryandadvancedcourses(Sestiretal.,
Before beginning the tutorial, it is important to ex- 2021; TARG Meta-Research Group, 2020). In their as-
plain why we need power analysis. There is a negative sessment of researcher’s understanding of power anal-
relationshipbetweenthesamplesizeofastudyandthe ysis, Collins and Watt (2021) advise that clearer ed-
effectsizethestudycanreliablydetect. Holdingevery- ucational materials should be available. In response,
thing else constant, a larger study can detect smaller ourapproachispresentingabeginner’stutorialthatcan
effect sizes, and conversely, a smaller study can only support both students and established researchers who
detect larger effect sizes. A study can be described as areunfamiliarwithpoweranalysis.
underpowerediftheeffectsizeyouaretryingtodetect We have split our tutorial into three parts starting
issmallerthantheeffectsizeyourstudyhastheability witharecapofthestatisticalconceptsunderlyingpower
todetect. analysis. There are common misconceptions around
Ifwepublishedorsharedtheresultsofallthestudies useful types of power analysis (Beribisky et al., 2019),
we ever conducted, underpowered research would be so it is important to outline what we are trying to
less of a problem. We would just see more statistically achieve. Inparttwo,weoutlinethedecisionsyoumust
non-significant findings. However, since there is publi- make when performing a power analysis, like choosing
cationbiasthatfavourssignificantfindings(Dwanetal., your alpha, beta, and smallest effect size of interest.
2008;Francoetal.,2014),underpoweredstudieswarp We then present a walk-through in part three on per-
whole fields of research (Button et al., 2013). Imag- forming a priori and sensitivity power analyses for two
ine five research groups were interested in the same independent samples and two dependent samples. Ab-
topic and performed a similar study using 50 partici- solutebeginnersunfamiliarwithpoweranalysisshould
pants each. The results from the first four groups were start with part one, while readers with a general un-
notstatisticallysignificant,butthefifthgroupbychance derstanding of power analysis can start with part two.
observed a larger effect size which was statistically sig- We conclude with recommendations for future reading
nificant. We know that non-significant findings are less thatoutlinespoweranalysisformoreadvancedstatisti-
likelytobepublished(Francoetal., 2014), soonlythe caltests.
fifth group published their findings which happened to
observealargerstatisticallysignificanteffect. PartOne: TheStatisticsBehindPowerAnalysis
Now imagine you wanted to build on this research
TypeIandTypeIIErrors
andtoinformyourstudy, youreviewtheliterature. All
youfindisthefifthstudyreportingalargerstatistically The dominant theory of statistics in psychology is
significant effect, and you use thateffect size toinform known as “frequentist” or “classical” statistics. Power
your study, meaning you recruit a smaller sample than analysis is used within this framework where proba-
ifyouexpectedasmallereffectsize. Ifstudiessystemat- bility is assigned to “long-run” frequencies of observa-
icallyusesmallsamplesizes,onlylargermoreunrealis- tions (many things happening over time). In contrast,
ticeffectsizesarepublished,andsmallermorerealistic Bayesian statistics uses another theory of probability
effect sizes are hidden. Moreover, researchers tend to that can be applied to individual events through com-
havepoorintuitionsaboutstatisticalpower,wherethey bining prior belief with a likelihood function2. In this
underestimate what sample size they need for a given article, we are only covering the frequentist approach
effect size (Bakker et al., 2016). In combination, this where the “long-run” probability is the basis of where
meansresearcherstendtopowertheirstudiesforunre- yougetp-valuesfrom.
alisticallylargeeffectsizesandthinktheyneedasample Researchers often misinterpret the information pro-
size which would be too small to detect more realistic vided by p-values (Goodman, 2008). In our follow-
effect sizes (Etz & Vandekerckhove, 2016). In short, ing explanations, we focus on the Neyman-Pearson ap-
systematically underpowered research is a problem as proach(Lakens,2021),wheretheaimofthefrequentist
it warps researchers’ understanding of both what con- branch of statistics is to help you make decisions and
stitutes a realistic effect size and what an appropriate limit the number of errors you will make in the long-
samplesizeis. run(Neyman,1977). Theformaldefinitionofap-value
A power analysis tutorial article is nothing new.
2SeeKruschkeandLiddell,(2018)forhowpoweranalysis
Therearecomprehensiveguidestopoweranalysis(e.g.,
appliestoBayesianstatistics.
===== PAGE 3/20 =====
3
byCohen(1994)istheprobabilityofobservingaresult as a fixed standard of evidence. Fisher - one of the pi-
at least as extreme as the one observed, assuming the oneers of hypothesis testing - commented that he ac-
nullhypothesis(thereisnoeffect)istrue. Thismeansa cepted 5% as a low standard of evidence across re-
small p-value (closer to 0) indicates the results are un- peated findings (Goodman, 2008). Fisher (1926) em-
likelyifthenullhypothesisistrue,whilealargep-value phasised that individual researchers should consider
(closer to 1) indicates the results are more likely if the whichalphaisappropriateforthestandardofevidence
nullistrue. in their study, but this nuance has been lost over time.
The probabilities do not relate to individual studies For example, Bakker et al. (2020) reported that for
buttellyoutheprobabilityattachedtotheprocedureif studies that specifically mention alpha, 91% of power
yourepeateditmanytimes. So,ap-valueof.05means analyses use 5%. This shows how, in psychology, alpha
that, if you were to keep taking lots of samples from issynonymouswith5%anditisrareforresearchersto
the population, and the null hypothesis was true, the useadifferentalphavalue.
chanceoffindingaresultatleastasextremeastheone Theoppositeproblemiswherewesaythereisnotan
wehaveseenis5%,or1in20. So,thiscanbephrased effect when there actually is one. This is known as a
as “if we conducted an infinite number of studies with type II error (said, type two error) or a false negative.
the same design as this, 5% of all of the results would In the Neyman-Pearson approach, this is the second el-
be at least this extreme”. The reason to use long-run ementofusinghypothesistestingtohelpusmakedeci-
probability, is that any single measurement comes with sions. InadditiontoalphalimitinghowmanytypeIer-
itthepossibilityofsomekindof‘error’,orunaccounted rors(falsepositives)wearewillingtomake,wesetbeta
for variance that are not assumed in our hypotheses. to limit how many type II errors (false negatives) we
For example, the researcher’s reaction times, the tem- are willing to make. Beta (sometimes written as “β”) is
perature of the room, the participant’s level of sleep, theprobabilityofconcludingthereisnotaneffectwhen
thebrightnessofthescreensonequipmentbeingused, there really is one. This is normally set at .20 (20%),
etc. could all cause slight changes to the accuracy of whichmeanswearewillingtomakeatypeIIerror20%
themeasureswemake. Inthelong-run,thesearelikely ofthetimeinthelong-run. Bysettingthesetwovalues,
averagedout. wearestatingrulestohelpusmakedecisionsandtrying
We used a p-value of .05 as an example because an tolimithowoftenwewillbewronginthelong-run. We
alpha value of .05 tends to be used as the cut-off point will consider how you can approach these decisions in
in psychology to conclude “we are happy to say that parttwo.
thisresultisunlikely/surprisingenoughtomakeanote
of”. Alpha(sometimeswrittenas“α”)istheprobability One-andtwo-tailedtests
of concluding there is an effect when there is not one,
In significance testing, we describe the null hypoth-
known as a type I error (said, type one error) or false
esis as a probability distribution centred on zero. We
positive. This is normally set at .05 (5%) and it is the
can reject the null hypothesis if our observed result is
threshold we look at for a significant effect. Setting al-
greater than a critical value determined by our alpha
pha to .05 means we are willing to make a type I error
value. The area after the critical value creates a rejec-
5%ofthetimeinthelong-run. IntheNeyman-Pearson
tion region in the outer tails of the distribution. If the
approach, we create cutoffs to help us make decisions
observed result is in this rejection region, we conclude
(Lakens, 2021). We want to know if we can reject the
thedatawouldbeunlikelyassumingthenullhypothesis
null hypothesis and conclude we have observed some
istrue,andrejectthenullhypothesis.
kind of effect. By setting alpha, we are saying the p-
There are two ways of stating the rejection region.
valueforthisstudymustbesmallerthanalphatoreject
These are based on the type of alternative hypothesis
the null hypothesis. If our p-value is larger than alpha,
weareinterestedin. Therearetwotypesofalternative
we cannot reject the null hypothesis. This is where the
hypotheses: (1) non-directional, and (2) directional. A
term“statisticalsignificance”comesfrom. Asascientific
non-directional hypothesis is simply a statement that
community,wehavecometothegroupconclusionthat
there will be any effect, irrespective of the direction of
this cut-off point is enough to say “the null hypothesis
the effect, e.g., ‘Group A is different from Group B’. In
may not be true” and we understand that in the long-
contrasttothis,theassumednull-hypothesisis‘GroupA
run, we would be willing to make a mistake 5% of the
isnotdifferentfromGroupB’.GroupAcouldbesmaller
timeifthenullwasreallytrue.
thanGroupB,orGroupAcouldbebiggerthanGroupB.
It is important to understand that the cut-off of 5%
Inbothsituations,thenullhypothesiscouldberejected.
appears immutable now for disciplines like psychology
A directional hypothesis, on the other hand, is a state-
thatroutinelyuse5%foralpha,butitwasnevermeant
mentthattherewillbeaspecificeffect,e.g.,‘GroupAis
===== PAGE 4/20 =====
4
biggerthanGroupB’.Now,theassumednullhypothesis statement. Howmuchdoesalcoholslowdownreaction
is‘GroupAisnotbiggerthanGroupB’.Inthisinstance time? Is one drop of alcohol enough or do you need
even if we find evidence that Group B is bigger than toconsumeafullkegofbeerbeforeyourreactiontime
GroupA,thenullhypothesiscouldnotberejected. decreasesbyjust1millisecond? Thesmallesteffectsize
Thisiswherethenumberoftailsinatestcomesin. In ofinterestoutlineswhateffectsizeyouwouldconsider
atwo-tailedtest(alsoknownasanon-directionaltest), practicallymeaningfulforyourresearchquestion.
whenalphaissetto5%,therearetwoseparate2.5%ar- Effect sizes can be expressed in two ways: as an un-
eastocreatearejectionregioninboththepositiveand standardised effect, or as a standardised effect. An un-
negativetails. Together,thetwotailscreateatotalarea standardisedeffectsizeisexpressedintheoriginalunits
of5%. Tobestatisticallysignificant,theobservedresult ofmeasurement. Forexample,ifyoucompleteaStroop
can be in either the positive or negative rejection re- task, you measure response times to congruent and in-
gions. GroupAcouldbehigherthangroupB,orgroup congruent colour words in milliseconds. The mean dif-
BcouldbehigherthangroupA,youarejustinterested ference in response time to congruent and incongruent
inadifferenceinanydirection. conditions is an unstandardised effect size and will re-
Inaone-tailedtest(alsoknownasadirectionaltest), main consistent across studies. This means you could
there is just one larger area totalling 5% to create a sayonestudyreportingameandifferenceof106mshad
rejection region in either the positive or negative tail alargereffectthanastudyreportingameandifference
(depending on the direction you are interested in). To of79ms.
be statistically significant, the critical value is slightly Unstandardised effect sizes are easy to compare if
smaller,buttheresultmustbeinthedirectionyoupre- themeasurementunitsareconsistent,butinpsychology
dicted. This means you would only accept a result of we do not always have easily comparable units. Many
‘group A is bigger than group B’ as significant. You subdisciplines use Likert scales to measure an effect of
couldstillfindthatgroupBisbiggerthangroupA,but interest. For example, in mental health research, one
no matter how big the difference is, you cannot reject mightbeinterestedinhowmuchanxietysomeoneexpe-
the null hypothesis as it is contrary to your directional rienceseachweek(participantsareoftengivenoptions
prediction. suchas“notatall”,“alittle”,“neitheralittlenoralot”,
“a lot”, and “all the time”). These responses are not in
StatisticalPower easilyinterpretablemeasurementsbut,asscientists,we
would still like to provide a numerical value to explain
Statistical power is defined as the probability of cor-
whataneffectmeans3.
rectly deciding to reject the null hypothesis when the
This is where standardised effect sizes are useful as
null hypothesis is not true. In plain English: the like-
theyallowyoutocompareeffectsacrosscontexts,stud-
lihood of successfully detecting an effect that is actu-
ies,orslightlydifferentmeasures. Forexample,ifstudy
ally there (see Baguley, 2009 for other lay definitions).
oneusedafive-pointscaletomeasureanxietybutstudy
When we have sufficient statistical power, we are mak-
twousedaseven-pointscale,adifferenceoftwopoints
ing the study sensitive enough to avoid making too
on each scale has a different interpretation. A stan-
many type II errors. Statistical power is related to beta
dardised effect size allows you to convert these differ-
where it is 1-β and typically expressed as a percentage.
ences into common measures, making it easier to com-
Ifweuseabetavalueof.20,thatmeansweareaiming
pareresultsacrossstudiesusingdifferentunitsofmea-
tohavestatisticalpowerof80%(1-.20=.80=80%).
surement. There are many types of standardised effect
EffectSize sizes,suchasCohen’sdorη2 (said,etasquared),which
we use in different contexts (see Lakens, 2013 for an
Forstatisticalpower,wespokeabout“detectinganef- overview). In this tutorial, we mainly focus on Cohen’s
fectthatisactuallythere”. Thefinalpieceofthepower d as the standardised mean difference as it is the effect
analysispuzzleisthesmallesteffectsizeofinterest. An size used in jamovi, the software we use in part three
effectsizecanbedefinedasanumberthatexpressesthe below. Althoughtherearedifferentformulas,Cohen’sd
magnitude of a phenomenon relevant to your research is normally the mean difference divided by the pooled
question(Kelley&Preacher,2012). Dependingonyour standarddeviation. Thismeansitrepresentsthediffer-
research question, this includes the difference between ence between groups or conditions, expressed as stan-
groups or the association between variables. For ex- darddeviationsinsteadoftheoriginalunitsofmeasure-
ample, you could study the relationship between how
much alcohol you drink and reaction time. We could 3Note, we use this as an example of measurements with
say “alcohol has the effect of slowing down reaction different scales, but it is normally better to analyse ordinal
time”. However, there is something missing from that datawithordinalmodels(seeBürkner&Vuorre,2019).
===== PAGE 5/20 =====
5
ment. ingpoweranalysis: alpha,beta,samplesize,effectsize,
Standardised and unstandardised effect sizes each andone-ortwo-tailedtests. Forease,wehaveprovided
have their strengths and weaknesses (Baguley, 2009). a summary of these concepts, their meaning, and how
Unstandardised effect sizes are easier to interpret, par- we often use them in Table 1. It takes time to appreci-
ticularly for lay readers who would find it easier to un- atetheinterrelationshipbetweentheseconcepts,sowe
derstand a difference of 150ms instead of 0.75 stan- recommend using the interactive visualisation by Mag-
dard deviations. However, it can be harder to com- nusson(https://rpsychologist.com/d3/nhst/).
pare unstandardised effect sizes across studies when
there are different measurement scales. Standardised Typesofpoweranalysis
effect sizes help with this as they convert measures to
Asthefourmainconceptsbehindpoweranalysisare
standardised units, making it easier to compare effect
related,wecancalculateoneastheoutcomeifwestate
sizes across studies. However, the standardisation pro-
theotherthree. Themostcommontypesofpoweranal-
cess can cause problems, as effect sizes can change de-
ysisrelatingtotheseoutcomesare(1)apriori,(2)sen-
pendingonwhetherthedesignwaswithin-orbetween-
sitivity, and (3) post-hoc. If we want sample size as
subjects,ifthemeasuresareunreliable,andifsampling
the outcome, we use a priori power analysis to deter-
affects the variance of the measures through restrict-
minehowmanyparticipantsweneedtoreliablydetect
ing the values to a smaller range of the scale (Bagu-
agivensmallesteffectsizeofinterest,alpha,andpower.
ley, 2009). Similarly, the frame of reference is impor-
Alternatively,ifwewanttheeffectsizeastheoutcome,
tant when interpreting standardised effect sizes. When
wecanusesensitivitypoweranalysistodeterminewhat
classifying the magnitude of standardised effects, Co-
effect size we can reliably detect given a fixed sample
hen (1988, pg. 25) specifically says “the terms "small,"
size,alpha,andpower.
"medium," and "large" are relative, not only to each
Thereisalsopost-hocpoweranalysisifwewantsta-
other, but to the area of behavioural science or even
tistical power as the outcome given an observed effect
more particularly to the specific content and research
size,samplesize,andalpha. Post-hocpoweranalysisis
method being employed in any given investigation”.
anattractiveidea,butitshouldnotbereportedasites-
Cohen emphasised that the qualitative labels (“small”,
sentiallyexpressesthep-valueinadifferentway. There
“medium,” and “large”) are arbitrarily applied to spe-
isadirectrelationshipbetweenobservedpowerandthe
cific values, and should be applied differently to differ-
p-value of your statistical test, where a p-value of .05
ent fields. This means that interpretation should not
meansyourobservedpoweris50%(Lakens,2022). Re-
simplyfollowrulesofthumbthatwereestablishedout-
member,probabilityinfrequentiststatisticsdoesnotap-
side of the research field of interest. Although the soft-
plytoindividualevents,sousingtheobservedeffectsize
ware we introduce in part three relies on standardised
in a single study ignores the role of the smallest effect
effect sizes, Baguley (2009) emphasises it is better to
size of interest in the long-run. As post-hoc power is
focus on interpreting unstandardised effect sizes wher-
uninformative,weonlyfocusonaprioriandsensitivity
everpossible.
poweranalysisinthistutorial.
To bring this back to statistical power (successfully
detectingatrueeffect),thebiggeraneffectis,theeasier
PartTwo: DecisionMakinginPowerAnalysis
it is to detect. In the anxiety example, we could com-
paretheeffectsoftwotypesoftherapy. Ifthedifference Nowthatyouarefamiliarwiththeconcepts,weturn
between therapy A and therapy B was, on average, 3 ourfocustodecisionmakinginpoweranalysis. Inpart
points on an anxiety scale, it would be easier to detect one,wedefinedthemaininputsusedinpoweranalysis,
than if the average difference between therapy A and but now you must decide on a value for each one. Set-
therapy B was 1 point. The smaller decrease of 1 point tingyourinputsisthemostdifficultpartofpoweranal-
would be harder to detect than the larger decrease of ysis as you must understand your area of research and
3 points. You would need to test more people in each be able to justify your choices (Lakens, 2022). Power
therapy group to successfully detect this weaker effect analysisisareflectiveprocessthatismosteffectivedur-
becauseofthegreaterlevelofoverlapbetweenthetwo ing the planning stage of research, meaning that you
setsoftherapyoutcomes. Itisthisprinciplethatallows must balance your inferential goals (what you want to
us to say that the bigger the effect size, the easier it is find out) with the resources you have available (time,
todetect. Inotherwords,ifyouhavethesamenumber money, equipment, etc.). In this part, we will outline
of participants, statistical power increases as the effect different strategies for choosing a value for alpha, be-
sizeincreases. ta/power, one- or two-sided tests, your smallest effect
Wehavenowcoveredthefivemainconceptsunderly- sizeofinterest,andyoursamplesize.
===== PAGE 6/20 =====
6
Table1
Tableshowingthebasicconceptsunderlyingpoweranalysis,whattheymean,andhowtheyareoftenused.
Concept Whatitis Howitisoftenused
Alpha(α) Cut-off value for how frequently we are will- Thisistraditionallysetto.05(5%ofthetime),
ingtoacceptafalse-positive. but it is often set to lower thresholds in dis-
ciplines like physics. The lower alpha is, the
fewer false-positives there will be in the long-
run.
Beta(β) Cut-off value for how frequently we are will- Inpsychology,thisisusuallysetto.20(20%of
ingtoacceptafalse-negative. thetime),implicitlysuggestingfalsenegatives
are less of a concern than false positives. The
lower beta is, the fewer false-negatives there
willbeinthelong-run.
Power Thechancesofdetectinganeffectthatexists. The opposite of beta, power is how likely you
(1-β) aretodetectagiveneffectsize. Thisisusually
setto.80(80%ofthetime). Thehigherpower
is, the more likely you are to successfully de-
tectatrueeffectifitisthere.
Effectsize A number that expresses the magnitude of a Unstandardisedeffect sizesexpress thediffer-
phenomenon relevant to your research ques- ence or relationship in the original units of
tion. measurement,suchasmilliseconds. Standard-
ised effect-sizes express the difference or re-
lationship in standardised units, such Cohen’s
d. Higher absolute effect sizes mean a larger
differenceorstrongerrelationship.
One-tailed When the rejection region in null hypothesis If you have a (ideally preregistered) clear di-
test significance testing is limited to one tail in a rectionalprediction,one-tailedtestsmeanyou
positiveornegativedirection. wouldonlyrejectthenullhypothesisifthere-
sult was in the direction you predicted. The
observed result may be in the extreme of the
opposite tail, but you would still fail to reject
thenullhypothesis.
Two-tailed When the rejection region in null hypothesis If you would accept a result in any direction,
test significance testing is present in the extremes youcanuseatwo-tailedtesttorejectthenull
ofboththepositiveandnegativetailarea. hypothesis if the observed result is in the ex-
tremesofeitherthepositiveornegativetail.
apriori Howmanyparticipantsdoweneedtoreliably We tend to use the term ‘a priori’ in front of a
power detect a given smallest effect size of interest, power analysis that is conducted before data
analysis alpha,andpower? is collected. This is because we are deducing
the number of participants from information
wealreadyhave.
Sensitivity Whateffectsizecouldwedetectwithourfixed We use a sensitivity power analysis when we
power samplesize,alpha,anddesiredpower? alreadyknowhowmanyparticipantswehave
analysis (e.g.,usingsecondarydata,oraccesstoarare
population). We use this type of analysis to
evaluate what effect sizes we can reliably de-
tect.
===== PAGE 7/20 =====
7
Alpha poweranalysis.
Aiming for 80% power was largely a pragmatic ap-
The first input to set is your alpha value. Tradition-
proach, so you may argue it is not high enough. Co-
ally, we use .05 to say we are willing to accept making
hen (1965) explicitly stated that you should ignore his
a type I error up to 5% of the time. There is nothing
suggestion of 80% if you have justification for another
special about using an alpha of .05, it was only a brief
value. Setting beta to .20 means you are willing to ac-
suggestion by Fisher (1926) for what felt right, but he
cept a type II error 20% of the time. This implicitly
emphasised you should justify your alpha for each ex-
means type II errors are four times less serious than
periment. Decades of tradition mean the default alpha
type I errors when alpha is set to .05. To match the
issetto.05,buttherearedifferentapproachesyoucan
error rates, Bakker et al. (2020) found the next most
taketoargueforadifferentvalue.
commonvaluewas95%power(beta=.05),butitonly
You could start with the traditional alpha of .05 but
represented19%ofpoweranalysesintheirsample.
adjust it for multiple comparisons. For example, if
Earlier,wementionedworkingwithrarepopulations.
youwereplanningonperformingfourrelatedtestsand
Manysuchpopulations(suchasthosewithraregenetic
wanted to correct for multiple comparisons, you could
conditions) may receive specialist care or support. If
usethiscorrectedalphavalueinyourpoweranalysis. If
one were to assess the effectiveness of this specialist
you used the Bonferroni-Holm method (Cramer et al.,
care/support, then not finding an effect that does exist
2016), the most stringent alpha value would be set as
(a type II error) might lead to this support being taken
.0125insteadof.05. Usingthisloweralphavaluewould
away. Insuchcircumstances,youcouldarguethattype
require more participants to achieve the same power,
II errors are just as important to avoid, if not more im-
butyouwouldensureyourmorestringenttesthadyour
portant, than type I errors. As such, in these circum-
desiredlevelofstatisticalpower.
stances,youmightwanttoincreaseyourpower(havea
Alternatively, you could argue your study requires
lowerbetavalue),toavoidundueharmtoavulnerable
deviating from the traditional .05 alpha value. One
population.
approach is to switch between a .05 alpha for sugges-
Deciding on the beta value for your own study
tivefindingsanda.005alphaforconfirmatoryfindings
will involve a similar process to justifying your alpha.
(Benjaminetal.,2018). Thismeansifyouhaveastrong
You must decide what your inferential goals are and
prediction, or one that has serious theoretical implica-
whether80%powerisenough,knowingyoucouldmiss
tions,youcouldargueyourstudyrequiresamorestrin-
out on a real effect 20% of the time. However, if you
gent alpha value. Theoretical physicists take this ap-
increase power to 90% or 95%, it will require more
proachofusingamorestringentvalueevenfurther,and
participants, so you must perform a cost-benefit anal-
useanalphavalueof.0000003(knownas‘fivesigma’).
ysisbasedonhoweasyitwillbetorecruityoursample
Thereasonforhavingsuchastringentalphalevelisthat
(Lakens,2022).
tomakechangestoourunderstandingofphysicswould
have knock-on effects to all other sciences, so avoiding
One-andtwo-tailedtests
falsepositivesisoftheutmostimportance. Anotherap-
proach is to justify your bespoke alpha for each study Intestscomparingtwovalues,suchasthedifference
(Lakensetal.,2018). Theargumenthereisyoushould between two groups or the relationship between two
performacost-benefitanalysistodetermineyouralpha variables,youcanchooseaone-ortwo-tailedtest. Lak-
based on how difficult it is to recruit your sample. See ens (2016a) argued one-tailed tests are underused and
MaierandLakens(2021)foraprimeronjustifyingyour offer a more efficient procedure. As the rejection re-
alpha. gion is one 5% area (instead of two 2.5% areas), the
critical value is smaller, so holding everything else con-
Beta stant,youneedfewerparticipantsforastatisticallysig-
nificantresult. One-tailedtestsalsoofferamoresevere
Beta also has a traditional value: most studies aim
testofahypothesissincetheobservedresultmustreach
forabetaof.20,meaningtheywant80%power. Cohen
the rejection region in the hypothesised direction. The
(1965) suggested the use of 80% as he felt that type II
p-value in your test may be smaller than alpha, but if
errors are relatively less serious than type I errors. At
the result is in the opposite direction to what you pre-
the time of writing, 80% power would lead to roughly
dicted, you still cannot reject the null hypothesis. This
doublethesamplesizesthanthestudieshecritiquedin
means one-tailed tests can be an effective option when
his review (Cohen, 1962). Aiming for 80% power has
youhaveastrongdirectionalprediction.
proved influential as Bakker et al. (2020) found it was
One-tailed tests are not always appropriate though,
the most common value researchers reported in their
soitisimportantyouprovideclearjustificationforwhy
===== PAGE 8/20 =====
8
you are more interested in an effect in one direction about whether the results in the meta-analysis are sim-
and not the other (Ruxton & Neuhäuser, 2010). If you ilar to your planned study. Sometimes, meta-analyses
would be interested in an effect in either a positive or will report a broad meta-analysis amalgamating all the
negative direction, then a two-tailed test would be bet- results, then report moderator analyses for the type
ter suited. One-tailed tests have also been a source of of studies they include, so you could check whether
suspicion since they effectively halve the p-value. For there is an estimate restricted to methods similar to
example, Wagenmakers et al. (2011) highlighted how your study. We also know meta-analyses can report
somestudiestook advantageofanopportunisticuseof inflated effect sizes due to publication bias (Lakens,
one-tailedtestsfortheirresultstobestatisticallysignif- 2022), meaning you can look for a more conservative
icant. This means one-tailed tests are most convincing estimate such as the lower bound of the confidence in-
whencombinedwithpreregistration(seeKathawallaet tervalaroundtheaverageeffectoriftheauthorsreport
al. (2021) if preregistration is a procedure you are un- abias-correctedaverageeffect.
familiar with) as you can demonstrate that you had a Second, there may be one key study you are mod-
cleardirectionalhypothesisandplannedtotestthathy- elling your project on. You could use their effect size
pothesiswithaone-tailedtest. to inform your power analysis, but as Panzarella et al.
(2021)warn,effectsizesarebestinterpretedincontext,
Effectsize so question how similar your planned methods are. As
a result from a single study, there will be uncertainty
In contrast to alpha and beta, there is not one tradi-
around their estimate, so think about the width of the
tionalvalueforyourchoiceofeffectsize. Manystudies
confidence interval around their effect size and use a
approach power analysis with a single effect size and
conservativeestimate.
valueforpowerinmind,butaswewilldemonstratein
Finally, you can consult effect size distributions. The
part three, power exists along a curve. In most cases,
most popular guidelines are from Cohen (1988) who
you do not know what the exact effect size is, or you
argued you should use d = 0.2 for new areas of re-
would not need to study it. The effect size you use is
search as the measures are likely to be imprecise, 0.5
essentiallytheinflectionpointforwhicheffectsizesyou
forphenomenaobservabletothenakedeye,and0.8for
wantsufficientpowertodetect. Ifyouwant80%power
differences you hardly need statistics to detect. Cohen
for an effect of Cohen’s d = 0.40, you will be able to
(1988)explicitlywarnedtheseguidelineswerefornew
detecteffectsof0.40with80%power. Youwillhavein-
areas of research, when there was nothing else to go
creasingly higher levels of power for effects larger than
on. But, like many heuristics, the original suggestions
0.40, but increasingly lower levels of power for effects
have lost their nuance and are now taken as a ubiqui-
smallerthan0.40. Thismeansitisimportanttothinkof
tous ‘rule of thumb’. It is important to consider what
your smallest effect size of interest, as you are implicitly
effectsizesmeanforyoursubjectarea(Baguley,2009),
saying you do not care about detecting effects smaller
but researchers seldom critically choose an effect size.
thanthisvalue.
An analysis of studies that did justify their effect size
Themostdifficultpartofanaprioripoweranalysisis
found that the majority of studies simply cited Cohen’s
justifyingyoursmallesteffectsizeofinterest. Choosing
suggestedvalues(Bakkeretal.,2020). Relyingonthese
an effect size to use in power analysis and interpreting
rulesofthumbcanleadtostrangeinterpretations,such
effectsizesinyourstudyrequiressubjectmatterexper-
as paradoxes where even incredibly small effect sizes
tise (Panzarella et al., 2021). You must decide what
(usingCohen’sruleofthumb)canbemeaningful. Abel-
effectsizesyouconsiderimportantormeaningfulbased
son(1985)foundthatanR2 of.003wastheeffectsize
on your understanding of the measures and designs in
ofthemostsignificantcharacteristicpredictingbaseball
your area. For example, is there a relevant theory that
success (batting average). In context, then, an R2 of
outlinesexpectedeffects;whathavestudiestestingsim-
.003isclearlymeaningful,soitisimportanttointerpret
ilar hypotheses found; what are the practical implica-
effect sizes in context rather than apply broad general-
tionsoftheresults? Someofthesedecisionsaredifficult
isations. If you must rely on effect size distributions,
to make and all the strategies are not always available,
there are articles which are sub-field specific. For ex-
but there are different sources of information you can
ample, Gignac and Szodorai (2016) collated effects in
consult for choosing and justifying your smallest effect
individual differences research and Szucs and Ioanni-
sizeofinterest(Lakens,2022).
dis(2021)outlinedeffectsincognitiveneurosciencere-
First, you could identify a meta-analysis relevant to
search.
yourareaofresearchwhichsummarisestheaverageef-
Effect size distributions can be useful to calibrate
fect across several studies. If you want to use the es-
yourunderstandingofeffectsizesindifferentareasbut
timate to inform your power analysis, you must think
===== PAGE 9/20 =====
9
they are not without fault. Panzarella et al. (2021) on conducting is informative, or if it would be uninfor-
demonstrated that in the studies that cited effect size mative, you would have the opportunity to change the
distributions, most used them to directly interpret the design or use more precise measures to produce larger
effect sizes they observed in their study (e.g., “in this effectsizes.
studywefounda‘large’effect,whichmeans...”). How-
ever, as seen in Abelson’s paradox, small effects in one PartThree: PowerAnalysisusingjamovi
context can be meaningful in another context. Effect
For this tutorial, we will be using the open source
sizedistributionscanhelptounderstandthemagnitude
software jamovi (2021). Although it currently offers a
ofeffectsizeswithinandacrosssubjectareas,butcom-
limited selection for power analysis, it is perfect for an
paringyourobservedeffectsizetoanamalgamationof
introductionforthreereasons. First,itisfreeandacces-
effects across all of psychology leads to a loss in nu-
sible on a wide range of devices. Historically, G*Power
ance. If you have no other information, effect size dis-
(Faul et al., 2009) was a popular choice, but it is no
tributions can help to inform your smallest effect size
longerunderactivedevelopmentwhichpresentsacces-
ofinterest,butwhenitcomestointerpretationitisim-
sibility issues. Second, the output in jamovi contains
portant to put your effect size in context compared to
written guidance on how to interpret the results and
studiesinvestigatingasimilarresearchquestion.
emphasises underrepresented concepts like power ex-
With these strategies in mind, it is important to con-
isting along a curve. Finally, Bakker et al. (2020) ob-
sider what represents the smallest effect size of inter-
servedauthorsoftenfailtoprovideenoughinformation
est for your specific study. It is the justification that is
to reproduce their power analysis. In jamovi, you save
important as there is no single right or wrong answer.
your output and options in one file, meaning you can
Poweranalysisisalwaysacompromisebetweendesign-
sharethisfiletobefullyreproducible. Combined,these
inganinformativestudyanddesigningafeasiblestudy
featuresmakejamovitheperfectsoftwaretouseinthis
fortheresourcesatyourdisposal. Youcouldalwaysset
tutorial.
youreffectsizetod=0.05,butthesamplesizerequired
To download jamovi to your computer, navi-
wouldoftenbeunachievableandeffectsthissmallmay
gate to the download page (https://www.jamovi.org/
not be practically meaningful. Therefore, you must ex-
download.html) and install the solid version to be the
plainandjustifywhatrepresentsthesmallesteffectsize
most stable. Once you open jamovi, click Modules (in
ofinterestforyourareaofresearch.
thetopright,Figure1ainred),clickjamovilibrary(Fig-
ure 1a in blue), and scroll down in the Available tab
Samplesize
until you see jpower and click INSTALL (Figure 1b in
The final input you can justify is your sample size. green). This is an additional module written by Morey
You may be constrained by resources or the population andSelkerwhichappearsinyourjamovitoolbar.
youstudy,meaningyouknowthesamplesizeandwant Inthefollowingsections,imaginewearedesigninga
toknowwhateffectsizesyoucoulddetectinasensitiv- studytobuildonIrvingetal. (2022)whotestedanin-
itypoweranalysis. tervention to correct statistical misinformation. Partici-
Lakens(2022)outlinedthattwostrategiesforsample pantsreadanarticleaboutanewfictionalstudywhere
sizejustificationincludemeasuringanentirepopulation one passage falsely concludes watching TV causes cog-
andresourceconstraints. Ifyoustudyaspecificpopula- nitive decline. In the correction group, participants re-
tion, suchasparticipantswithararegeneticcondition, ceive an extra passage where the fictional researcher
you might know there are only 30 participants in your explains they only reported a correlation, not a causal
country which you regularly study, placing a limit on relationship. In the no-correction group, the extra pas-
the sample size you can recruit. Alternatively, in many sagejustexplainsthefictionalresearcherwasnotavail-
studentprojects,thetimeormoneyavailabletoconduct able to comment. Irving et al. then tested participants’
researchislimited,sothesamplesizemaybeinfluenced comprehension of the story and coded their answers
by resource constraints. You might have £500 for re- for mistaken causal inferences. They expected partic-
cruitment and if you pay them £10 for an hour of their ipants in the correction group to make fewer causal
time,youonlyhaveenoughmoneyfor50participants. inferences than those in the no-correction group, and
In both scenarios, you start off knowing what your foundevidencesupportingthispredictionwithaneffect
sample size will be. This does not mean you can ig- size equivalent to Cohen’s d = 0.64, 95% CI = [0.28,
nore statistical power, but it changes from calculating 0.99]. Inspired by their study, we want to design an
thenecessarysamplesizetodetectagiveneffectsize,to experiment to correct another type of misinformation
whateffectsizeyoucandetectwithagivensamplesize. inarticles.
This allows you to decide whether the study you plan Irving et al. (2022) themselves provide an excellent
===== PAGE 10/20 =====
10
Figure 1. Opening jamovi and managing your additional modules. Click modules (a in red), jamovi library (a in
blue) to manage your modules, and scroll down to install jpower (b in green) to be able to follow along to the
tutorial.
example of explaining and justifying the rationale be- completemultipleconditionsinsteadofbeingallocated
hind their power analysis, so we will walk through the toseparategroups.
decision making process and how it changes the out-
puts. For our smallest effect size of interest, our start- TwoIndependentsamples
ing point is the estimate of d = 0.64. However, it is
A priori power analysis in independent samples.
worth consulting other sources to calibrate our under-
Ifyouopenjamovi,youshouldhaveanewwindowwith
standingofeffectsinthearea,suchasIrvingetal. citing
no data or output. For an independent samples t-test,
a meta-analysis by Chan et al. (2017). For debunking,
makesureyouareontheanalysestab,clickonjpower,
theaverageeffectacross30studieswasd=1.14,95%
and select Independent Samples T-Test. This will open
CI = [0.68, 1.61], so we could use the lower bound of
thewindowshowninFigure2.
the confidence interval, but this may still represent an
Wewillstartbycalculatingpoweraprioriforaninde-
overestimate. Irving et al. used the smallest effect (d
pendent samples t-test. On the left side, you have your
= 0.54) from the studies most similar to their design
inputs and on the right side, you have the output from
which was included in the meta-analysis. As a value
yourchoices. Dependingonthetypeofanalysisyouse-
slightly smaller than the other estimates, we will also
lect under Calculate, one of the inputs will be blanked
usethisasthesmallesteffectofinterestforourstudy.
outingrey. Thismeansitistheparameteryouwantas
Nowwehavesettledonoursmallesteffectsizeofin-
theoutputontherightsideandyouwillnotbeableto
terest,wewillused=0.54inthefollowingdemonstra-
edit it. To break down the main menu options in this
tions. Westartwithaprioriandsensitivitypoweranal-
window:
ysis for two independent samples, exploring how the
outputschangeaswealterinputslikealpha,power,and
• Calculate: Your choice of calculating one of
thenumberoftailsinthetest. Foreachdemonstration,
(a) the minimum number of participants (N per
weexplainhowyoucantransparentlyreportthepower
group) needed for a given effect size, (b) what
analysis to your reader. We then repeat the demon-
yourpowerisgivenaspecificeffectsizeandsam-
strations for two dependent samples to show how you
ple size, or (c) the smallest effect size that you
require fewer participants when the same participants
couldreliablydetectgivenafixedsamplesize.
===== PAGE 11/20 =====
11
Figure2. Defaultsettingsforanindependentsamplest-testusingthejpowermoduleinjamovi.
• Minimally-interesting effect size: This is thestan- one direction or you would be interested in any
dardisedeffectsizeknownasCohen’sd. Herewe significantresult.
canspecifyoursmallesteffectsizeofinterest.
For this example, our smallest effect size of interest
• Minimum desired power: This is our long-run will be d = 0.54 following our discussion of building
power. Poweristraditionallysetat.80(80%)but on Irving et al. (2022). We can enter the following
someresearchersarguethatthisshouldbehigher inputs: effectsized=0.54, alpha=.05, power=.90,
at.90(90%)or.95(95%). Thedefaultsettingin relativesizeofgroup2togroup1=1, andtwo-tailed.
jpoweris.90(90%)butseeparttwoforjustifying YoushouldgettheoutputinFigure3. Thefirsttable“A
thisvalue. Priori Power Analysis” tells us that to detect our small-
esteffectsizeofinterest,wewouldneedtwogroupsof
• Nforgroup1: Thisinputiscurrentlyblankedout
74 participants (N = 148) to achieve 90% power in a
as in this example we are calculating the mini-
two-tailedtest.
mumsamplesize,buthereyouwoulddefinehow
Injamovi,itisclearhowstatisticalpowerexistsalong
manyparticipantsareinthefirstgroup.
a curve. The second table in Figure 3 “Power by Ef-
• Relativesizeofgroup2togroup1: Ifthisissetto fectSize”showsuswhatrangeofeffectsizeswewould
1,thesamplesizeiscalculatedbyspecifyingequal likely detect with 74 participants per group. We would
group sizes. You can specify unequal group sizes have 80-95% power to detect effect sizes between d
by changing this input. For example, 1.5 would = 0.46-0.60. However, we would only have 50-80%
mean group 2 is 1.5 times larger than group 1, power to detect effects between d = 0.32-0.46. This
whereas 0.5 would mean group 2 is half the size shows our smallest effect size of interest could be de-
ofgroup1. tected with 90% power, but smaller effects have lower
powerandlargereffectswouldhavehigherpower.
• α (type I error rate): This is your long-run type
Thisisalsoreflectedinthepowercontourplot,which
one error rate which is conventionally set at .05.
is reported by default (Figure 4). If you cannot see
Seeparttwoforstrategiesonjustifyingadifferent
the plot, make sure the “Power contour plot” option is
value.
ticked under Plots and scroll down in the Results win-
• Tails: Isthetestone-ortwo-tailed? Youcanspec- dowasitisincludedatthebottom. Thelevelofpower
ify whether you are looking for an effect in just you choose is the black line that curves from the top
===== PAGE 12/20 =====
12
Figure 4. A power contour to show how as the effect
size decreases (smaller values on the y-axis), the num-
Figure 3. priori power analysis results for a two-tailed berofparticipantsrequiredtodetecttheeffectincreases
independentsamplest-testusingd=0.54asthesmall- (highervaluesonthex-axis). Ourdesiredlevelof90%
esteffectsizeofinterest. Wewouldneed74participants powerisindicatedbytheblackcurvedline.
pergroup(N=148)for90%power.
ipants per group (for a two-tailed test; alpha =
left to the bottom right. For our effect size, we travel .05). Thiswouldbe38fewerparticipantsthanour
alongthehorizontalblacklineuntilwereachthecurve, firstestimate,saving19hoursofdatacollection.
andthedownarrowtellsusweneed74participantsper
group. For larger effectsas you travelup the curve, we Itisimportanttobalancecreatinganinformativeex-
would need fewer participants and for smaller effects periment with the resources available. Therefore, it is
downthecurvewewouldneedmoreparticipants. crucialthat,wherepossible,youperformapoweranal-
Now that we have explored how many participants ysis in the planning phase of a study as you can make
we would need to detect our smallest effect size of in- these kinds of decisions before you recruit any partici-
terest,wecanaltertheinputstoseehowthenumberof pants. Youcanmakefewertypeone(decreasingalpha)
participantschanges. Whereverpossible,itisimportant ortypetwo(increasingpower)errors,butyoumustre-
to perform a power analysis before you start collecting cruitmoreparticipants.
data, as you can explore how changing the inputs im- IntheoriginalpoweranalysisbyIrvingetal. (2022),
pactsyoursamplesize. they used inputs of d = 0.54, alpha = .05, power =
.95,andone-tailedforadirectionalprediction,andthey
• Tail(s): If you change the number of tails to one,
aimed for two groups of 75 (N = 150) participants. In
this decreases the number of participants in each
thesedemonstrations,wearewalkingthroughchanging
groupfrom74to60. Thissavesatotalof28par-
the inputs to see how it affects the output, but you can
ticipants (14 in each group). If your experiment
lookattheirarticleforagoodexampleofjustifyingand
takes 30 minutes per participant, that is saving
reportingapoweranalysis.
you 14 hours’ worth of work or cost while still
How can this be reported? Bakker et al. (2020)
providingyourexperimentwithsufficientpower.
warned that only 20% of power analyses contained
• α: If you change α to .01, we would need 104 enough information to be fully reproducible. To report
participants in each group (for a two-tailed test), yourpoweranalysis,thereaderneedsthefollowingfour
60 more participants than our first estimate and keypiecesofinformation:
30morehoursofdatacollection.
• Thetypeoftestbeingconducted,
• Minimum desired power: If we decreased power
to the traditional 80%, we would need 55 partic- • Thesoftwareusedtocalculatepower,
===== PAGE 13/20 =====
13
• Theinputsthatyouused,and
• Whyyouchosethoseinputs.
FortheoriginalexampleinFigure3,wecouldreport
it like this: “To detect an effect size of Cohen’s d = 0.54
with 90% power (alpha = .05, two-tailed), the jpower
moduleinjamovisuggestswewouldneed74participants
per group (N = 148) for an independent samples t-test.
Similar to Irving et al. (2022), the smallest effect size of
interestwassettod=0.54,butweusedatwo-tailedtest
aswewerelesscertainaboutthedirectionoftheeffect.”
Thisprovidesthereaderwithalltheinformationthey
would need in order to reproduce the power analysis
andensureyouhavecalculateditaccurately. Thestate-
mentalsoincludesyourjustificationforthesmallestef-
fect size of interest. Please note there is no single ‘cor-
rect’ way to report a power analysis. Just be sure that
youhavethefourkeypiecesofinformation.
Sensitivity power analysis in independent sam-
ples. Selecting the smallest effect size of interest for
Figure 5. Sensitivity power analysis results for an inde-
an a priori power analysis would be an effective strat-
pendentsamplest-testwhenthereisafixedsamplesize
egy if you wanted to calculate how many participants
of 40 per group (N = 80). We would be able to detect
youneedwhendesigningyourstudy. Nowimagineyou
aneffectsizeofd=0.73with90%power.
already knew the sample size or had access to a pop-
ulation of a known size. In this scenario, you would
conduct a sensitivity power analysis. This would tell
you what effect sizes your study would be powered to but we would have greater than 90% power to detect
detect for a given alpha, power, and sample size. This effectsizeslargerthand=0.73.
is helpful for interpreting your results as you can out- To acknowledge how power exists along a curve, we
line what effect sizes your study was sensitive to and also get a second type of graph. We now have a power
whicheffectswouldbetoosmallforyoutoreliablyde- curve (Figure 6) with the x-axis showing the potential
tect. If you change the “Calculate” input to Effect size, effectsizeandthey-axisshowingwhatthepowerwould
“Minimally-interesting effect size” will now be greyed beforthatpotentialeffectsize. Ifthisplotisnotvisible
out. in the output, make sure you have “Power curve by ef-
Imaginewehadfinishedcollectingdataandweknew fect size” ticked in the Plots options. This tells us how
we had 40 participants in each group but did not con- powerchangesastheeffectsizeincreasesordecreases,
duct a power analysis when designing the study. If we withourotherinputsheldconstant.
enter40forNforgroup1,1forrelativesizeofgroup2 At90%power,wecandetecteffectsizesofd=0.73
to group 1, alpha = .05, power = .90, and two-tailed, or larger. If we follow the black curve towards the bot-
wegettheoutputinFigure5. tom left, power decreases for smaller effect sizes. This
The first table in Figure 5 “A Priori Power Analysis” showsthatoncewehaveafixedsamplesize,powerex-
tells us that the study is sensitive to detect effect sizes istsalongacurvefordifferenteffectsizes. Wheninter-
of d = 0.73 with 90% power (note, the table is still re- preting your results, it is important you have sufficient
ferredtoasapriori,despiteitbeingasensitivitypower statistical power to detect the effects you do not want
analysis. This is a quirk of the software. Do not worry, tomissouton. Ifthesensitivitypoweranalysissuggests
it is running a sensitivity analysis). This helps us to youwouldmisseffectsyouwouldconsidermeaningful,
interpret the results if we did not plan with power in you would need to calibrate your expectations of how
mind or we had a rare sample. The second table in informativeyourstudyis.
Figure 5 “Power by Effect Size” shows we would have How can this be reported? We can also state the
80-95% power to detect effect sizes between d = 0.63- resultsofasensitivitypoweranalysisinareport. Ifyou
0.82,but50-80%powertodetecteffectsizesbetweend didnotperformanaprioripoweranalysis,youcouldre-
=0.44-0.63. Astheeffectsizegetssmaller,thereisless portthisinthemethodtocommentonyourfinalsample
chance of detecting it with 40 participants per group, size. If you are focusing on interpreting how informa-
===== PAGE 14/20 =====
14
have four inputs as we do not need to worry about the
ratio of group 2 to group 1. In a paired samples t-test,
every participant must contribute a value for each con-
dition. If we repeat the inputs from our independent
samples t-test a priori power analysis (d = 0.54, alpha
= .05, power = .90, two-tailed), your window should
looklikeFigure8.
The table “A Priori Power Analysis” suggests we
would need 39 participants to achieve 90% power to
detectoursmallesteffectsizeofinterest(d=0.54)in-
spiredbyIrvingetal. (2022). Wewouldneed109fewer
participantsthanourfirstestimate,saving54.5hoursof
datacollectionassumingyourexperimenttakes30min-
utes. We also have the second table “Power by Effect
Size” to show how power changes for different effect
sizeranges.
Beforewemoveontohowtoreportthepoweranal-
ysis, we will make a note of the important lesson that
Figure 6. A power curve to show how as the effect size usingawithin-subjectsdesignwillalwayssaveyoupar-
decreases(smallervaluesonthex-axis),wewouldhave ticipants. The reason for this is that instead of every
lessstatisticalpower(lowervaluesonthey-axis)forour participantcontributingjustonevalue(whichmayhave
fixedsamplesize. Ourdesiredlevelof90%powerisin- measurement error because of extraneous variables),
dicated by the intersection of the black horizontal line they are contributing two values (one to each condi-
andtheblackcurvedline. tion). Theerrorcausedbymanyoftheextraneousvari-
ables(suchastheirage,eyesight,strength,oranyother
participant-specificvariablethatmightcauseerror)are
tiveyourresultsare, youcouldexploreitinthediscus- the same for both conditions for the same person. The
sion. Muchlikeanaprioripoweranalysis,therearekey less error in our measurements there is, the more sure
detailsthatmustbeincludedtoensureitisreproducible we can be that the results we see are due to our ma-
andinformative. FortheexampleinFigure5,youcould nipulation. As within-participants designs lower the
report: amount of error compared to between-participants de-
“Thejpowermoduleinjamovisuggestsanindependent sign, they need fewer participants to achieve the same
samples t-test with 40 participants per group (N = 80) amount of power. The amount of error accounted for
wouldbesensitivetoeffectsofCohen’sd=0.73with90% inawithin-participantsdesignmeansyouneedapprox-
power (alpha = .05, two-tailed). This means the study imatelyhalfthenumberofparticipantsyouneedtode-
would not be able to reliably detect effects smaller than tect the same effect size in a between-subjects design
Cohen’sd=0.73”. (Lakens,2016b). Whenyouaredesigningastudy,think
As with an a priori power analysis, there are multi- about whether you could convert the design to within-
plewaysyoucandescribethesensitivitypoweranalysis subjectstomakeitmoreefficient.
with the example above demonstrating one way of do- While it helps save on participants, it is not always
ing so. The main goal is to communicate the four key possible, or practical, to use a within-subjects design.
pieces of information to ensure your reader could re- For example, in the experiment we are designing here,
produce the sensitivity power analysis and confirm you participantsareshowntwoversionsofanewsstorywith
calculateditaccurately. asubtlemanipulation. Abetween-subjectsdesignmight
be a better choice as participants are randomised into
Twodependentsamples one of two groups and they do not see the alternative
manipulation. This means participants would find it
A priori power analysis in dependent samples.
more difficult to work out the aims of the study and
Nowwewilldemonstratehowyoucanconductapower
changetheirbehaviour. Inawithin-subjectsdesignyou
analysis for a within-subjects design. This time, you
would need at least two versions of the news story to
need to select Paired Samples T-Test from the jpower
createone‘correction’conditionandone‘nocorrection’
menutogetawindowlikeFigure7.
condition. This means participants would experience
The inputs are almost identical to what we used for
both conditions and they could work out the aims of
the independent samples t-test, but this time we only
===== PAGE 15/20 =====
15
Figure7. Defaultsettingsforapairedsamplest-testusingthejpowermoduleinjamovi.
thestudyandpotentiallychangetheirbehaviour. Inad- in mind or had a limited sample. The second table in
dition, you would need to ensure the two versions of Figure 9 “Power by Effect Size” shows we would have
the news story were different enough that participants 80-95% power to detect effect sizes between d = 0.53-
didnotsimplyprovidethesameanswer,butcomparable 0.68, but 50-80% power to detect effect sizes between
enough to ensure you are not introducing a confound. d = 0.37-0.53. As the effect size gets smaller, there
This is another example of where thinking of statistical is less chance of detecting it with 30 participants, but
power in the design stage of research is most useful. wewouldhavegreaterthan90%powertodetecteffect
You can decide whether a within- or between-subjects sizeslargerthand=0.61.
designisbestsuitedtoyourprocedure. Howcanthisbereported? FortheexampleinFig-
Howcanthisbereported? FortheexampleinFig- ure 9, you could report: “The jpower module in jamovi
ure 8, you could report: “To detect an effect size of Co- suggests a paired samples t-test with 30 participants
hen’sd=0.54with90%power(alpha=.05,two-tailed), wouldbesensitivetoeffectsofCohen’sd=0.61with90%
the jpower module in jamovi suggests we would need 39 power (alpha = .05, two-tailed). This means the study
participants for a paired samples t-test. Similar to Irving would not be able to reliably detect effects smaller than
et al. (2022), the smallest effect size of interest was set Cohen’sd=0.61”.
tod=0.54,butweusedatwo-tailedtestaswewereless
certainaboutthedirectionoftheeffect.”. Conclusion
Sensitivity power analysis in dependent samples.
In this tutorial, we demonstrated how to perform a
Ifyouchange“Calculate”toEffectsize,wecanseewhat
power analysis for both independent and paired sam-
effect sizes a within-subjects design is sensitive enough
plest-testsusingthejpowermoduleinjamovi. Weout-
to detect. Imagine we sampled from 30 participants
lined two of the most useful types of power analysis:
without performing an a priori power analysis. Setting
(1) a priori, for when you want to know how many
the inputs to power = .90, N = 30, alpha = .05, and
participants you need to detect a given effect size, and
two-tailed;youshouldgettheoutputinFigure9.
(2) sensitivity, for when you want to know what effect
The“APrioriPowerAnalysis”tableshowsusthatthe
sizes you can detect with a given sample size. We also
designwouldbesensitivetodetectaneffectsizeofd=
emphasisedthekeyinformationyoumustreporttoen-
0.61 with 90% power using 30 participants. This helps
sure power analyses are reproducible. Our aim was to
ustointerprettheresultsifwedidnotplanwithpower
provide a beginner’s tutorial to learn the fundamental
===== PAGE 16/20 =====
16
concepts of power analysis, so you can build on these
lessonsandapplythemtomorecomplicateddesigns.
There are three key lessons to take away from this
tutorial. First,youcanplantomakefewertypeone(de-
creasing alpha) or type two (increasing power) errors,
butitwillcostmoreparticipantsassumingyouwantto
detect the same effect size. Second, using a one-tailed
test offers a more severe test of a hypothesis and re-
quires fewer participants to achieve the same level of
power. Finally, using a within-subjects design requires
fewerparticipantsthanabetween-subjectsdesign.
Poweranalysisisareflectiveprocess,anditisimpor-
tanttokeepthesethreelessonsinmindwhendesigning
yourstudy. Designinganinformativestudyisabalance
between your inferential goals and the resources avail-
able to you (Lakens, 2022). That is why we framed
changes in the inputs around how many hours of data
collection your study would take assuming it lasted 30
minutes. You will rarely have unlimited resources as
a researcher, either from the funding body supporting
your research, or from the number of participants in
Figure 8. A priori power analysis results for a paired your population of interest. Planning your study with
samplest-testusingd=0.54asthesmallesteffectsize statistical power in mind provides you with the most
of interest. We would need 39 participants for 90% flexibilityasyoucanmakedecisions,likeconsideringa
power. one-tailedtestorusingawithin-subjectsdesign,before
youcanpreregisterandconductyourstudy.
Thenumberofparticipantsrequiredforasufficiently
powered experiment might have surprised you. De-
pending on the inputs and design, we needed between
39 and 208 participants to detect the same small-
est effect size of interest (d = 0.54) to build on Irv-
ing et al. (2022). For resource-limited studies like
student dissertations or participant-limited studies on
rare populations, getting so many participants may
be unachievable. As a result, changing to a within-
participantsdesign, orchangingtheotherinputsmight
be needed, where possible. In circumstances where
within-participantsdesignsarenotpossible,andchang-
inginputs(e.g.,alpha)doesnotwork,youcanstillcon-
duct the study, providing you adjust your expectations
andmaketheresultsavailable. Ifyoudomakeyourre-
sultsavailable,whileyoursamplesizemaybetoosmall
in isolation to detect your smallest effect size of inter-
est,yourresultscanthenbecollatedintometa-analyses
providingtheyareavailabletootherresearchers.
Alternative solutions include studying larger effect
sizes, and/or focusingon ‘team science’. Cohen(1973)
quippedthatinsteadofchasingsmallereffects,psychol-
ogy should emulate older sciences by creating larger
Figure 9. Sensitivity power analysis results for a paired
effects through stronger manipulations or using more
samples t-test when there is a fixed sample size of 30
precisemeasurements. Alternatively,ifyoucannotcon-
participants. We would be able to detect an effect size
duct an informative study individually, you could pool
ofd=0.61with90%power.
resources and engage in team science. For example,
===== PAGE 17/20 =====
17
student dissertations can benefit from projects where is the flexibility to simulate your own bespoke power
multiplestudentsworktogether,witheachstudentcon- analysis. Thestartingpointissimulatingadatasetwith
tributingonecomponentandcollectingdataforalarger known attributes - like the mean and standard devi-
network/project (Creaven et al., 2021; Wagge et al., ation of each group or correlation between variables
2019), or labs across the world pool their resources to- - and applying your statistical test. You then repeat
gether (Moshontz et al., 2018). In the past, students this simulation process many times and store the p-
have been encouraged to work on a project by them- values from each iteration. As probability in frequen-
selves to gain experience conducting a science experi- tist statistics relates to long-run frequencies, you cal-
mentbythemselves. However,encouragingstudentsto culate what percentage of those p-values were lower
workingroupsmaynowbejustasuseful,assuchgroup than your alpha, providing your statistical power. See
work reflects the paradigm shift towards ‘team science’ Quandt(2020)andSleegers(2021)fordemonstrations
seen in the wider research community in recent years of simulation applied to power analysis in R and the
(Wuchtyetal.,2007). summer school workshop series organised by PsyPAG
To conclude our tutorial, we present a list of re- (https://simsummerschool.github.io/).
sources you can refer to for additional applications of Simulation approaches also scale to more advanced
power analysis. We limited our tutorial to two inde- techniques such as accounting for the number of trials
pendentsamplesandtwopairedsamplesformaximum in a task instead of solely the number of participants
accessibility, so it is important to outline resources for (Bakeretal.,2021)ormixed-effectsmodels,whichare
additionaldesigns. growing in popularity in psychology. Power analysis
proceduresformixedeffectsmodelsrelyonsimulation,
G*Power soseeBrysbaertandStevens(2018),DeBruineandBarr
(2021),andKumleetal. (2021)forguidance.
Although G*Power (Faul et al., 2009) is no longer
in active development, it supports power analysis for
AuthorContact
a range of statistical tests, such as correlation, non-
parametrictests,andANOVA.Thereisalongercompan- ORCiD JEB: 0000-0002-4191-5245; Email JEB:
ion guide to this manuscript that walks through power james.bartlett@glasgow.ac.uk;ORCiDSJC:0000-0002-
analysisforcorrelationandANOVA(Bartlett,2021). 3559-1141;EmailSJC:sarah.charles@kcl.ac.uk.
Superpower ConflictofInterestandFunding
G*PowercancalculatepowerforANOVAmodels,but We have no conflicts of interest to disclose. Writing
itdoesnotaccuratelyscaletofactorialANOVAandpair- thisarticlewasnotsupportedbyanyfundingsources.
wise comparisons. To target these limitations, Lakens
andCaldwell(2021)developedanRpackageandShiny AuthorContributions
appcalledSuperpower. Superpowerprovidesmoreflex-
Conceptualization (JEB, SJC); Writing - Original
ibility and scales up to factorial ANOVA as you enter
Draft(JEB,SJC);Writing-Review&Editing(JEB;SJC);
meansandstandarddeviationspercellforyoursmallest
Visualization(JEB;SJC).JEBplacedfirstduetooriginal
effectsizesofinterest. Forguidance,seeourcompanion
conceptualization, butfully sharedauthorshipbetween
guidefortheShinyapp(Bartlett,2021)andtheauthors’
JEBandSJC.
ebookfortheRpackage(Caldwelletal.,2021).
OpenSciencePractices
pwrRpackage
This article is theoretical and as such provides no
IfyouuseR,thepwrpackage(Champelyetal.,2020)
newdataormaterials,andwasnotpre-registered. The
supports many of the same tests as G*Power such as t-
entire editorial process, including the open reviews, is
tests, correlation, and regression. The arguments are
publishedintheonlinesupplement.
alsosimilartoG*power’sinputs,suchasomittingoneof
numeratoranddenominatordegreesoffreedom,effect
References
sizeas f2,alpha,orpowerforyourdesiredoutput.
Abelson, R. P. (1985). A variance explanation paradox:
Simulation When a little is a lot. Psychological Bulletin,
97(1), 129–133. https://doi.org/10.1037/
Packages like pwr are user-friendly as they only re-
0033-2909.97.1.129
quire you to define inputs to calculate power analyt-
ically, but one of the benefits of a programme like R
===== PAGE 18/20 =====
18
Baguley, T. (2009). Standardized or simple effect size: 2(1), 77–101. https://doi.org/10.1177/
Whatshouldbereported?BritishJournalofPsy- 2515245918823199
chology, 100(3), 603–617. https://doi.org/10. Button, K. S., Ioannidis, J. P. A., Mokrysz, C., Nosek,
1348/000712608X377117 B. A., Flint, J., Robinson, E. S. J., & Munafò,
Baker, D. H., Vilidaite, G., Lygo, F. A., Smith, A. K., M.R.(2013).Powerfailure:Whysmallsample
Flack, T. R., Gouws, A. D., & Andrews, T. J. sizeunderminesthereliabilityofneuroscience.
(2021). Power contours: Optimising sample Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 14(5), 365–376.
size and precision in experimental psychology https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn3475
and human neuroscience. Psychological Meth- Caldwell, A. R., Lakens, D., & Parlett-Pelleriti, C. M.
ods, 26(3), 295–314. https://doi.org/http: (2021). Power Analysis with Superpower. Re-
//dx.doi.org/10.1037/met0000337 trieved November 23, 2021, from https://
Bakker, M., Hartgerink, C. H. J., Wicherts, J. M., & van aaroncaldwell.us/SuperpowerBook/
der Maas, H. L. J. (2016). Researchers’ Intu- Champely, S., Ekstrom, C., Dalgaard, P., Gill, J.,
itions About Power in Psychological Research. Weibelzahl, S., Anandkumar, A., Ford, C., Vol-
PsychologicalScience,27(8),1069–1077.https: cic, R., & Rosario, H. D. (2020). Pwr: Ba-
//doi.org/10.1177/0956797616647519 sic Functions for Power Analysis. Retrieved
Bakker, M., Veldkamp, C. L. S., Akker, O. R. v. d., As- November 23, 2021, from https://CRAN.R-
sen,M.A.L.M.v.,Crompvoets,E.,Ong,H.H., project.org/package=pwr
& Wicherts, J. M. (2020). Recommendations Chan, M.-P. S., Jones, C. R., Hall Jamieson, K., &
in pre-registrations and internal review board Albarracín, D. (2017). Debunking: A Meta-
proposals promote formal power analyses but Analysis of the Psychological Efficacy of Mes-
do not increase sample size. PLoS ONE, 15(7), sagesCounteringMisinformation.Psychological
e0236079. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal. Science, 28(11), 1531–1546. https://doi.org/
pone.0236079 10.1177/0956797617714579
Bartlett, J. E. (2021). Introduction to Power Analysis: Chen, L.-T., & Liu, L. (2019). Content Analysis of
A Guide to G*Power, jamovi, and Superpower. Statistical Power in Educational Technology
https://osf.io/zqphw/ Research: Sample Size Matters. International
Benjamin, D. J., Berger, J. O., Johannesson, M., Nosek, Journal of Technology in Teaching and Learn-
B. A., Wagenmakers, E.-J., Berk, R., Bollen, ing,15(1),49–75.RetrievedJuly8,2021,from
K. A., Brembs, B., Brown, L., Camerer, C., Ce- https://eric.ed.gov/?id=EJ1276088
sarini, D., Chambers, C. D., Clyde, M., Cook, Cohen, J. (1962). The statistical power of abnormal-
T. D., De Boeck, P., Dienes, Z., Dreber, A., social psychological research: A review. The
Easwaran, K., Efferson, C., ... Johnson, V. E. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology,
(2018).Redefinestatisticalsignificance.Nature 65(3), 145–153. https://doi.org/10.1037/
HumanBehaviour,2(1),6–10.https://doi.org/ h0045186
10.1038/s41562-017-0189-z Cohen,J.(1965).SomeStatisticalIssuesinPsychologi-
Beribisky,N.,Davidson,H.,&Cribbie,R.A.(2019).Ex- calResearch.InW.BenjaminB(Ed.),Handbook
ploringperceptionsofmeaningfulnessinvisual ofclinicalpsychology.McGraw-Hill.
representationsofbivariaterelationships.PeerJ, Cohen, J. (1973). Statistical Power Analysis and Re-
7,e6853.https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj.6853 search Results. American Educational Research
Brysbaert, M. (2019). How Many Participants Do We Journal, 10(3), 225–229. https://doi.org/10.
Have to Include in Properly Powered Experi- 2307/1161884
ments? A Tutorial of Power Analysis with Ref- Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the be-
erence Tables. Journal of Cognition, 2(1), 16. havioral sciences (2nd ed.). Lawrence Erlbaum
https://doi.org/10.5334/joc.72 Associates.
Brysbaert, M., & Stevens, M. (2018). Power Analysis Cohen, J. (1994). The earth is round (p<.05). Amer-
andEffectSizeinMixedEffectsModels:ATuto- ican Psychologist, 49(12), 997–1003. https://
rial. Journal of Cognition, 1(1), 9. https://doi. doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.49.12.997
org/10.5334/joc.10 Collins, E., & Watt, R. (2021). Using and Understand-
Bürkner,P.-C.,&Vuorre,M.(2019).OrdinalRegression ing Power in Psychological Research: A Survey
Models in Psychology: A Tutorial. Advances in Study.Collabra:Psychology,7(1),28250.https:
Methods and Practices in Psychological Science, //doi.org/10.1525/collabra.28250
===== PAGE 19/20 =====
19
Cramer, A. O. J., van Ravenzwaaij, D., Matzke, D., Ste- viewofthereportingofsamplesizecalculations
ingroever, H., Wetzels, R., Grasman, R. P. P. P., and corresponding data components in obser-
Waldorp, L. J., & Wagenmakers, E.-J. (2016). vational functional magnetic resonance imag-
Hidden multiplicity in exploratory multiway ing studies. NeuroImage, 86, 172–181. https:
ANOVA:Prevalenceandremedies.Psychonomic //doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.08.012
Bulletin&Review,23(2),640–647.https://doi. Irving, D., Clark, R. W. A., Lewandowsky, S., & Allen,
org/10.3758/s13423-015-0913-5 P. J. (2022). Correcting statistical misinforma-
Creaven, A.-M., Button, K., Woods, H., & Nordmann, tionaboutscientificfindingsinthemedia:Cau-
E. (2021). Maximising the educational and re- sationversuscorrelation.JournalofExperimen-
search value of the undergraduate dissertation tal Psychology. Applied. https://doi.org/10.
in psychology. Retrieved April 4, 2022, from 1037/xap0000408
https://psyarxiv.com/deh93/ Kathawalla, U.-K., Silverstein, P., & Syed, M. (2021).
DeBruine, L. M., & Barr, D. J. (2021). Understand- Easing Into Open Science: A Guide for Gradu-
ing Mixed-Effects Models Through Data Simu- ate Students and Their Advisors. Collabra: Psy-
lation.AdvancesinMethodsandPracticesinPsy- chology, 7(18684). https://doi.org/10.1525/
chological Science, 4(1), 2515245920965119. collabra.18684
https://doi.org/10.1177/2515245920965119 Kelley, K., & Preacher, K. J. (2012). On effect size. Psy-
Dwan,K.,Altman,D.G.,Arnaiz,J.A.,Bloom,J.,Chan, chological Methods, 17(2), 137–152. https://
A.-W., Cronin, E., Decullier, E., Easterbrook, doi.org/10.1037/a0028086
P. J., Elm, E. V., Gamble, C., Ghersi, D., Ioan- Kruschke, J. K., & Liddell, T. M. (2018). The Bayesian
nidis, J. P. A., Simes, J., & Williamson, P. R. New Statistics: Hypothesis testing, estimation,
(2008).SystematicReviewoftheEmpiricalEv- meta-analysis, and power analysis from a
idence of Study Publication Bias and Outcome Bayesian perspective. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Reporting Bias. PLoS ONE, 3(8), e3081. https: Review, 25(1), 178–206. https://doi.org/10.
//doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0003081 3758/s13423-016-1221-4
Etz, A., & Vandekerckhove, J. (2016). A Bayesian Per- Kumle, L., Võ, M. L.-H., & Draschkow, D. (2021). Es-
spective on the Reproducibility Project: Psy- timating power in (generalized) linear mixed
chology(D.Marinazzo,Ed.).PLoSONE,11(2), models:AnopenintroductionandtutorialinR.
1–12. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone. Behavior Research Methods, 53(6), 2528–2543.
0149794 https://doi.org/10.3758/s13428-021-01546-0
Faul,F.,Erdfelder,E.,Buchner,A.,&Lang,A.-G.(2009). Lakens, D. (2013). Calculating and reporting effect
Statistical power analyses using G*Power 3.1: sizes to facilitate cumulative science: A practi-
Tests for correlation and regression analyses. cal primer for t-tests and ANOVAs. Frontiers in
Behavior Research Methods, 41(4), 1149–1160. Psychology, 4. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.
https://doi.org/10.3758/BRM.41.4.1149 2013.00863
Fisher, R. A. (1926). The Arrangement of Field Experi- Lakens, D. (2021). The Practical Alternative to the p
ments.JournaloftheMinistryofAgriculture,33, ValueIstheCorrectlyUsedpValue.Perspectives
503–515. onPsychologicalScience,16(3),639–648.https:
Franco,A.,Malhotra,N.,&Simonovits,G.(2014).Pub- //doi.org/10.1177/1745691620958012
lication bias in the social sciences: Unlocking Lakens, D. (2022). Sample Size Justification. Collabra:
the file drawer. Science. https://doi.org/10. Psychology, 8(1), 33267. https://doi.org/10.
1126/science.1255484 1525/collabra.33267
Gignac, G. E., & Szodorai, E. T. (2016). Effect Lakens, D. (2016a). One-sided tests: Efficient and Un-
size guidelines for individual differences re- derused. Retrieved March 29, 2022, from http:
searchers.PersonalityandIndividualDifferences, //daniellakens.blogspot.com/2016/03/one-
102, 74–78. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.paid. sided-tests-efficient-and-underused.html
2016.06.069 Lakens, D. (2016b). Why Within-Subject Designs Re-
Goodman,S.(2008).Adirtydozen:Twelvep-valuemis- quire Fewer Participants than Between-Subject
conceptions. Seminars in Hematology, 45(3), Designs. Retrieved November 21, 2021, from
135–140. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1053 / j . http://daniellakens.blogspot.com/2016/11/
seminhematol.2008.04.003 why-within-subject-designs-require-less.html
Guo, Q., Thabane, L., Hall, G., McKinnon, M., Goeree, Lakens, D., Adolfi, F. G., Albers, C. J., Anvari, F., Apps,
R.,&Pullenayegum,E.(2014).Asystematicre- M. A. J., Argamon, S. E., Baguley, T., Becker,
===== PAGE 20/20 =====
20
R.B.,Benning,S.D.,Bradford,D.E.,Buchanan, Ruxton, G. D., & Neuhäuser, M. (2010). When should
E.M.,Caldwell,A.R.,VanCalster,B.,Carlsson, we use one-tailed hypothesis testing? Methods
R.,Chen,S.-C.,Chung,B.,Colling,L.J.,Collins, inEcologyandEvolution,1(2),114–117.https:
G. S., Crook, Z., ... Zwaan, R. A. (2018). Jus- //doi.org/10.1111/j.2041-210X.2010.00014.x
tifyyouralpha.NatureHumanBehaviour,2(3), Sedlmeier, P., & Gigerenzer, G. (1989). Do Studies of
168–171. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562- Statistical Power Have an Effect on the Power
018-0311-x ofStudies?PsychologicalBulletin,105(2),309–
Lakens, D., & Caldwell, A. R. (2021). Simulation- 316.
Based Power Analysis for Factorial Analy- Sestir, M. A., Kennedy, L. A., Peszka, J. J., &
sis of Variance Designs. Advances in Methods Bartley, J. G. (2021). New Statistics, Old
and Practices in Psychological Science, 4(1), Schools: An Overview of Current Introduc-
2515245920951503.https://doi.org/10.1177/ tory Undergraduate and Graduate Statistics
2515245920951503 Pedagogy Practices. Teaching of Psychology,
Larson,M.J.,&Carbine,K.A.(2017).Samplesizecal- 00986283211030616. https://doi.org/10.
culationsinhumanelectrophysiology(EEGand 1177/00986283211030616
ERP) studies: A systematic review and recom- Sleegers, W. (2021). Simulation-based power analyses.
mendations for increased rigor. International https://willemsleegers.com/content/posts/9-
Journal of Psychophysiology, 111, 33–41. https: simulation-based-power-analyses/simulation-
//doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2016.06.015 based-power-analyses.html
Maier, M., & Lakens, D. (2021). Justify Your Alpha: A Szucs, D., & Ioannidis, J. P. A. (2021). Correction:
PrimeronTwoPracticalApproaches.Retrieved Empirical assessment of published effect sizes
June 24, 2021, from https://psyarxiv.com/ andpowerintherecentcognitiveneuroscience
ts4r6/ andpsychologyliterature.PLOSBiology,19(3),
Moshontz, H., Campbell, L., Ebersole, C. R., IJzerman, e3001151. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
H.,Urry,H.L.,Forscher,P.S.,Grahe,J.E.,Mc- pbio.3001151
Carthy,R.J.,Musser,E.D.,Antfolk,J.,Castille, TARG Meta-Research Group. (2020). Statistics educa-
C. M., Evans, T. R., Fiedler, S., Flake, J. K., tion in undergraduate psychology: A survey of
Forero, D. A., Janssen, S. M. J., Keene, J. R., UK course content. https://doi.org/10.31234/
Protzko,J.,Aczel,B.,... Chartier,C.R.(2018). osf.io/jv8x3
ThePsychologicalScienceAccelerator:Advanc- The jamovi Project. (2021). Jamovi. https://www.
ing Psychology Through a Distributed Collabo- jamovi.org
rative Network. Advances in Methods and Prac- Wagenmakers, E.-J., Wetzels, R., Borsboom, D., & van
tices in Psychological Science, 1(4), 501–515. der Maas, H. L. J. (2011). Why psychologists
https://doi.org/10.1177/2515245918797607 must change the way they analyze their data:
Neyman, J. (1977). Frequentist Probability and Fre- Thecaseofpsi:CommentonBem(2011).Jour-
quentist Statistics. Synthese, 36(1), 97–131. nalofPersonalityandSocialPsychology,100(3),
http://www.jstor.org/stable/20115217 426–432.https://doi.org/10.1037/a0022790
Panzarella, E., Beribisky, N., & Cribbie, R. A. (2021). Wagge,J.R.,Brandt,M.J.,Lazarevic,L.B.,Legate,N.,
Denouncing the use of field-specific effect size Christopherson, C., Wiggins, B., & Grahe, J. E.
distributions to inform magnitude. PeerJ, 9, (2019). Publishing Research With Undergrad-
e11383.https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj.11383 uate Students via Replication Work: The Col-
Perugini, M., Gallucci, M., & Costantini, G. (2018). A laborative Replications and Education Project.
Practical Primer To Power Analysis for Simple FrontiersinPsychology,10.https://doi.org/10.
Experimental Designs. International Review of 3389/fpsyg.2019.00247
Social Psychology, 31(1). https://doi.org/10. Wuchty, S., Jones, B. F., & Uzzi, B. (2007). The In-
5334/irsp.181 creasing Dominance of Teams in Production
Quandt, J. (2020). Power Analysis by Data Simulation ofKnowledge.Science,316(5827),1036–1039.
inR-PartI.RetrievedApril1,2022,fromhttps: https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1136099
//julianquandt.com/post/power-analysis-by-
data-simulation-in-r-part-i/