
===== PAGE 1/21 =====
Opendata:Yes
Meta-Psychology,2024,vol8,MP.2020.2554 Openmaterials:NotApplicable Editedby:DanielLakens
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2020.2554 OpenCode:Yes Reviewedby:Brydges,C.,Field,S.M.,Hildegard,J.
Articletype:OriginalArticle Openandreproducibleanalysis:Yes Analysisreproducedby:JensFust
PublishedundertheCC-BY4.0license Openreviewsandeditorialprocess:Yes AllsupplementaryfilescanbeaccessedatOSF:
Preregistration:No https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/FYUBE
Bayesian Evaluation of Replication Studies
Hidde J. Leplaa1, Charlotte Rietbergen1, and Herbert Hoijtink1
1DepartmentofMethodologyandStatistics,UtrechtUniversity
In this paper a method is proposed to determine whether the result from an original
study is corroborated in a replication study. The paper is illustrated using two repli-
cationstudiesandthecorrespondingoriginalstudiesfromtheReproducibilityProject:
Psychology by the Open Science Collaboration. This method emphasizes the need to
determine what one wants to replicate from the original paper. This can be done by
translating the research hypotheses formulated in the introduction into informative
hypotheses, or, by translating the results into interval hypotheses. The Bayes factor
willbeusedtodeterminewhetherthehypothesesresultingfromtheoriginalstudyare
corroboratedbythereplicationstudy. Ourmethodtoassessthesuccessfulnessofrepli-
cationwillbetterfittheneedsanddesiresofresearchersinfieldsthatusereplication
studies.
Keywords: Bayesfactor,InformativeHypothesis,ReplicationCrisis,ReplicationStudy
Introduction ofthereplicationstudycorroboratedtheoriginalstudy;
which would mean it was a successful replication. In
People will walk more slowly when primed with
thisproject,only36%to47%oftheoriginalstudieswas
words related to being old was the result of a study by
successfully replicated. Since the OSC consists mainly
Bargh et al. (1996). However, the replication study by
ofstudiescomparinggroupmeans,ourfocuswillbeon
Doyen et al. (2012) failed to corroborate the results.
ANOVAs, although the ideas can easily be translated to
Thisstudybecameoneoftheexamplesoftheexistence
otherstatisticalmodels.
of the so-called replication crisis in the behavioral sci-
It is open for debate how many studies within the
ences; results obtained in a study are often not corrob-
OSC (2012, 2015) were replicated. This is due to the
orated by its replication. The question is now: what
fact that different methods were used to determine the
should we believe? How can we rely on results from
success of the replications. Throughout the literature,
scientificresearchinthebehavioralsciencesiftheycon-
different kinds of methods are used to evaluate repli-
tradict each other so often? But first: do they actually
cation studies. Anderson and Maxwell (2016) iden-
contradict each other? We will focus on the question
tifysixdifferentgoalswhenevaluatingsuccessfulnessof
how it can be determined whether a replication study
replicationstudies,andpresentforeachgoalasuitable
supportstheearlierstudy. Wewillproposetwomethods
methodtoanalyseit: significance-based,nulleffectinfer-
to translate an original paper into a hypothesis: either
ring,effectsizeestimating,meta-analysis,assessingincon-
basedonthetheory,orontheresults. Subsequently,the
sistency,andassessingconsistency. Wewilldiscussthese
dataresultingfromthereplicationstudywillbeusedto
methods, along with some of the critiques. Both the
evaluatethesehypotheseswiththeBayesfactor.
third, effect size estimation, and fourth, meta-analysis,
We will illustrate this paper with two studies from
donotfocusontestingwhetherareplicationstudycor-
the Open Science Collaboration (OSC) Reproducibility
roboratestheresultsoftheoriginalstudy. Thereforewe
Project: Psychology (OSC, 2012, 2015). For each of
willnotdiscussthesemethods. Then,wewillintroduce
100 psychological experiments, an exact (Hüffmeier et
ourmethodsasanadditionalandinnovativeoptionbe-
al.,2016)replicationstudywasexecutedbyresearchers
causeincontrasttotheotherapproachesweformulate
from the OSC, using a procedure as similar as possi-
thereplicationhypothesesexplicitlybasedonthetheory
ble to the original study and indicating in detail any
orresultspresentedintheoriginalpaper.
methodological differences between the original study
The significance-based method was done by testing
andthereplicationstudy. Furthermore,thesamplesize
whethertheeffectobservedinboththeoriginalandthe
for the replication study was determined based on a
replication study was significant. It is also referred to
power analysis. The statistical analyses in the replica-
as vote counting (Anderson & Maxwell, 2016; Simon-
tion studies were the same ones as used in the original
sohn, 2015; Zondervan-Zwijnenburg et al., 2019). If
studies. The goal was to evaluate whether the results
===== PAGE 2/21 =====
2
the statistical tests provide the same answer (e.g. both tendonthismethodbutwillbesuitableforANOVAsas
significantorbothnon-significant),andthedirectionof well. Another application of this method can be found
theeffectisthesame,thestudyisconsideredtoberepli- in Patil et al. (2016), though their method is limited
cated. Theproblemwiththisapproachisthatwhilean to a confidence interval for the original study. Further-
originalstudywithap-valueof.04isnotconsideredto more,asMoreyandLakens(n.d.)alsohighlighted,their
be replicated if the replication study finds a p-value of method requires well-powered original and replication
.06,thesameoriginalstudyisreplicatedwhentherepli- studies. The latter is not unique to Patil et al.’s ap-
cationstudyfindsap-valueof<.001. Interestingly,the proach,andwillfurtherbediscussedlaterinthispaper.
differencebetweenap-valueof.04and.06isnotneces- Last Anderson and Maxwell (2016) identify the
sarily significant itself (Gelman & Stern, 2006) For fur- method called assessing consistency. This method com-
therresearchinlinewiththesignificance-basedmethod bines the methods two (equivalence testing) and five
we refer to Etz and Vandekerckhove (2016), Ly et al. (assessinginconsistency): theytestiftheCIaroundthe
(2018),Marsmanetal.(2017),Simonsohn(2015),and difference in the effect sizes falls within a subjectively
VerhagenandWagenmakers(2014). determined region of indifference. As with the second
The second method discussed in Anderson and method: the width of the interval is subjectively deter-
Maxwell(2016)wasnulleffectinferring. Inthismethod, mined. But, as Anderson and Maxwell (2016) mention
usually called equivalence testing, the null hypothesis themselves: onlywithverylargesamplesizestheCIwill
that there is a relevant effect is tested against the al- besmallenoughtoreasonablyexpectittofitwithinthe
ternative hypothesis, that there is not a relevant effect. region of indifference. In all applications without very
This is done by establishing a "region of indifference" large sample sizes, this method will never confirm that
(Anderson & Maxwell, 2016). This region identifies theeffectsizesareequal.
which results are essentially zero, assuming that find- Three issues apply to both the first two and the
inganeffectofexactlyzeroisnearlyimpossible. Ifthen last two methods identified by Anderson and Maxwell
the90%-confidenceinterval(90%-CI)aroundtheeffect (2016). First,allmethodsresultinadichotomousinter-
found in the replication falls completely in this region pretation of the test results: either the results from the
of indifference, the hypothesis that there is a relevant original study are replicated or they are not. However,
effect has to be rejected in favor of the hypothesis that althoughthisisoftenignored,thereareerrorprobabili-
thereisnotarelevanteffect. Ifit(partially)liesoutside tiesassociatedwiththesedecisions: ifthenullhypothe-
this region, the hypothesis that there is relevant effect sisisrejectedthereisusuallyaTypeIerrorof5%prob-
cannotberejected. Anissuewiththismethodisthatit abilitythatthisisincorrect,andifthenullhypothesisis
isdifficulttodeterminethewidthoftheregionofindif- notrejected,thereisanunknown(becausethepopula-
ference. TheinterestedreaderisreferredtoSimonsohn tion effect size is not known) Type II error probability
(2015)whospecifiessuchanintervalusingaCohen’sd thatthenullhypothesisisincorrectlynotrejected. Sec-
of .1, however, without providing an argument for this ond, the methods test just one hypothesis at a time. As
specificinterval. Furthermore,theresultsoftheoriginal wewillshowinthispaper,sometimesresearcherswant
studyaredisregardedwhendecidingtoacceptorreject to test multiple competing hypotheses. This can be the
the null hypothesis. That is, the region of indifference casein,forexample,atwo-wayANOVA,wherethegoal
isdeterminedwithouttakingintoaccountthedataand maybetodetermineifnone,one,orbothpossiblemain
results from the original study, in the next method the effectsarepresent(asisthecaseinthestudybyJanssen
original study does have a role when determining the et al. (2008). Third and last, all methods test a (in-
hypothesesofinterest. terval)hypothesisagainstthecorrespondingalternative
Assessing inconsistency is an answer to the cri- hypothesis. Aswillbeshowninthispaperourapproach
tique that the difference between significant and non- also allows for a class of more flexible hypotheses that
significant is often not significant itself (Gelman & arecalledinformativehypotheses(Hoijtink,2012).
Stern, 2006). It is a test of the heterogeneity of the The approaches proposed in this paper is a new and
effect sizes resulting from the original and replication innovativeadditiontotheapproachesidentifiedbyAn-
study. Itisperformedbycalculatingaconfidenceinter- derson and Maxwell (2016). First, we use the Bayes
valaroundthedifferenceineffectsizes. Itisasophisti- factor(BF)(Hoijtink,Gu,etal.,2019b;Kass&Raftery,
catedmethodtoassessthesimilaritybetweentheorigi- 1995)whichreplacesdichotomousdecisionsbyaquan-
nalandreplicationstudy. Sinceonlyoneeffectsizeper tification of the support in the data for each of the hy-
studycanbeincludedintheanalysisatoncethemethod potheses involved. Use of support as quantified by the
ofAssessinginconsistencyonlyproperlyworksfort-tests, Bayes factor is elaborated by Morey et al. (2016). It is
whichmakesitsomewhatlimited. Ourmethodwillex- analternativeforPopperianfalsification(Popper,1963)
===== PAGE 3/21 =====
3
called logical positivism. The interested reader is re- support in the data for the replication hypothesis (the
ferred to Hawthorne (2021) for an elaboration of log- informative or interval hypothesis) versus its comple-
ical positivism, that is, the philosophical foundation of ment. This renders an innovative method that uses
using the BF as a measure of support for the hypothe- informative hypotheses and the BF to evaluate repli-
ses of interest. Second, we allow for the evaluation of cation studies. Our approach explicitly addresses the
multiplehypothesesatonce,withtheadditionalbenefit fact that researchers do not always test the correct hy-
that the methods can be applied to ANOVAs and t-tests pothesis (Cho & Abe, 2013) and therefore is a remedy
whiletheotherapproachesaremostlytailoredtothet- againstthe"null-ritual",whichwaspreviouslycriticized
test. Third,weforcethereplicationresearchertomake by Gigerenzer (2004). Our paper is also in line with
aninformeddecisionabouttheformulationoftherepli- Dienes (2014) who discusses Bayesian interpretations
cationhypotheses. of non-significant results (however, not in the context
The BF was already proposed by Anderson and of replication studies). To address a similar issue, we
Maxwell (2016) to evaluate the results of replication step away from using the null-hypothesis, instead we
studies. As will be elaborated later, the Bayes factor useinformativeandintervalhypotheses,andputthisto
measures the relative support in the data for two or workinthecontextofreplicationstudies.
morecompetinghypotheses. TheBFhasbeenusedpre- This paper is structured as follows: our method is
viously to evaluate replication studies. Some of these illustratedusingoneofthereplicationstudiesfromthe
studies used the ANOVA or t-test null hypotheses (Etz OSC (2012, 2015). This study will be introduced in
&Vandekerckhove,2016;Harms,2018;Lyetal.,2018; the next section. Following this introduction, we will
Marsman et al., 2017) versus a one- or two-tailed al- explain and demonstrate our methods, where an origi-
ternative hypothesis. Other studies using the BF only nal paper is translated to hypotheses, from start to fin-
focused on t-tests (Field et al., 2019; Marsman et al., ish. Subsequently, a second example employing more
2017;VanAert&VanAssen,2017). than one hypothesis of interest will be presented. This
Cho and Abe (2013) addressed the fact that re- paper is concluded with a discussion in which we will
searchersdonotalwaystestthecorrecthypothesis. Of- reflectonthepossibilitytosynthesizeinformationfrom
ten,thisinvolvestestingthenullhypothesis,whichwas different studies, similar to methods three and four of
previously criticized by Gigerenzer (2004). We argue AndersonandMaxwell(2016).
that oftentimes retesting the null hypothesis is not in
line with the goals of the replication researchers, who Therunningexample
want to determine if the replication study corroborates
Therunningexampleusedinthispaperisastudyon
the results from the earlier study. To test more rele-
the perceptions of closeness toward one’s family mem-
vant hypotheses, we allow the replication researchers
bersandhometown(Williams&Bargh,2008). InStudy
to evaluate replication hypotheses based on either the
4ofthispaper,participantswereinstructedtomarkoff
introduction of the original paper (subsequently called
two points on a Cartesian coordinate plan: these could
the"theorybasedmethod")ortheresultsoftheoriginal
be close to the origin (Group 1 - Closeness), some dis-
paper(subsequentlycalledthe"resultsbasedmethod").
tance from the origin (Group 2 - Intermediate), or far
Thisisnotuniquetoourapproach,otherexamplescan
from the origin (Group 3 - Distance). Participants then
be found in Simonsohn (2015), who use the results of
rated the strength of their bonds to their siblings, their
theoriginalstudytodeterminetheeffectsizetobeeval-
parents, and their hometown. All questions were an-
uatedinareplicationstudy. Anotherexample,although
sweredonascalerangingfrom1(notatallstrong)to7
notspecifictotheevaluationofreplicationstudies,isre-
(extremely strong) and averaged to create a total score.
placingthenullhypothesiswithanintervalhypothesis,
The hypothesis was that marking points more distant
asisdoneinequivalencetesting(Lakensetal.,2018).
from the origin would result in perceiving the close-
In our methods we will evaluate other kinds of hy-
ness toward one’s family members and hometown as
potheses than used in these articles. The theory based
lessstrong. Theresultsfromthisstudyaresummarized
methodtranslatestheintroductionsectionfromanorig-
inTable1,whichcontainsmoreinformationandwillbe
inal paper into an informative hypothesis or hypothe-
referred to throughout this paper. Williams and Bargh
ses (Hoijtink, 2012, e.g. H : µ < µ < µ ), whereas
t 3 2 1 (2008)concludedthattheirexpectationswerematched
the results based method uses the results section to
by their results. This can be seen from the p-value of
formulate interval hypotheses (Lakens et al., 2018;
.01,whichindicatesthatthethreemeansarenotequal,
Zondervan-Zwijnenburg et al., 2019, e.g. H : 5.28 <
r andanorderingofthemeansashypothesized.
µ < 5.94 & 4.90 < µ < 5.56). After data is col-
1 2 Joy-Gaba et al. (2012) executed a direct replication
lected the BF is calculated to determine the relative
ofthestudybyWilliamsandBargh(2008). Theirproce-
===== PAGE 4/21 =====
4
dureswereassimilaraspossible,usingthesamemate- 1. "Accordingly, we argue that a primitive under-
rialsinthereplicationstudyaswereusedintheoriginal standingofphysicaldistanceisthefoundationfor
study. The results from the replication study, also pre- the later-developed concept of psychological dis-
sented in Table 1, show no significant differences be- tance, given humans’ pervasive tendency to con-
tweenthegroups. Usingtheprocedureofvotecounting ceptualize the mental world by analogy to the
it can be concluded that the results were not success- physicalworld"(Williams&Bargh,2008,p.2)
fully replicated: the p-value is not below the threshold
2. "We hypothesized that participants primed with
of.05.
distancewouldreportweakerattachmentstotheir
Whatshouldbereplicated family members and hometown, compared with
participants primed with closeness" (Williams &
As elaborated in the introduction, our method to Bargh,2008,p.6)
evaluate replication studies determines the support in
the replication data for one ore more hypotheses re- Step1.3-Readingthemethodsandtheresultssection
sulting from the original study. Two methods to obtain
Read the results section of the original paper. This
these hypotheses will be presented in this section. In
section elaborates which analyses are to be executed.
thefirst,thehypothesesareextractedfromthetheoret-
Nooutputresultsfromthisstep.
ical framework as presented in an introduction of the
original paper. In the second, hypotheses are formu- Step 1.4 - Coding of statements in the methods and
lated based on the information in the results section of theresultssection
the original paper. An overview of the steps is given in
Statements are coded that indicate what is actually
Table2.
tested. Intheory,thiscanbestatementsinthemethods
Method1-Theorybasedmethod sectionexplainingwhichtestswillbeconductedtotest
the hypotheses of interest. However, after checking 25
Toconstructhypothesesfromtheintroductionofthe
papers from the OSC Reproducibility Project: Psychol-
original study a six step procedure will be used that is
ogy to find examples of ways to present this informa-
based on qualitative research methods (e.g. Charmaz,
tion in the methods section, we had to conclude that
2006;Glaser,1978).
this information is never, or barely ever, presented in
the methods section. Therefore only the results section
Step1.1-Readingtheintroduction
is used for the following steps, since here the relevant
Read the introduction section of the original paper. information is always present. It remains necessary to
Theintroductiontypicallycontainsthetheoreticalback- read the methods section, to understand how the vari-
ground for the study, and results in the formulation of ablesusedinastudyareoperationalized.
theory-basedhypothesesthatwillbetestedinthestudy. In the results section the outcomes of the tested hy-
Thereisnooutputfromthisstep. potheses are presented. However, note that, these will
only be coded according to which hypothesis has been
Step1.2-Codingofstatementsintheintroduction
evaluated with which test, not to clarify the results
Those statements are coded that specify theories or of that test. The statements of interest may be indi-
expectations with respect to the outcomes of the study. cated with words such as: "we have tested (...)", "we
Coding is a qualitative (Boeije, 2010; Charmaz, 2006; used/conducted(...) analysis/test(...)",and"totestthe
Glaser, 1978) manner of data analysis. Typically, cod- hypothesis (...)". Also, sentences indicating particular
ing consists of two activities: segmenting and labeling testsareofinterest,e.g. t-test,ANOVA,andregression.
(textual) data. For our purposes, the labelling part is Fortherunningexamplethefollowingstatementswere
not that relevant, because the only goal is to localize codedintheresultssection:
statements that can be labeled "theory or expectation
1. "Next, we conducted a planned contrast analysis
with respect to the outcomes of the study", that is, for
usingweightsof-1,0,and1foralinearcontrast,
eachstatementselectedthelabelisthesame. Thestate-
and -1, +2, -1 for a quadratic contrast, for the
mentsofinterestareoftenindicatedwithwordssuchas
Closeness,Intermediate,andDistanceconditions,
"hypothes*","expect*",and"argue*"1.
respectively. These contrast weights allowed us
Thisstepgivesasoutputoneormorestatements. In
to test the specific hypothesis that participants in
therunningexampletwostatementswerecoded:
1*=differentextensionsarepossible,e.g. hypothesis,hy-
pothesize,hypotheses
===== PAGE 5/21 =====
5
Table1
DescriptivestatisticsandresultsoftheoriginalstudyofWilliamsandBargh(2008)anditsreplicationbyJoy-Gabaetal.(2012).
OriginalstudybyWilliams ReplicationstudybyJoy-Gaba
&Bargh(2008) etal. (2012)
Group1 Group2 Group3 Group1 Group2 Group3
Closeness Intermediate Distance Closeness Intermediate Distance
M (SD) 5.61(0.90) 5.23(0.90) 4.86(0.90) 5.44(0.83) 5.31(1.07) 5.31(1.15)
95%CI (5.28,5.94) (4.90,5.56) (4.53,5.19) (5.19,5.69) (4.99,5.63) (4.94,5.68)
n 28 28 28 44 43 38
M (95%CI) 0.38(-0.09,0.85) 0.13(-0.27,0.53)
1−2
M (95%CI) 0.37(-0.10,0.84) 0.00(-0.48,0.48)
2−3
H :µ =µ =µ p=.01,η2 =.11 p=.79,η2 =.004
0 1 2 3
H ∗ :µ <µ <µ BF =2.10
ts 3 2 1 tsc
H :µ +0.21<µ +0.10<µ BF =0.57
tmin1 3 2 1 tmin1c
H :µ +0.41<µ +0.19<µ BF =0.11
tmin2 3 2 1 tmin2c
H :5.28<µ <5.94 & BF =1.92
rM 1 rMc
4.90<µ <5.56 & 4.53<µ <5.19
2 3
H :−0.09<µ −µ <0.85 & BF =4.44
rD 1 2 rDc
−0.10<µ −µ <0.84
2 3
Notethat,WilliamsandBargh(2008)donotpresenttheirthreemeans,standarddeviationsandsamplesizes.Wewereunabletoretrievetheoriginaldata,therefore
numberspresentedinthetablewerereconstructedusingtheinformationpresentedinthepaperassumingequalwithingroupsvariancesandassumingthatthemean
ofthesecondgroupwaslocatedonanequaldistanceoftheothertwomeans. Thisisverylikelynotinlinewiththeoriginaldata,butallowsustoillustrateour
approachusingarealoriginalstudy.
*=IntheintroductionsectionWilliamsandBarghonlyexplicitlydiscussthegroupsClosenessandDistance,butinlinewiththetheoryunderlyingdistanceques,we
assumedthattheeffectof"Intermediate"isbetweenthatof"Distance"and"Closeness".
the Distance condition enjoyed the excerpt more Step1.5-Selectingthestatementsfromtheintroduc-
than those in the Intermediate condition, who in tionthatareactuallytested
turn enjoyed it more than those in the Closeness
The statements coded in Step 1.4 can be used to
condition."(Williams&Bargh,2008,p.4)
verify which statements coded in Step 1.2 are actu-
2. "An ANOVA revealed that the three spatial- ally tested. For the running example, as can be seen
primegroupsdifferedsignificantlyinthereported from the second statement coded in Step 1.4, only the
strength of their bonds to their family and home- second statement coded in Step 1.2 ("We hypothesized
town,(...)"(Williams&Bargh,2008,p.7) that participants primed with distance would report
weakerattachmentstotheirfamilymembersandhome-
Thisstepresultsinoneormorecodedstatements. town, compared with participants primed with close-
ness") was tested. The result of Step 1.5 is a number
ofstatements.
===== PAGE 6/21 =====
6
Table2
Overviewandshortexplanationofthesteps.
Theorybasedmethod Resultsbasedmethod
1.1-Readingtheintroduction 2.1-Readingtheresultssection
Simplyreadthroughthesectiontoknowwhatisbeingstudied Simplyreadthroughthesectiontoknowwhatisbeingstudied
1.2-Codingstatementsintheintroduction 2.2-Extractingtheresults
Indicatethepriorexpectationsoftheresearchers Extracttheresultsandindicate
1.3-Readingthemethodsandtheresultssection whattheresultsoftheconductedtestsare
Simplyreadthroughthesectiontoknowwhattestswereconducted 2.3-Translatingresultstointervalhypotheses
1.4-Codingofstatementsinthe Calculatethedesiredintervalhypothesesbasedontheresults
methodsandtheresultssection
Selectthestatementsthatreporttheresultsofthetests
1.5-Selectingthestatementsfromthe
introductionthatareactuallytested
SelectthestatementsfromStep1.2thataretested
withthestatementsselectedinStep1.4
1.6-Translatingstatementtoinformativehypotheses
Formulatethetestedstatementsfromthe
introductionsectionastestablehypotheses
Step 1.6 - Translating statements to informative hy- specify the interaction effect, elements like µ > µ
1A 1B
potheses andµ >µ havetobeadded.
1A 2A
Next to inequality constraints, one could also use
In Step 1.6 informative hypotheses are formulated.
equalityconstraints. Twoexamplesare:
In the theory based method only ordered hypotheses
are formulated, of which two forms are distinguished: H :µ +µ =µ +µ ,
4 1A 1B 2A 2B
simple ordering and minimal difference hypotheses on
(combinationsof)parameters.
and
Informative hypotheses are a formal representation
of the expectations a researcher has with respect to
H :µ +µ =µ +µ &µ +µ >µ +µ .
the relations between the means in an ANOVA (Hoi- 5 1A 1B 2A 2B 1A 2A 1B 2B
jtink,2012,p. 50-51;Klugkist,2005). Usinginequality
H indicates the absence of a main effect of the factor
4
constraints, order relations between (combinations of)
with levels 1/2. No specification has been given in H
4
means(µ)canbespecified. Threeexamplesare:
regarding a main effect of the factor with levels A/B or
aninteractioneffectofthosetwofactors. Next,H isan
H :µ <µ <µ , 5
1 1 2 3
extensionofH . Nexttothespecifiedabsenceofamain
4
effect of the factor with levels 1/2, a main effect of the
H :µ +0.2<µ & µ +0.5<µ ,
2 1 2 1 3 factorwithlevelsA/Bisspecifiedhere. H hypothesizes
5
that there is main effect, with the subjects located at
and
levelAscoreonaveragehigherthansubjectslocatedat
levelB.
H 3 :µ 1A−µ 1B >µ 2A−µ 2B. Toformulatetheinformativehypothesisbasedonthe
theory section of the paper, first the dependent vari-
H showsaspecificorderingofthreemeans,wherethe
1 able needs to be be determined. Second, it needs to
meanofGroup1issmallerthanthatofGroup2,which
be determined which groups are distinguished and the
inturnissmallerthanthatofGroup3. H isalsoanor-
2 theory needs to be translated into inequality and or
dering of three means, but now the minimal difference
equality restrictions on the group means. Applied to
is specified. The mean of Group 1 is at least 0.2 points
the running example this renders: the variables in the
lower than the mean of Group 2, and 0.5 points lower
statement ("We hypothesized that participants primed
thanthemeanofGroup3. H showsatwowayanalysis
3 withdistancewouldreportweakerattachmentstotheir
of variance, with two factors with levels 1/2 and A/B.
familymembersandhometown, comparedwithpartic-
Here,itisstatedthatthedifferencebetweenthemeans
ipantsprimedwithcloseness";Williams&Bargh,2008,
of Levels A and B is greater when located at Level 1,
p.6) are 1) attachment to family members and home-
than when located at Level 2. This is the start of a hy-
town, and 2) the prime. The first variable, attachment,
pothesis that specifies an interaction effect. To further
is measured on a 7-point interval scale. For the prime
===== PAGE 7/21 =====
7
variable three groups are distinguished in this study; Method2-Resultsbasedmethod
Distance, Intermediate and Closeness. The groups are
Toconstructhypothesesbasedontheoutcomesofthe
clearly ordered in this statement: a group primed with
originalstudyathreestepprocedurewillbeused.
more closeness scores is expected to score on average
higher on the dependent variable, strength of the at-
Step2.1-Readingtheresultssection
tachment, than the group primed with more distance.
Becausethereisnomentionofthesizeofthedifference, Read the results section of the original paper, which
aninformativehypothesiswithaninequalityconstraint reports the outcomes of the conducted analyses. It
willbeformulated: might also be usefulto read the methods section toget
ageneralideaofhowthestudywasexecuted. Thereis
H ts :µ Distance <µ Intermediate <µ Closeness, nooutputfromthisstep.
where, the subscript t denotes that the hypothesis is
Step2.2-Extractingtheresults
based on the literature review in the introduction of
thepaper,andthesub-subscriptsindicatesasimpleor- Extract the results from the original paper. The rele-
dering hypothesis is formulated. We would like to add vant results for this method are the mean and its stan-
another variant of these types of hypotheses. Typically, dard error for each group. If the standard error is not
when discussing differences between two means, peo- reported it can be computed using the standard devi-
ple refer to a relevant difference. The hypothesis H ation and sample size for each of the groups. Those
ts
leavesroomforirrelevantdifferences, e.g. themeanof statistics are often included in a table with descriptive
the Distance group is 0.01 lower than the mean of the statistics in the results section. In the running example
Closenessgroup. Inthesecondhypothesisbasedonthe not all the needed statistics were reported. The avail-
introduction section we assume at least a small effect, ablestatementsthatwereusedtodeterminetheresults
that is a minimal difference of 0.2 standard deviation reportedinTable1are:
(SD; Cohen, 1988). There are two ways to interpret
1. "An ANOVA revealed that the three spatial-
this: either 0.2 SD difference between adjacent groups
primegroupsdifferedsignificantlyinthereported
or between the groups with the most extreme means.
strength of their bonds to their family and home-
To show the effect of either decision, two hypothesis
town,F(2,81)=4.97,p =.95,η2 =.11."Note
areformulated: rep
that, this corresponds to the p-value of .01 as re-
H tmin1 :µ Distance+0.21<µ Intermediate+0.10<µ Closeness portedinTable1.
2. "(...) the linear contrast showed that participants
and
primed with distance reported weaker bonds to
their family and hometown (M = 4.86), com-
H :µ +0.41<µ +0.19<µ
tmin2 Distance Intermediate Closeness paredwithparticipantsprimedwithcloseness(M
where the sub-subscript min indicates that a minimal =5.61),t(81)=-2.86,p rep=.96."Notethat,this
differencehypothesisisformulatedwithatleastCohen’s corresponds to the p-value of .01 as reported in
D equals 0.2 between adjacent groups. The score of Table1.
0.10equals0.1timesthepooledwithingroupstandard
Step2.3-Translatingresultstointervalhypotheses
deviation of groups Intermediate and Closeness in the
replicationdata. Thescoreof0.19equals0.2timesthe Withintervalhypothesesitcanbetestedwhetherone
pooled within group standard deviation of groups In- or more means are within our outside of a certain in-
termediate and Closeness in the replication data. The terval of values (Zondervan-Zwijnenburg et al., 2019).
scores of 0.21 and 0.41 equal 0.1 and 0.2 times the Examplesofintervalhypothesesare:
pooled within group standard deviation of groups Dis-
tanceandIntermediateontopofthedifferencebetween
the groups Intermediate and Closeness: i.e. 0.21 is H =0.2<µ <0.4,
6 1
based on 0.0956 (0.1 times pooled within group SD
for Intermediate and Closeness) + 0.1108 (0.1 times
H =−0.1<µ <0.7&1.1<µ <2.4,
7 1 2
pooledwithingroupSDforDistanceandIntermediate).
Theresultofthisstepisaninformativehypothesisthat
and
canlaterbeevaluatedusingthedataresultingfromthe
replicationstudy. Beforewecontinuewiththeanalysis,
H =−0.6<µ −µ <0.1&0.7<µ −µ <1.2.
wewilldiscusstheresultsbasedmethod. 8 1 2 2 3
===== PAGE 8/21 =====
8
InH itisstatedthatthemeanofGroup1iswithinthe eachofthosemeansanintervalhastobespecified. Us-
6
range 0.2 to 0.4. Whereas H states that the mean of ing the descriptive statistics presented in Table 1 and
7
Group 1 is somewhere in the range -0.1 through 0.7, Equations1and3resultsin:
and the mean of Group 2 is in the interval 1.1 to 2.4.
Lastly, H states that the difference between the means
8
ofGroups1and2issomewhereintherangeof-0.6(µ H :5.28<µ <5.94 & 4.90<µ <
2 rM Closeness Intermediate
isconsiderablylarger)to0.1(µ isslightlylarger),and 5.56 & 4.53<µ <5.19,
1 Distance
the difference between the means of Groups 2 and 3 is
intherangeof0.7to1.2(µ islarger). Theendpoints
2
oftheintervalshouldbechosensuchthattheyrepresent wherethesubscriptrindicatesthehypothesisisformu-
the uncertainty in the estimates of the means obtained lated based on the results, and the sub-subscript M in-
from the original study. As can be seen in Equations 1 dicates it is an interval hypothesis based on the means.
and2thelowerbound(LB)oftheintervalisthelower There is another possibility however. Instead of focus-
boundofthetraditional95%confidenceintervalforthe ingonthemeans,onecouldalsofocusonthedifference
meanorthedifferencebetweentwomeans,andtheup- between means. Often, researchers are not necessarily
per bound (UB), Equations 3 and 4, is chosen analo- interestedinthemeansthemselves,butratheronthere-
gously: spectivepositionofonemeanrelatedtoanother. There-
fore,intervalhypothesescouldalsobeformulatedsuch
SD
LB = M−1.96∗ √ (1) thattheyspecifyinwhatregionthedifferencebetween
mean
n twomeansfall. Forthisstudyitresultsinthefollowing
(cid:115) hypothesis:
SD2 SD2
LB = M −M −1.96∗ 1 + 2 (2)
difference 1 2 n n H :−0.09<µ −µ <0.85 & −0.10<
1 2 rD Closeness Intermediate
µ −µ <0.84,
SD Intermediate Distance
UB = M+1.96∗ √ (3)
mean
n
(cid:115)
wherethesub-subscriptDindicatestheintervalhypoth-
SD2 SD2
UB = M −M +1.96∗ 1 + 2, (4) esis is based on the difference between the means. In
difference 1 2 n n
1 2 hypothesisH itisspecifiedthatthedifferencebetween
rD
whereallstatisticsarederivedfromtheoriginalstudy. the means of the groups Closeness and Intermediate
Duetopublicationbias(Rosenthal,1979) M −M is should be between -0.09 (mean of the Intermediate
1 2
possibly an overestimation of the true effect. If this is group is somewhat higher) and 0.85 (mean of Close-
indeedthecase, M −M obtainedfromthereplication nessisconsiderablyhigher),andthedifferencebetween
1 2
datawillprobablybe(much)smallerandnotcontained themeansofthegroupsIntermediateandDistanceisin
in the intervals specified in the hypotheses. Therefore, the range of -0.10 to 0.84. This interval is based on
the support in the replication data for the replication the 95%-CI calculated around the difference of these
hypotheses will be small, which is, in this case, the de- meansintheoriginalstudy. Furthermore,thedifference
siredresult. Iftheintervalinthereplicationhypothesis between the means of the Intermediate and Distance
becomes very narrow, this would be the case when the groupisalsospecifiedinhypothesisH rD.
sample size in the original study was large, two things At this point, the replication hypotheses are formu-
canhappen. Eithertheresultfromthereplicationstudy lated in the form of informative hypotheses in the the-
fallswithintheinterval,whichwouldleadtostrongsup- orybasedmethodorintheformofintervalhypotheses
port for the replication hypothesis as is desired. Or, if intheresultsbasedmethod. Inthefollowingsectionwe
bias was present in the original study, the results from discusshowthesehypothesescanbeevaluated.
the replication study falls outside of the interval which
would lead to a strong rejection of the replication hy- Animportantpropertyoftheoriginalstudy
pothesis,whichisalsodesired.
Animportantnoteneedstobemade. Whenusingthe
To formulate an interval hypothesis, a similar proce-
originalpapertoformulatehypotheses,thesamplesize
dureshouldbefollowedasforthetheorybasedmethod.
of that original study is of high influence on usefulness
Start with determining the dependent variable. Then,
of the replication (Anderson & Maxwell, 2016; Ander-
determine which groups are distinguished. Finally, the
sonetal., 2017). Notethatthisonlyinfluencesthepo-
confidence interval for each group can be determined.
tential usefulness of replications conducting according
Intherunningexample,threemeanswerereported. For
to the results based method. These problems are not
===== PAGE 9/21 =====
9
present in the theory based method, as we will discuss Conductingthereplicationstudy
below. We specify two situations that both seem prob-
Afterdeterminingthehypothesesthatwillbetested,
lematic: a large and a small sample size in the original
the replication study can be executed. This includes
study. This phenomenon is touched upon in the pre-
the set-up of the study, obtaining the participants, and
vious subsection (and is also explored in Simonsohn,
collecting the data. The methodological set-up of the
2015),butwillbediscussedmoreelaboratehere.
replication study is not within the scope of this paper.
First, a large sample size might seem problematic.
For the decisions to be made for the set-up, we refer to
A large sample size leads to small intervals, that is,
articles such as Brandt et al. (2014), Hüffmeier et al.
rather precise estimates. Two situations can arise. Ei-
(2016), and Wilson (2016). The three relevant issues
thertheestimateiscorrectortherewasbiasintheorig-
to be discussed here are the competing hypothesis, the
inal study. While this may seem problematic, it actu-
interpretation of the Bayes factor (BF), and Bayesian
ally is not. In case the estimate is unbiased, the repli-
updating.
cated(difference)inmeanswillbeclosetotheoriginal
(difference) in means leading to strong support for the
Thecompetinghypothesis
replication hypothesis. However, if bias was present in
theoriginalstudy,the(differencein)meansintherepli- The goal of the replication study is to use new data
cationstudywillberatherdifferentfromthedifference to determine the relative support for the replication
specified in the replication hypothesis. This will lead hypothesis versus its complement: "not the replica-
to a rather strong rejection of the replication hypothe- tion hypothesis". This enables answering the question
sis. Bothsituationsgivethedesiredresult: eitherstrong "Are the results of the original study replicated or not".
supportforthereplicationhypothesisintheabsenceof The complement of an informative hypothesis specify-
bias, or strong support against the replication hypothe- ing two group means is easy to understand: the com-
sis in the presence of bias. Concluding: a large sample plement of µ < µ is simply put µ ≥ µ . For hy-
1 2 1 2
size,andbias,arenoproblem. potheses with more groups and interval hypotheses it
Second, a small sample seems problematic. A small is harder to capture the complement. Therefore, the
sample size leads to relatively big intervals. The bigger notation "not H" is used. For instance, in the the-
t
an interval, the higher the chances are that the repli- ory based method the replication hypothesis specified
cation hypothesis receives support. One should won- that the mean of the Distance-group was smaller than
der if it is useful to conduct the replication study when the mean of the Intermediate-group which in its turn
the replication hypothesis is vague and non informa- is smaller than the mean of the Closeness-group (H :
ts
tive. The result based method should not be used for µ < µ < µ ). The competing hy-
Distance Intermediate Closeness
original studies with too small sample sizes. A critical pothesis contains every situation where this is not the
assessment of the replication hypothesis is needed: do case (e.g. µ < µ < µ , but also
Intermediate Distance Closeness
you think it is realistic to reject the replication hypoth- µ <µ <µ andmore),H : "notH ".
Closeness Intermediate Distance c ts
esis based on the results? If this is not the case, dif- AlsofortheotherhypothesesintherunningexampleH
c
ferent kinds of hypotheses could be formulated. For equals"notthereplicationhypothesis".
instance, the informative hypothesis from the theory
basedmethodcouldbeused,evenbasedontheresults. Comparing the replication hypothesis with its com-
That is, the ordering could be specified based on the plement
ordering in the results of the original study. Note that
The BF will be used to determine the relative sup-
forthetheorybasedmethodthesmallsampleissuedoes
portinthedataforthereplicationhypothesisversusits
not arise, since the hypotheses are formulated without
complement. See for a general introduction of the BF
involvingthe samplesizes orreported meansandstan-
Kass and Raftery (1995), and for a tutorial focused on
darddeviationsfromtheoriginalstudy.
hypotheses evaluation Hoijtink, Mulder, et al. (2019).
To summarize, the theory based method could be
Here, the Bayes factor as implemented in the R pack-
used regardless of the properties of the original study.
age bain will be used (for the statistical background
The result based method can be used when the origi-
theinterestedreaderisreferredtoGuetal.,2018;Hoi-
nalstudyhasalargesamplesize,regardlessofpossible
jtink, Gu, et al., 2019b; and Hoijtink, Mulder, et al.,
bias. Inthecaseofasmallsampleintheoriginalstudy,
2019). We now provide a rather accessible account of
it is better to avoid the result based method and to use
this BF. For a more thorough explanation and elabora-
the theory based method. The flexibility in formulat-
tionofhowbaincalculatestheBF,theinterestedreader
ing hypotheses ensures that a proper evaluation of the
isreferredto. ThisBFiscalculatedbyevaluatingthefit
corroborationoftheresultsshouldbepossible.
andthecomplexityofeachhypothesis:
===== PAGE 10/21 =====
10
isnorelevanteffect)overitscomplement(whichstates
f 1−c
BF = t × t, (5) that there is a relevant effect). "In an era of height-
tsc c t 1− f t enedawarenessofpublicationbias,sloppyscience,and
where f denotesthefitofH,c denotesthecomplex- irreplicability of research results, researchers should be
t t t
ityofH and1−f and1−c denotethefitandcomplexity conservative,thatis,convincingevidenceisneededbe-
t t t
ofthecomplement,respectively. Wheninformativeand forethealternativehypothesis[thereisa(relevant)ef-
interval hypotheses are evaluated both the fit and the fect]ispreferredoverH 0[orthereisnorelevanteffect]"
complexity are probabilities. A really badly fitting hy- (Hoijtink, Mulder, et al., 2019, p. 30). However, when
pothesis has a fit close to zero, and a very good fitting the interval hypothesis or the informative hypothesis
hypothesishasafitclosetoone. Averyspecifichypoth- represents the results of an original study, the reason-
esis has a complexity close to zero, and a hypotheses ingshouldbetheotherwayaround,thatis,convincing
that is not very specific has a complexity close to one. evidence is needed before the interval or informative
Notethat,BF isobtainedifthesubscriptstinEquation hypothesisisacceptedoveritscomplement,thatis,the
rc
5arereplacedbyr. Bayesfactorshouldpreferthecomplementunlessthere
The BF is a measure of the relative support in the is substantial evidence in the data in favor of the inter-
data for H and H . If, for example, BF = 9, there is val or informative hypothesis. This can be achieved in
r c rc
9 times more support in the data for H than for H . If bainusingfraction = 3. Theinterestedreaderisalso
r c
BF = 0.2 there is 5 times more support for H than referred to the section Sensitivity Analysis in Hoijtink,
rc c
for H . As can be seen in Equation 5 support is quan- Mulder, et al. (2019) where this topic is further elabo-
r
tified using fit (which should be good) and complexity rated.
(which should be small because more specific hypothe- Notethat,theBFdoesnotleadtoadichotomousde-
ses allow for better predictions). The statistical elabo- cision in favor or against the replication hypothesis, it
ration of fit and complexity can be found in Gu et al. is a measure of support. If BF rc = 82, it is clear that
(2018) and Hoijtink, Mulder, et al. (2019). Here only the replication hypothesis is preferred by the data, if
two short and intuitive illustrations will be given. The BF rc = 9, there still is substantial support for the repli-
fitofH ts :µ 1 >µ 2 >µ 3 isgoodif M 1 =6,M 2 =3,M 3 =1 cation hypothesis; if BF rc = 3.5, there is some support
because the sample means are in agreement with the for the replication hypothesis but its complement can
order restrictions specified by the hypothesis, and bad not be disqualified; and, if BF rc = 1.4, the replication
if M = 5,M = 6,M = 9. The complexity of H : data provide about equal support for both hypotheses.
1 2 3 ts
µ > µ > µ equals 1/6 because one of six possible For a proper interpretation of the BF, general purpose
1 2 3
orderingofthreemeansisspecified. Thecomplexityof cut-off values are unnecessary and, in fact, should be
H t′ s : µ 1 > (µ 2,µ 3) equals 2/6 because two orderings are avoided(see,forexample,thediscussionofcut-offval-
specified (µ > µ > µ and µ > µ > µ ). Thus, H uesinHoijtink,Mulder,etal.,2019).
1 2 3 1 3 2 ts
is more specific than H t′
s
and therefore it has a smaller Assuming that a priori each of the hypotheses is
complexity. equally likely, as is usually done, the BF can be trans-
To compute the complexity a parameter called "frac- latedintoso-calledposteriormodelprobabilities(PMP)
tion" has to be set. This parameter determines the which quantify the certainty of our preference for one
weight of the complexity in the computation of the of the hypotheses being tested. For example, if BF rc
Bayes factor. The Bayes factor for the evaluation of an = 4, PMP r = 4/(1+4) = .80 and PMP c = 1/(1+4) =
informative hypothesis specified using only inequality .20, which implies that a preference for H r comes with
constraintsversusitscomplementisindependentofthe aBayesianerrorprobabilityof.20. If,forexample,BF rc
choice of this fraction (Hoijtink, Mulder, et al., 2019; =11,PMP r =11/(1+11)=.92andPMP c =.08. This
Mulder, 2014). However, this is not the case for inter- implies that in this situation a preference for H r comes
val hypotheses or informative hypotheses specified us- withaBayesianerrorprobabilityof.08. Theinterested
ing at least one equality constraint. The default setting reader is referred to Hoijtink, Mulder, et al. (2019) for
in bain (fraction = 1) is chosen such that the Bayes furtherelaboration. Notethat,inthesequelwewilluse
factor tends to prefer the interval hypothesis or an in- both BFs and PMPs to quantify the support in the data
formative hypothesis using at least one equality con- forthehypothesesentertained.
straint over its complement unless there is substantial
Determiningthedesiredsupport
evidenceinthedataagainsttheintervalorinformative
hypothesis. Thereisagoodreasontoprefertheinterval
How much support we aim for if the replication hy-
hypothesis or informative hypothesis specified with at
pothesis or its complement is true needs to be deter-
leastoneequalityconstraint(sincethesestatethatthere
mined in advance. Sufficient support need not be es-
===== PAGE 11/21 =====
11
pecially strong (e.g.: BF = 4, or BF = 6) if the re- bysamplingadditionaldatauntiltheminimumamount
rc rc
searcher is testing an idea or hypothesis new to their of support in favor of the replication hypothesis or its
research field and simply wants to know whether it is complementisobtainedortheavailableresources(time
worthwhile to pursue this theory. However, when es- and money) to collect additional data have been ex-
tablishedtheoriesareretestedandtheresearcheristhus hausted. Of course, replication studies should be ad-
verycertainaboutthehypothesisofinterest,moresup- equately powered, see for example Morey and Lakens
port would be required (e.g.: BF = 9, or BF = 11). (n.d.) and Simonsohn (2015). Therefore, it is recom-
rc rc
Each researcher has to decide for the situation at hand mendedtoexecutesomeformofBayesiandesignanal-
how much support is required. In line with the last ysis in order to determine whether the resources avail-
lines of the previous section, to avoid the introduction able are sufficient to obtain a "well-powered" replica-
of new cut-off values, general purpose guidelines will tion study. Bayesian design analysis is under develop-
notbeprovided. Pleasenotethatthedesiredsupportis ment,theinterestedreaderisreferredtoFu(2022)and
alsoneededinthenextsubsectionwherewewillintro- Schönbrodt and Wagenmakers (2018) for the current
duceBayesianupdating. Notefurthermore,thattheuse stateoftheart.
of support should not lead to dichotomous decisions. Practicallyupdatingcanbeexecutedbystartingwith
Whatitshouldleadtoisapreferenceforoneofthehy- a reasonable sample size, e.g. n = 20 per group. After
pothesesinvolved,wherethestrengthofthispreference the first round of data collection the BF is determined.
is quantified using the BF and PMPs. E.g. if BF = 6, If this BF meets the desired support, see the previous
rc
thereisapreferenceforH ,PMP =.86,butH cannot subsection, data collection is finished and the research
r r c
yet be ignored, since a preference for H comes with a process moves on. If the BF does not meet the desired
r
Bayesianerrorprobabilityof(1−.86)=.14. IfBF =9, supportforeitherhypothesis,moredataiscollected. Af-
rc
thereisastrongerpreferenceforH ,butstillH cannot tereachroundofdatacollection(withforinstancen=
r c
completely be ignored: a preference for H comes with 20 per group) the BF is determined. Once it reaches
r
aBayesianerrorprobabilityof.10. thedesiredamountofsupportforeitherhypothesisthe
For the running example, different decisions could datacollectionstops. Pleasenotethatwhenthedesired
be made per hypothesis. For the theory based method BFisrelativelysmall,e.g. BF =4(whichcorresponds
rc
(H : µ < µ < µ and both H toPMPsof.80and.20forH andH ,respectively),the
ts Distance Intermediate Closeness tmin1 r c
and H ), a support of BF = 3 or BF = 3 could suf- probability that the best hypothesis is incorrectly pre-
tmin2 tc ct
fice. FromtheintroductionofWilliams&Bargh(2008) ferred is still relatively large. On the other hand, if the
it canbe seenthat theypursue the evaluationof anew desiredBFisrelativelylarge,e.g. BF =11,theproba-
rc
theory,thereforeonecouldseethisasafirstexploration bility of an incorrect preference is relatively small, that
wheresomesupportwouldalreadybesatisfactory. The is, if H is preferred the error probability, that is, the
r
hypothesesfromtheresultsbasedmethod(H :5.28< PMP associated with H , equals .08. Updating cannot
rM c
µ < 5.94 & 4.90 < µ < 5.56 & 4.53 < be illustrated here, since this paper is based on exist-
Closeness Intermediate
µ < 5.19andH : −0.09 < µ −µ < ing original and replication studies and therefore the
Distance rD Closeness Intermediate
0.85 & −0.10 < µ −µ < 0.84) should re- sample sizes are fixed. However, we will provide one
Intermediate Distance
ceive a substantial amount of support. The data in the examplewhereupdatingisappliedusingadditionalhy-
original study was very convincing with respect to this pothetical data and mention for the other hypotheses
hypothesis, therefore it would be reasonable to aim for whatdecisionwouldbemadewithregardstoupdating.
a BF of 10 in favor of either this replication hypothesis
or its complement. Note that, the BF values chosen in Evaluatingthereplicationhypothesisusingtherepli-
thisparagraphare,intheroleofreplicationresearchers, cationdata
ourchoices. Otherreplicationresearchersmayverywell
To calculate BF or BF the R package bain
tc rc
comeupwithdifferentvalues.
(Hoijtink, Mulder, et al., 2019; https://informative-
hypotheses.sites.uu.nl/software/bain/) is used. The
Animportantpropertyofthereplicationstudy
codes and data used for the analyses presented in this
In classical statistics power analyses are often con- paper can be found on the OSF page for this study:
ducted (Cohen, 1988; Erdfelder et al., 1996). Power https://osf.io/up3rv/.
analysisprovidestheneededsamplesizetoreachmean-
Theorybasedmethod,H
ingful conclusions for hypotheses formulated in stan- ts
dard forms. For Bayesian statistics there is a very good For H : µ < µ < µ , the desired
alternative: Bayesianupdating(Hoijtink,Mulder,etal.,
ts Distance Intermediate Closeness
support was BF = 3 for either hypothesis. In the repli-
2019; Rouder, 2014). Bayesian updating is conducted
cation sample there were 44 and 38 participants in the
===== PAGE 12/21 =====
12
groups. The data eventually provided minimal support Only the difference between the means of the Interme-
forthereplicationhypothesis,BF =2.10,butsupport diateandtheDistancegroupareaccordingtothesitua-
tsc
does not reach the desired level. The difference be- tiondescribeinH . Allothermeansarenotinaccor-
tmin1
tweenthemeansoftheDistancegroup(M=5.31,SD= dance with either hypothesis. The resulting BFs were:
1.15), the Intermediate group (M = 5.31, SD = 1.07), BF = 0.57 and BF = 0.11. There is no convinc-
tmin1c tmin2c
and the mean of the Closeness group (M = 5.44, SD ingsupporttopreferH oritscomplement: PMP =
tmin1 tmin1
=0.83)isnotlargeenough(Cohen’sd=0.13between .36andPMP =0.64,however,updatingcouldbeused
c
bothDistanceandCloseness,andbetweenIntermediate toreachthedesiredlevelofsupport. Thereisclearsup-
and Closeness), nor is the ordering convincingly out of portforH overH ,BF =.11,thatis,BF =9.10
c tmin tminc ctmin
order,torendertherequiredevidenceinfavorofeither withPMP =.10andPMP =.90.
tmin c
thereplicationhypothesisoritscomplement.
Resultsbasedmethod,H
Therefore,Bayesianupdating(Rouder,2014)canbe rM
applied here to obtain stronger support for either the
For the second method we consider the hypothesis
replication hypothesis or its complement. Since we are H (H : 5.28 < µ < 5.94 & 4.90 < µ <
not able to collect more data ourselves, we duplicate 5.r 5M 6 &r 4M .53 < µ Closen <ess 5.19). A desired I sn ute prm pe odi ra tte of
Distance
thedatasetofthereplicationstudy. Thisisnotarecom-
BF = 10 was set for this hypothesis. The intervals ap-
mended procedure! It is used here only to demonstrate
pearsmallenoughtoformulatemeaningfulconclusions.
howupdatingworks. Wewillassumethatwehavecol-
Some overlap between adjacent means is present, but
lectedadditionaldatawithcoincidentallythesamesam-
the extremes do not overlap. Furthermore, the interval
ple means, standard deviations, and sample size as the
cover around 10% of the scale, which leaves enough
firsthalf. TheBF iscalculatedfortheupdateddataset.
tsc room for scores outside the intervals. We can continue
Now,theresultisBF =2.66(versusthepreviousBF
tsc tsc with the results based method. With approximately n
= 2.10). The extended dataset gives almost 3 times = 40 per group, two out of three means (M =
Closeness
moresupportforthereplicationhypothesisthanforthe 5.44,SD = 0.83& M = 5.31,SD = 1.15)fromthe
Intermediate
complement. Since the desired amount of support is
replication study fall within their respective confidence
stillnotachieved,itisreasonabletocontinuecollecting
intervalsfromthehypothesis. ThemeanoftheDistance
data until the threshold of BF = 3 is achieved in favor group (M = 5.31,SD = 1.07) does not fall within its
of the replication hypothesis or its complement. Note
hypothesized confidence interval. This results in some
again that in a real situation the researcher would need
support for the replication hypothesis, BF = 1.92.
toactuallycollectmoredataforBayesianupdating,which
rMc
There is some reason to further explore H , though
wedidnotdo.
rM
there is no convincing support according to the stan-
After adding more data, in this case triplicating the
dards set by us to prefer the presented hypothesis or
original data, BF is calculated again. Now, the result
tsc its complement, the Bayesian error probability associ-
is BF = 3.10 (versus the previous BF = 2.66). The
extents dc
ed dataset gives more than
threetsc
times as much
atedwithapreferenceforH
rM
isPMP
c
=.34. Updating
could, inprinciple, beusedtoobtainstrongerevidence
support for the replication hypothesis over the comple-
foreitherhypothesis.
ment. Now, the desired amount of support is achieved,
we have a preference for H , however this preference Resultsbasedmethod,H
ts rD
comeswithanerrorprobabilityequaltoPMP =.24.
c Lastly the interval hypothesis specifying the differ-
Theorybasedmethod,H tmin1 and tmin2 e µnce betw <ee 0n .8t 5h &e m −e 0a .1n 0s <(H µrD : −0.0 −9 µ< µ Clo <sen 0e .s 8s 4−
)
Intermediate Intermediate Distance
For the minimal difference hypothesis two hypothe-
is considered. For this hypothesis a desired support of
seswereformulated: H (µ +0.41<µ +
tmin1 Distance Intermediate BF=10wasset. Thedifferencescoresaremeasuredon
0.19<µ )andH (µ +0.21<µ +
Closeness tmin2 Distance Intermediate ascalefrom-6to6. Thismeansthattheintervalscover
0.10 < µ ). Both hypotheses were formulated to
Closeness about 10% of the scale, which leaves enough room for
show the impact of interpreting the minimal difference
scores outside the intervals. We can continue with the
of 0.2 SD, either between adjacent groups or between
resultsbasedmethod. Bothintervalsincludetheactual
themostextremegroupmeans. AdesiredsupportofBF
differencebetweenthegroupsmeansfoundintherepli-
= 3 was set for this hypothesis. With approximately n
cation study, this results in BF = 4.44. There is sup-
=40pergroupwecanseethattheactualdifferenceis
rDc
port although not convincing enough for our goals to
notinagreementwiththehypothesis. Themeanofthe
prefer either the replication hypothesis nor its comple-
Closeness group is 0.13 higher than both the mean of
ment. To achieve this level of support, updating could
the Distance and the mean of the Intermediate group.
beused.
===== PAGE 13/21 =====
13
Conclusion Step2-Codingofstatementsintheintroductionsec-
tion
Inreality,researcherswouldevaluateonereplication
hypothesis. That we evaluated four hypotheses was From the introduction section a number of state-
only to show the versatility of our approach. But it ments were coded that related to the hypotheses of in-
may be clear that most BFs show no clear preference teresttotheresearchersoftheoriginalpaper:
foreitherhypothesis. TheonlyBFthatgivesaclearan-
• "Theprimarysourceofempiricalevidencecitedin
swer shows strong support for the complement. All in
support of lexical selection by competition is the
all, we conclude that the results of Williams and Bargh
semantic interference effect (...): Naming a pic-
(2008) are not convincingly corroborated by Joy-Gaba
ture of an object (e.g., CAR) is slower in the con-
etal.(2012).
text of a semantic category coordinate distractor
Example2-Janssen,Schirm,Mahon,and word (e.g., truck) compared to an unrelated dis-
Caramazza tractor word (e.g., table)." (Janssen et al., 2008,
p.2)
For the second example, the original article of
Janssen et al. (2008) and the replication of Study 1 • "If the semantic interference effect arises at the
in this paper by Galak (2012) will be used. The deci- level of lexical selection, then the semantic in-
sionwasmadetoconductthereplicationusingthesim- terference effect will not be observed when par-
pleorderinghypothesisfromthetheorybasedmethod, ticipants delay their picture naming responses."
because the goal of this replication is to test the gen- (Janssenetal.,2008,p.3)
eral conflicting theories presented in the introduction
• "However,ifthesemanticinterferenceeffectarises
of Janssen et al. (2008). This second example will il-
at a postlexical level of processing, then semantic
lustrateasituationwherecompetingtheoriesaretested
interferenceshouldbeobservedinadelayednam-
againsteach other, as wellas ahypothesis specifiedus-
ingtask."(Janssenetal.,2008,p.3)
inganequalityconstraintandaninequalityconstraint.
• "If participants have already retrieved the lexical
Step1-Readingtheintroductionsection
representations corresponding to the target pic-
Readingtheintroductionsection turenamesinthedelayednamingconditionatthe
timethecueispresented,thenthereshouldbeno
The goal of the study is to test whether the seman-
effect of the frequency of the target pictures on
tic interference effect arises in a delayed naming task.
naminglatencies."(Janssenetal.,2008,p.4)
Participants were shown 20 pictures of common ob-
jects,halfwithlowfrequencynames(used1to9times Step3-Readingthemethods&resultssection
permillionwords)andhalfwithhighfrequencynames
The methods section makes clear that a 2 (Fre-
(used 72 to 724 times per million). In each trial, one
quency: high; HF, vs low; LF) x 2 (Relatedness: re-
of the 20 pictures (e.g., car) was shown on the screen.
lated;rel,vsunrelated;unrel)ANOVAdesignwasused.
After 1000 ms, a distractor word was shown beneath
The dependent variable was the time the participants
thepicture. Thedistractorcouldbeeitherrelated(e.g.,
neededtonametheobject.
truck) or unrelated (e.g., table). Participants were in-
structed to name the picture as soon as the distractor
Step 4 - Coding of statements in the methods & re-
word appeared on the screen. The semantic interfer-
sultssection
ence effect claims that a related distractor word makes
it easier to find the correct word, so the response time From the results section, the three statements with
is shorter when the distractor word is related. Since respecttohypothesistestingwerecoded. Notethatthe
the participant sees the picture for some time, it is ex- interestisonwhatisbeingtested, notontheresultsof
pected that the frequency (1-9 times or 72-724 times thetest:
permillion)hasnoeffectonthetimetogivetheproper
response. If the semantic interference effect arises at • "The R[esponse] T[ime] analysis revealed a main
a post-lexical level of processing, that is, after thinking effect of semantic relatedness, (...) ; F 2(1,38) =
about what to say, the distractor word would influence 4.4,MSE =1,137.2,p<.05,indicatingslowerRTs
reaction time. The researchers wanted to investigate inthesemanticallyrelatedthantheunrelatedcon-
whether this effect appears in such a delayed naming dition."(Janssenetal.,2008,p.6)
task.
===== PAGE 14/21 =====
14
• Neither the main effect of frequency nor (...) using the replication data, each can be tested against
reached significance (all Fs < 1). (Janssen et al., its complement, and, additionally, both can be tested
2008,p.6) againsteachother.
• Neither (...) nor the interaction between fre-
Determiningthedesiredsupport
quency and semantic relatedness reached signif-
icance(all Fs<1). (Janssenetal.,2008,p.6) Fromtheliteratureitisapparentthatthereisaclear
andestablishedtheoryregardingtheeffectoffrequency
Step 5 - Selecting the statements from the introduc- onthereactiontime. Fortherelatednessofdistractors,
tionsectionthatareactuallytested therearecontradictingideasandtheories. Forthisrea-
son,thedesiredsupportissetto5forbothoftherepli-
Based on the statements from the results section, it
cationhypothesesversustheirrespectivecomplements.
appearedthatthefirststatementwasnottested, itwas
However, the replication hypotheses can also be tested
merelyadescriptionoftheeffectunderinvestigationin
against each other, and to gather some idea on which
statements two and three. However, Statements 2 and
hypothesis needs further exploration, here a minimum
3weretested.
BFof5isalsochosen.
Step 6 - Translating statements to informative hy-
CalculateBF forthereplicationdata
potheses
Three BFs are calculated: each replication hypothe-
StatementsremainingfromStep5willnowbetrans-
ses versus its complement and the replication hypothe-
latedintosimpleorderinghypotheses:
ses versus each other. Note that, for the same reason
• "If the semantic interference effect arises at the highlighted for interval hypotheses, here too bain was
level of lexical selection, then the semantic inter- used with fraction = 3 for all analyses. The statistics
ference effect will not be observed when partici- for both the original and the replication study are dis-
pants delay their picture naming responses." can playedinTable3.
berepresentedas:
µ 1A+µ 2A =µ 1B+µ 2B • H t1 : µ 1A+µ 2A = µ 1B+µ 2B & µ 1A+µ 1B = µ 2A+µ 2B
versusitscomplement. Theresultoftheanalysis,
• "However,ifthesemanticinterferenceeffectarises BF = 4.57, indicates a slight preference for the
t1c
at a postlexical level of processing, then semantic first replication hypothesis, the error probability
interferenceshouldbeobservedinadelayednam- associated with a preference for H equals PMP
t1 c
ingtask."canberepresentedas: = .18. This is corroborated by the η2’s for both
µ 1A+µ 2A >µ 1B+µ 2B maineffectsthatcanbefoundinTable5,itis.02
forthefirstpartofH and.03forthesecondpart,
• "If participants have already retrieved the lexical t1
thatis,botharerathersmall.
representations corresponding to the target pic-
turenamesinthedelayednamingconditionatthe • H : µ +µ > µ +µ & µ +µ = µ +µ
timethecueispresented,thenthereshouldbeno
t2 1A 2A 1B 2B 1A 1B 2A 2B
versus its complement. The result of this analy-
effect of the frequency of the target pictures on
sis,BF =2.24,lendshardlyanysupportforthe
naminglatencies."canberepresentedas:
t2c
replication hypothesis versus its complement, the
µ +µ =µ +µ
1A 1B 2A 2B error probability associated with a preference for
H equalsPMP =.31.
The first two statements describe the same main ef- t2 c
fect, but with different outcomes. One suggests that
• H versusH . Whenthetworeplicationhypothe-
there is a main effect: the reaction time is lower with
t1 t2
ses are tested versus each other, the support for
unrelated distractors than with related distractors, the
thefirstishardlylargerthanforthesecond,BF
other describes the absence of this effect: both groups
t1t2
= 2.04, the error probability associated with a
scoreequallyonaverage. Thethirdstatementdescribes
preferenceforH equalsPMP =.33.
the other main effect, that of frequency. This results in
t1 t2
thefollowingreplicationhypotheses:
H :µ +µ =µ +µ & µ +µ =µ +µ ,
t1 1A 2A 1B 2B 1A 1B 2A 2B
H :µ +µ >µ +µ & µ +µ =µ +µ ,
t2 1A 2A 1B 2B 1A 1B 2A 2B
===== PAGE 15/21 =====
15
3elbaT
.)2102(kalaGybnoitacilperstidna)8002(azzamaraC&,nohaM,mrihcS,nessnaJfoydutslanigiroehtfostluserdnascitsitatsevitpircseD
)2102(kalaGybydutsnoitacilpeR
,nessnaJybydutslanigirO
)8002(azzamaraC&,nohaM,mirhcS
B2puorG
A2puorG
B1puorG
A1puorG
B2puorG
A2puorG
B1puorG
A1puorG
B2
A2
B1
A1
B2
A2
B1
A1
)64.43(24.238
)54.35(40.438
)36.14(51.518
)15.14(27.528
rn
rn
rn
1rn
)DS(M
)25.748,23.718(
)74.758,16.018(
)04.338,09.697(
)19.348,35.708(
MdnuoraIC%59
02
02
02
02
rn
rn
rn
rn
n
30.=2η,72.=p
50.>p
µ+
µ=
µ+
µ:
H
B2
A2
B1
A1
0
20.=2η,34.=p
rn=2η,50.<p
µ+
µ=
µ+
µ:
H
B2
B1
A2
A1
0
900.=2η,65.=p
50.>p
µ−
µ=
µ−
µ:
H
B2
A2
B1
A1
0
75.4=
FB
µ+
µ=
µ+
µ&
µ+
µ=
µ+
µ:
H
c1t
B2
A2
B1
A1
B2
B1
A2
A1
1t
42.2=
FB
µ+
µ=
µ+
µ&
µ+
µ>
µ+
µ:
H
c2t
B2
A2
B1
A1
B2
B1
A2
A1
2t
40.2=
FB
2t1t
.sdnocesillimniderusaemllaerasnaemehT.2.noitamrofnidetroperehtnodesabdetaluclacebtinacron,)rn(detropertonsinoitamrofnisihT=1.etoN
===== PAGE 16/21 =====
16
Conclusion used 95%-intervals, 90% or 99% intervals could also
have been used. For the results based method one has
Wechose5asthedesiredsupportforbothreplication
todecidewhethertofocusonmeansoradifferencebe-
hypotheses versus their respective complements and
tween means. Within this article no investigation on
versuseachother. H (µ +µ =µ +µ & µ +µ =
t1 1A 2A 1B 2B 1A 1B theimpactofthechoiceshasbeenexecuted. Thefocus
µ +µ )receivedmorethan4timesasmuchsupportas
2A 2B in this paper is on the hypotheses one formulates. It
its complement. H receives about double the support
t1 is essential to test the correct hypothesis, and the main
asH (µ +µ >µ +µ & µ +µ =µ +µ ). Both
t2 1A 2A 1B 2B 1A 1B 2A 2B message from this study is how to formulate that hy-
of these BFs do not meet the desired support. There is
pothesis. Therein still lies a subjective decision, repli-
someindicationthattheoriginalresultsofJanssenetal.
catingresearchersshouldcriticallyassesswhenaresult
(2008)formulatedintermsofH werecorroboratedby
t1 corroborates the original study. In some instances the
Galak (2012). However, since the sample sizes of the
differencebetweenadjacentmeansisimportant,some-
replication study were relatively small (20 persons per
timesafocusonthedifferencebetweenthesmallestand
group), and the desired support for either hypothesis
thelargestmeansismostrelevant(forthetheorybased
wasnotachieved,itisrelevanttoconsidercollectingad-
method). Andwhereasinsomecircumstanceshypothe-
ditionaldataforthereplicationstudyand,subsequently,
ses should be based on the means, in other one prefers
toupdatetheBayesfactors.
thedifferencebetweenmeans. Researchersshouldcriti-
callyassesswhichsituationappliestotheirsituationbe-
Discussion
foreconductingthereplicationstudy. Asensitivityanal-
Inspired by the Reproducibility Project: Psychology ysis could be helpful to understand the effect of these
(OSC, 2012; 2015) two refined methods were offered typesofdecisions. Theremainderofthepaperexplains
to plan and evaluate replication studies. In the the- thefurtherstepsnecessarytoanalysethereplicationhy-
orybasedmethodthereplicationhypothesiswasformu- pothesis. Duringthatprocess,foreachofthesubjective
lated based on the introduction of the original paper. decisionsthemainstreamoptionswerefollowed.
This method would be executed when a theory elabo- A major strength of these methods is the possibility
rated in the introduction of the original study is evalu- of updating (Rouder, 2014). Updating makes sure that
atedusingareplicationstudy. Twokindsofinformative studies end with convincing results. No estimates, as-
hypotheses can be formulated here, a simple ordering sumptions, or guesses are necessary, unlike for power
hypothesis or a minimal difference hypothesis. In the analyses. The replicating researchers only need to de-
results based method, the results of the original study terminewhatthestoppingpointis,i.e. whatthedesired
are used to formulate the replication hypothesis. Here, amountofsupportis.
anintervalhypothesisaroundthemeansoraroundthe TheuseoftheBFbringsonemorefeaturetothetable
differencebetweenmeansisformulated. which is not yet discussed: information synthesis (e.g.,
We believe both methods enable replication stud- Kuiper et al., 2013). Though not exclusive to the BF,
ies that meet the needs and desires of replicating re- synthesis is very easily conducted with the BF. With in-
searchers. Theycandeterminehowmuchtheresultsof formation synthesis, multiple BFs can be combined to
a replication study favor or contradict the original, us- createametaviewonthesupportforacertainhypoth-
ing the BF. Where necessary, Bayesian updating allows esis. It is necessary that the BFs under consideration
forthecollectionofdatauntilthedesireddegreeofcer- are calculated under the same conditions, that is, with
taintyisobtained. Ourmethodsallowtoformulatemul- the same hypotheses. In the case of the theory based
tipleconcurrenthypothesesaswasillustratedinExam- method, this leads to an interesting possibility. If the
ple2,andprovideflexibilityinformulatingthereplica- introductionsectionoftheoriginalpaperisconstructed
tion hypothesis. Our approach is a remedy against the before collecting the data for that paper, there are two
"null-ritual"(Gigerenzer,2004)andexplicitlyaddresses datasets (the original and the replication) able to pro-
theimportanceoftestingthecorrecthypothesis(which vide information on the replication hypothesis. By cal-
isnotalwaysdone,Cho&Abe,2013). culating the BF twice, and multiplying the two BF s
tc tc
For the evaluation of both methods some subjective anewoverallBF isgenerated,combiningtheinforma-
tc
decisionshadtobemade. Forbothmethodsthedesired tionfromboththeoriginalandthereplicatingstudy. For
support has been set to BF = 3 or 10. For the theory the results based method this is not possible, since the
based method one has to decide whether the minimal replicationhypothesisisbasedontheresultsoftheorig-
difference applies to each pair of group or to the ex- inal paper. This leads to an interesting discussion for
treme groups. For the results based method fraction theorybasedmethod: canweassumethatthehypothe-
= 3 has been chosen. For the results based method we ses from the introduction section are not influenced by
===== PAGE 17/21 =====
17
the data from that very same paper? Ideally; this as- This article earned the Open Data and Open Code
sumptionshouldbemet,butisthatalsotrueinreality? badge for making the data and code openly available.
The approaches presented in this paper can Ithasbeenverifiedthattheanalysisreproducedthere-
easily be executed using the R package bain sults presented in the article. The entire editorial pro-
(https://informative-hypotheses.sites.uu.nl/software/ cess,includingtheopenreviews,ispublishedintheon-
bain/, 2019). The approach presented in this paper is linesupplement.
thereforewellwithinreachofpsychologicalresearchers
thatwanttoexecuteareplicationstudyinordertoeval- References
uatetheresultsofanoriginalstudy.
Anderson,S.,Kelley,K.,&Maxwell,S.(2017).Sample-
size planning for more accurate statistical
AuthorContact
power: A method adjusting sample effect sizes
E-mail: H.J.Leplaa@uu.nl, Postal address: Utrecht forpublicationbiasanduncertainty.Psychologi-
University, Faculty of Social and Behavioral Sciences, calScience,28,1547–1562.https://doi.org/10.
Padualaan 14, PO Box 80140, 3508 TC Utrecht, The 1177/0956797617723724
Netherlands. Anderson, S., & Maxwell, S. (2016). There’s more than
one way to conduct a replication study: Be-
ConflictofInterestandFunding yondstatisticalsignificance.PsychologicalMeth-
ods, 21, 1–12. https://doi.org/10.1037/
The last author is supported by a fellowship of the
met0000051
Netherlands Institute for Advanced Study for the Hu-
Bargh, J. A., Chen, M., & Burrows, L. (1996). Auto-
manities and Social Sciences (NIAS-KNAW) and the
maticity of social behavior: Direct effects of
Consortium on Individual Development (CID) which is
trait construct and stereotype activation on ac-
funded through the Gravitation program of the Dutch
tion. Journal of personality and social psychol-
Ministry of Education, Culture, and Science and the
ogy,71(2),230–244.https://doi.org/10.1037/
NetherlandsOrganizationforScientificResearch(NWO
0022-3514.71.2.230
grantnumber024.001.003).
Berger, J., & Pericchi, L. (2004). Training samples in
objective bayesian model selection. The Annals
AuthorContributions
of Statistics, 32, 841–869. https://doi.org/10.
HJL,CR,andHHwereinvolvedintheinitialresearch 1214/009053604000000229
design. HJL wrote and revised the article in collabora- Boeije,H.(2010).Analysisinqualitativeresearch.Sage.
tion with HH, CR was actively involved in the review Brandt, M., IJzerman, H., Dijksterhuis, A., Farach, F.,
and edit of the first draft. HJL conducted the simula- Geller, J., Giner-Sorolla, R., Grange, J., Perug-
tion studies the analyses. All authors approved the fi- ini, N., Spies, J., & Van ’t Veer, A. (2014). The
nal manuscript. The first author (HJL) was the main replication recipe: What makes for a convinc-
author, the last author (HH) was the main supervisor ing replication? Journal of Experimental Social
on this project, the second author (CR) was the daily Psychology, 50, 217–224. https://doi.org/10.
supervisorduringthefirststepsofthisproject. 1016/j.jesp.2013.10.005
Charmaz, K. (2006). Constructing grounded theory:
Acknowledgments A practical guide through qualitative analysis.
Sage.
Thestartingpointforthispaperwasthebachelorthe-
Cho,H.-C.,&Abe,S.(2013).Istwo-tailedtestingfordi-
sisbyStiekema(2017). Wewouldliketoacknowledge
rectional research hypotheses tests legitimate?
the support of Fayette Klaassen and Qianrao Fu in the
Journal of Business Research, 66. https://doi.
early stages of this paper: their feedback and explana-
org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2012.02.023
tionswereofgreatvalueforthisproject. Thedataused
Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the be-
in this paper comes from the Open Science Collabora-
havioralsciences.LawrenceErlbaumAssociates.
tionReproducibilityProject: Psychology.
Dienes, Z. (2014). Using bayes to get the most out of
OpenSciencePractices non-significant results. Frontiers in Psychology,
5,1664–1078.https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.
2014.00781
Doyen, S., Klein, O., Pichon, C. L., & Cleeremans, A.
(2012).Behavioralpriming:It’sallinthemind,
===== PAGE 18/21 =====
18
but whosemind? PLoS ONE, 7(1). https://doi. 27(5), 804–821. https://doi.org/10.1037/
org/10.1371/journal.pone.0029081 met0000292
Erdfelder,E.,Faul,F.,&Buchner,A.(1996).Gpower:A Hoijtink, H., Gu, X., Mulder, J., & Rosseel, Y. (2019a).
general power analysis program. Behavior Re- Bayesian evaluation of informative hypothe-
search Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 28, ses for multiple populations. British Journal
1–11.https://doi.org/10.3758/BF03203630 of Mathematical and Statistical Psychology, 72,
Etz, A., & Vandekerckhove, J. (2016). A bayesian per- 219–243. https://doi.org/10.1111/bmsp.
spectiveonthereproducibilityproject:Psychol- 12145
ogy. PLoS ONE, 11(2). https://doi.org/10. Hoijtink, H., Gu, X., Mulder, J., & Rosseel, Y. (2019b).
1371/journal.pone.0149794 Computing bayes factors from data with miss-
Field, S., Hoekstra, R., Brinkmann, L., & Van Raven- ingvalues.PsychologicalMethods,24,253–268.
zwaaij, D. (2019). When and why to replicate: https://doi.org/10.1037/met0000187
As easy as 1, 2, 3? Collabra: Psychology, 5(46). Hoijtink, H., Mulder, J., Van Lissa, C., & Gu, X. (2019).
https://doi.org/10.1525/collabra.218 A tutorial on testing hypotheses using the
Fu, Q. (2022). Sample size determination for bayes factor. Psychological Methods, 24, 539–
bayesian informative hypothesis testing. 556.https://doi.org/10.1037/met0000201
[Doctoral dissertation]. Utrecht Uni- Hüffmeier, J., Mazei, J., & Schultze, T. (2016). Recon-
versity [Utrecht University Repository. ceptualizingreplicationasasequenceofdiffer-
https://dspace.library.uu.nl/handle/1874/416118]. ent studies: A replication typology. Journal of
Galak, J. (2012). Replication of study 1 by janssen, Experimental Psychology, 66, 81–92. https://
schirm, mahon, & caramazza (2008, jep:lmc) doi.org/10.1016/j.jesp.2015.09.009
[Retrievedfromhttps://osf.io/uhpyr/]. Informative hypotheses [computer software]
Gelman,A.,&Stern,H.(2006).Thedifferencebetween [Retrieved from https://informative-
“significant” and “not significant” is not itself hypotheses.sites.uu.nl/software/bain/].
statistically significant. The American Statisti- (2019).
cian, 60(4), 328–331. https://doi.org/10. Janssen, N., Schirm, W., Mahon, B., & Caramazza,
1198/000313006X152649 A. (2008). Semantic interference in a delayed
Gigerenzer, G. (2004). In Blackwell handbook of judg- naming task: Evidence for the response exclu-
ment and decision making. Blackwell Publish- sion hypothesis. Journal of Experimental Psy-
ing.https://doi.org/10.1002/9780470752937. chology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 34,
ch4 249–256. https://doi.org/10.1037/0278-
Glaser, B. (1978). Theoretical sensitivity. The Sociology 7393.34.1.249
Press. Joy-Gaba, J., Clay, R., & Cleary, H. (2012). Replication
Gu, X., Mulder, J., & Hoijtink, H. (2018). Approxi- ofkeepingone’sdistance:Theinfluenceofspa-
mate adjusted fractional bayes factors: A gen- tial distance cues on affect and evaluation by
eralmethodfortestinginformativehypotheses. williams&bargh(2008,psychologicalscience)
British Journal of Mathematical and Statistical [Retrievedfromhttps://osf.io/vnsqg/].
Psychology, 71, 229–261. https://doi.org/10. Kass,R.E.,&Raftery,A.E.(1995).Bayesfactors.Jour-
1111/bmsp.12110 nal of the American Statistical Association, 90,
Harms, C. (2018). A bayes factor for replications of 773–795.https://doi.org/10.2307/2291091
anova results. The American Statistician, 73, Klugkist, I., Laudy, O., & Hoijtink, H. (2005). Inequal-
327–339.https://doi.org/10.1080/00031305. ityconstrainedanalysisofvariance:Abayesian
2018.1518787 approach. Psychological Methods, 10, 477–493.
Hawthorne,J.(2021).Inductivelogic[RetrievedDecem- https://doi.org/10.1037/1082-989X.10.4.477
ber2,2022].TheStanfordEncyclopediaofPhi- Kuiper,R.,Hoijtink,H.,Buskens,V.,&Raub,W.(2013).
losophy. https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/ Combining statistical evidence from several
spr2021/entries/logic-inductive/ studies:Amethodusingbayesianupdatingand
Hoijtink,H.(2012).Informativehypotheses:Theoryand an example from research on trust problems
practiceforbehavioralandsocialscientists.New in social and economic exchange. Sociological
York:Chapman;Hall/CRC. Methods and Research, 42, 60–81. https://doi.
Hoijtink, H. (2022). Prior sensitivity of null hypoth- org/10.1177/0049124112464867
esis bayesian testing. Psychological Methods, Lakens, D., Scheel, A., & Isager, P. (2018). Equivalence
testing for psychological research: A tutorial.
===== PAGE 19/21 =====
19
Advances in Methods and Practices in Psycholog- curiousphilosophy. net / 2023 / 09 / is - sex -
ical Science, 1, 259–269. https://doi.org/10. binary--a-reasoned-objection-to-rationality-
1177/2515245918770963 rules-in-the-pursuit-of-truth/uploads/pdfs/
Ly, A., Etz, A., Marsman, M., & Wagenmakers, E.-J. Science%5C_as%5C_Falsification%5C_%5C_
(2018). Replication bayes factors from evi- Karl%5C_R%5C_%5C_Popper.pdf
denceupdating.BehaviorResearchMethods,51, Rosenthal, R. (1979). The "file drawer problem" and
2498–2508. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13428- tolerancefornulleffects.PsychologicalBulletin,
018-1092-x 86, 638–641. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-
Marsman, M., Schönbrodt, F., Morey, R., Yao, Y., Gel- 2909.86.3.638
man, A., & Wagenmakers, E.-J. (2017). A Rouder, J. (2014). Optional stopping: No problem for
bayesian bird’s eye view of ‘replications of im- bayesians. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 21,
portant results in social psychology’. Royal So- 301–308. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13423-
cietyOpenScience,4.https://doi.org/10.1098/ 014-0595-4
rsos.160426 Schönbrodt,F.D.,&Wagenmakers,E.-J.(2018).Bayes
Morey, R. D., & Lakens, D. (n.d.). Why most of factor design analysis: Planning for compelling
psychology is statistically unfalsifiable [[Re- evidence. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 25,
trieved November 22, 2022]. https : / / 128–142. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13423-
raw.githubusercontent.com/richarddmorey/ 017-1230-y
psychology%5C_resolution/master/paper/ Simonsohn, U. (2015). Small telescopes detectability
response.pdf and the evaluation of replication results. Psy-
Morey, R. D., Romeijn, J.-W., & Rouder, J. N. (2016). chologicalScience,26(5),559–569.https://doi.
The philosophy of bayes factors and the quan- org/10.1177/0956797614567341
tification of statistical evidence. Journal of Stiekema, J. (2017). Bayesiaanse evaluatie van in-
MathematicalPsychology,72,6–18.https://doi. formatieve hypotheses als methode voor repli-
org/10.1016/j.jmp.2015.11.001 catiebeoordeling [Unpublished bachelor’s the-
Mulder, J. (2014). Prior adjusted default bayes factors sis].
fortesting(in)equalityconstrainedhypotheses. Van Aert, R., & Van Assen, M. (2017). Bayesian evalu-
Computational Statistics and Data Analysis, 71, ation of effect size after replicating an original
448–463. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.csda. study.PLoSONE,12.https://doi.org/10.1371/
2013.07.017 journal.pone.0175302
O’Hagan, A. (1995). Fractional bayes factors Van Lissa, C., Gu, X., Mulder, J., Rosseel, Y., Van Zun-
for model comparison (with discus- dert, C., & Hoijtink, H. (2020). Teacher’s cor-
sion) [Retrieved June 10, 2021, from ner: Evaluating informative hypotheses using
http://www.jstor.org/stable/2346088]. Jour- the bayes factor in structural equation mod-
nal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B els. Structural Equation Modeling: A Multidisci-
(Methodological),57,99–138. plinary Journal, 28(2), 292–301. https://doi.
Open Science Collaboration. (2012). An open, large- org/10.1080/10705511.2020.1745644
scale,collaborativeefforttoestimatetherepro- Verhagen, J., & Wagenmakers, E.-J. (2014). Bayesian
ducibility of psychological science. Perspectives tests to quantify the result of a replication at-
on Psychological Science, 7(6), 657–660. https: tempt.JournalofExperimentalPsychology:Gen-
//doi.org/10.1177/1745691612462588 eral, 143(4), 1457. https://doi.org/10.1037/
OpenScienceCollaboration.(2015).Estimatingthere- a0036731
producibility of psychological science. Science, Williams,L.,&Bargh,J.(2008).Keepingone’sdistance:
349, 6251. https://doi.org/10.1126/science. The influence of spatial distance cues on affect
aac4716 and evaluation. Psychological Science, 19, 302–
Patil,P.,Peng,R.D.,&Leek,J.T.(2016).Whatshould 308. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9280.
researchersexpectwhentheyreplicatestudies? 2008.02084.x
a statistical view of replicability in psychologi- Wilson,A.(2016).Exactreplicationsinaninexactcon-
calscience.PerspectivesonPsychologicalScience, text: Commentary on ebersole et al. Journal
11(4), 539–544. https://doi.org/10.1177/ of Experimental Social Psychology, 67, 84–85.
1745691616646366 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jesp.2015.12.008
Popper, K. R. (1963). Science as falsification. Con- Zondervan-Zwijnenburg, M., van de Schoot, R., & Hoi-
jectures and refutations, 1, 33–39. https:// jtink, H. (2019). Testing anova replications by
===== PAGE 20/21 =====
20
meansofthepriorpredictivep-value[Retrieved Appendix
on January 28, 2019]. https://doi.org/10.
31234/osf.io/6myqh TheApproximateAdjustedFractionalBayesFactor
The Approximate Adjusted Fractional Bayes
Factor (AAFBF) is implemented in the R package bain
andwasdevelopedsuchthatitcanbeappliedinawide
rangeofstatisticalmodelsfortheevaluationofinforma-
tive hypotheses in addition to the traditional null and
alternative hypotheses. The statistical background of
the AAFBF can be found in (Gu et al., 2018; Hoijtink,
2022; Hoijtink, Gu, et al., 2019a, 2019b), more practi-
cally oriented tutorials about the use of the AAFBF can
befoundin(Hoijtink,Gu,etal.,2019a;VanLissaetal.,
2020). In this appendix the AAFBF, simplified to the
formitattainsinthecontextofANOVAmodels,willbe
presented.
The Bayes factor of H, which denotes either a
i
null (H ) or an informative hypothesis (H) versus the
0 i
unconstrainedhypothesisH canbewrittenastheratio
u
oftwomarginallikelihoods:
m(D|H) f
BF = i = i, (A1)
iu m(D|H ) c
u i
whereDdenotesthedata,thatis,foranANOVA,group
membership and score on the dependent variable for
each person. As was shown by Klugkist et al. (2005),
this ratio of two marginal likelihoods can be rewritten
intermoftheratioofthefit f andcomplexityc ofH.
i i i
The "approximate" in AAFBF results from the
fact that the fit is computed with respect to a nor-
mal approximation of the posterior distribution of µ =
[µ ,...,µ ], where G denotes the number of groups in
1 G
theANOVA:
g(µ|D)=N(µ|µˆ,Σ), (A2)
where µˆ denotes estimates of the means, and Σ the co-
variancematrixoftheestimateswhichisdiagonalwith
elements σ2/N for g = 1,...,G, where σ2 denotes the
g
pooled within groups variance, and N the sample size
g
ingroupG. Alreadyforrelativelysmallsamplesizeper
group(e.g.,20)thenormalapproximationbecomesvir-
tually indistinguishable from the true (a t-distribution)
posteriordistributionofthemeans. Thefitis
(cid:90)
f = g(µ|D)dµ. (A3)
i
µ∈Hi
It is illustrative to note that for hypotheses constructed
using only inequality constraints, the fit is the propor-
tion of the posterior distribution in agreement with H.
i
In general it holds that the larger the fit the larger the
supportinthedataforH.
i
===== PAGE 21/21 =====
21
Thecomplexityisbasedonthe"adjusted""frac- hypothesisversusitscomplementcanbewrittenas:
tional" prior distribution corresponding the posterior
f 1− f
distribution: BF ic = ci/ 1−ci. (A6)
i i
h(µ|D)=N(µ|µ ,Σ ), (A4) Ingeneralitholdsthatthelargerthecomplexitytheless
adj frac
specific,thatis,thelessparsimoniousH.
i
where the adjusted prior mean µ is a value on the Thepriormeansarechoseninthemannerelab-
adj
boundary of H and its complement H . For exam- orated in the previous paragraph to ensure that both
i c
ple, the complement of H 0 : µ 1 − µ 2 = 0 is H c : "not BF 0u and BF ic areconsistent(Guetal., 2018; Hoijtink,
H" and therefore any µ = µ can be used as Gu, et al., 2019a), that is, if the sample size increases
i 1,adj 2,adj
the prior mean. Analogously, a value on the bound- these Bayes factors go to 0 if H u or H c is the best hy-
ary of µ 1 > µ 2 > µ 3 and its complement would be pothesis and to infinity if H 0 or H i is the best hypothe-
µ = µ = µ . For interval hypotheses like sis. This holds for any value of J. The prior variances
1,adj 2,adj 13,adj
2 < µ < 4, µ is set equal to the mean of the interval, arechoseninagreementwiththeminimaltrainingsam-
adj
thatis,forsettingthemeanofthepriordistributionthis pleprinciple(see,forexample,Berger&Pericchi,2004;
hypothesisistreatedanalogouslyasµ=3. Thepriorco- O’Hagan,1995),thatis,whatisthesmallestsamplesize
variancematrixisbasedonafractionoftheinformation that allows estimation of the parameters of the ANOVA
inthedatawithrespecttotheµ’s,thatis,Σ =Σ∗1/b, model (the answer isG+1). In the AAFBF J is chosen
frac
where b = [b ,...,b ] with b = 1/G∗J/N , denotes the notequaltotheminimaltrainingsamplesize,butequal
1 G g g
fraction of information in group G used to specify the tothenumberofindependentconstraintsusedtospec-
priorvarianceofthemeaningroupg. Theparameter J ifythehypothesisofinterest. IncaseofH 0 :µ 1 =µ 2 =µ 3
willbeelaboratedinthenextparagraph. Thecomplex- the number of independent constraints equals two, the
ityis same holds for H i : µ 1 > µ 2 > µ 3. Finally note, that
(cid:90) the choice of J is only relevant if the goal is to eval-
c = h(µ|D)dµ. (A5)
i uate a hypothesis specified using equality or inequal-
µ∈Hi
ity constraints, in all other cases (hypotheses specified
It is illustrative to note that for hypotheses constructed using only inequality constraints that are not interval
using only inequality constraints, the complexity is the hypotheses) the Bayes factor is completely insensitive
proportion of the prior distribution in agreement with to the specification of J (Hoijtink, Mulder, et al., 2019;
H. ThisimpliesthattheBayesfactorofaninformative Mulder,2014).
i