
===== PAGE 1/16 =====
Opendata:NotApplicable Editedby:RickardCarlsson
Meta-Psychology,2024,vol8,MP.2020.2740 Openmaterials:NotApplicable Reviewedby:DavidTrafimow,WesBonifay
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2020.2740 Openandreproducibleanalysis:NotApplicable Analysisreproducedby:NotApplicable
Articletype:OriginalArticle Openreviewsandeditorialprocess:Yes AllsupplementaryfilescanbeaccessedatOSF:
PublishedundertheCC-BY4.0license Preregistration:No https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/YXMA2
Beyond a Dream: The Practical Foundations
of Disconnected Psychology.
Dario Krpan
LondonSchoolofEconomicsandPoliticalScience,UK
Abstract
Disconnected psychology is a form of psychological science in which researchers ground their work upon the main
principlesofpsychologicalmethodbutaredetachedfroma“field”consistingofotherpsychologiststhatcomprises
connectedpsychology. Ithaspreviouslybeenproposedthatcombiningthetwoformsofpsychologywouldresultin
the most significant advancement of psychological knowledge (Krpan, 2020). However, disconnected psychology
mayseemtobean“abstractutopia”,giventhatithasnotbeenpreviouslydetailedhowtoputitintopractice. The
present article therefore sets the practical foundations of disconnected psychology. In this regard, I first describe
a hypothetical disconnected psychologist and discuss relevant methodological and epistemological implications.
I then propose how this variant of psychology could be integrated with the current academic system (i.e., with
connected psychology). Overall, the present article transforms disconnected psychology from a hazy dream into
substancethatcouldeventuallymaximizepsychologicalknowledge,evenifimplementingitwouldrequirearadical
transformationofpsychologicalscience.
Keywords: Knowledge,Ethics,Method,Research,Meta-psychology.
Introduction discussitsmethodologicalandepistemologicalimplica-
tions. In this regard, I first sketch a hypothetical pic-
In the previous article (Krpan, 2020), it has been
ture of a disconnected psychologist and outline poten-
argued that current academic psychology, which is re-
tial practices that would constitute this variant of psy-
ferred to as connected because it requires “connecting
chology. I then propose how disconnected psychology
variousresearchfindingsandideasgeneratedbydiffer-
could be integrated with the current academic system
ent scholars” (p. 1), limits the potential of the disci-
(i.e., with connected psychology). More specifically, I
plinetoadvanceknowledgeabouthumanmindandbe-
discuss university education of disconnected psycholo-
havior. As a solution, it has been proposed to establish
gists, outline criteria that academic departments could
disconnected psychology in which “researchers develop
use when hiring disconnected psychologists, examine
their ideas by following the main principles of psycho-
theirrolewithinthedepartments,andsuggesthowthey
logicalmethod,buttheyaredisconnectedfroma“field”
would publish their work. I also explore issues that
consisting of other psychologists and therefore do not
funding bodies should consider when deciding how to
follow the discipline’s norms and conventions” (Krpan,
allocatefundingtodisconnectedpsychologists.
2020, p. 1). The author has argued that combining
these two streams of psychology would maximize the
WhoIsADisconnectedPsychologist?
potential of the discipline concerning the understand-
ing of human mind and behavior. The main aim of The key principle of disconnected psychology is that
the present article is to articulate in detail how discon- researchersneedtofollowthemaintenetsofpsycholog-
nectedpsychologycouldoperateinpracticeandfurther ical method: observability and nonaccidentality (Feyn-
===== PAGE 2/16 =====
2
man, 1998; Krpan, 2020; Popper, 1959, 1963; Rosnow Inadditiontonotbeingeducatedaboutthemethod-
and Rosenthal, 1989; Shrout and Rodgers, 2018). In ologicaltoolsdevelopedintherealmofconnectedpsy-
other words, whenever they develop ideas or theories chology, disconnected psychologists would be encour-
regarding the occurrence of psychological phenomena agedtoavoidreadingarticlesorbookspublishedwithin
(i.e., mental states or behaviors), researchers need to this form of psychology and might therefore have lit-
strive to find a way to measure these phenomena and tleawarenessofdevelopmentsinconnectedpsychology.
demonstrate that the ideas or theories reflect the phys- Althoughthispracticemayseemextreme,themainaim
ical reality and are not just imagination or chance. It ofdisconnectedpsychologistsistodevelopauniqueun-
is necessary to clarify what this means in the context derstanding of human mind and behavior that may be
ofdisconnectedpsychology. Disconnectedpsychologists shaped by a range of different influences, from their
are not trained in methodological tools that connected immediate life circumstances to the “infinite” diversity
psychologists typically use to satisfy these principles of of the world. Being exposed to ideas from connected
psychologicalmethod, suchasexperimentaldesign, re- psychology, especially in the early stages of their ca-
gression analysis, grounded theory, etc. Therefore, to reer when they are still developing their unique vision
demonstrateobservabilityandnonaccidentalityoftheir and style, may be detrimental to this objective for sev-
ideas and theories, they are expected to develop their eral reasons. First, it could influence them to adopt
own tools and procedures to extend the diversity of certainwritingconventionsfromconnectedpsychology
psychological method. Disconnected psychologists are, thatmay,onanimplicitlevel,shapehowtheyconstrue
however,trainedinsubjectsthatprovidethemwiththe psychologicalphenomena,reasonaboutthem,andform
skillstodoso,suchasmathematics,programming,phi- theories(BudgeandKatz,1995;Madiganetal.,1995).
losophy, and art. This approach to training will be fur- Second, it may influence them to internalize unwritten
ther discussed in the next section where I propose how rules,values,andassumptionsofconnectedpsychology
to incorporate disconnected psychology into academic that have evolved throughout the course of the field’s
educationandresearch. development and, even if not easy to identify or pin-
Emphasisonmethodwhendevelopingideasandthe- point,shapehowpsychologistsapproachandconceptu-
ories does not mean that disconnected psychologists alize topics they study (Budge and Katz, 1995; Maul et
would need to limit themselves in any way and be dis- al.,2016;Roediger,2003;Sternberg,2017;Teo,2009).
couraged from working on large-scale ideas or highly Therefore, to avoid the possibility of simply copying
ambitious theories. They would simply need to be crit- trends and modes of thought that have evolved in con-
ical and strive to convincingly argue and/or demon- nectedpsychology, disconnectedpsychologistwouldbe
strate, in any possible way they can think of, that their encouraged to investigate the world’s intellectual, cul-
ideas reflect the observable world and are not fiction. tural, and creative diversity instead of following the
If itis not possiblefor them totest anidea or theoryat workofconnectedpsychologists.
presentduetoitslargescale,resourcelimitations,orfor In this context, it may appear odd to propose that
someotherreasons,itwouldbesufficientthattheypro- disconnected psychologists should not be exposed to
posehowitcouldbetestedanduseanyotheravailable ideasfromconnectedpsychologysotheycoulddevelop
evidence, observations, or logical arguments to defend a unique understanding of human mind and behavior,
it, but also to identify any of its potential limitations. but they should be trained in disciplines such as math-
Applying psychological method in the realm of discon- ematics,programming,orphilosophy. Afterall,eachof
nected psychology would be more challenging than in these disciplines is “connected” (e.g., philosophers are
connectedpsychologyandrequirealotofcreativitybe- aware of and build upon each other’s work) and could
causeresearcherswouldneedtodeveloptheirownap- influence them to adopt its conventions and doctrines
proaches and/or build devices that would allow them when developing theories about human mind and be-
to convincingly argue about observability and nonacci- havior. Given these considerations, an ideal scenario
dentality of their ideas. However, as in connected psy- would be that each disconnected psychologist develops
chology, where a “perfect” method does not exist and their own systems of philosophy, math, art, etc. from
arguing about the validity and appropriateness of the first principles and then uses them to build their the-
methods employed to defend one’s claims is an inte- ories and methods in psychology. Whereas this would
gral part of the discipline (e.g., Benjamin et al., 2017; be possible if human life lasted a few millennia, or if
HeldandOtt,2018;Koch,1981;Loftus,1996;Rosnow completely disconnected societies evolved on different
and Rosenthal, 1989; Trafimow, 2014), the “burden of exoplanets, it is highly implausible in practice. There-
proof” to justify one’s ideas and theories would be on fore, an optimal approach to increase the diversity of
theresearcher. psychological theories and methodological approaches,
===== PAGE 3/16 =====
3
whichcanultimatelyincreasepsychologicalknowledge assumptions that need to be met to connect the ideas
(Krpan, 2020), is to provide individuals with a rich andconceptstotheobservableenvironment(Trafimow,
palette of ideas and inspirations from various intellec- 2009, 2012, 2021). For example, Ajzen’s (1988) the-
tual disciplines and domains of life, and allow them to oryofplannedbehaviorpositsthatperceivedbehavioral
connect these ideas and inspirations in their own way, control (i.e., whether people perceive they have con-
whileeliminatinginfluencesfromconnectedpsychology trol over their behavior) predicts behavioral intention,
that would shape these connections through its norms whichinturnpredictsbehavior. However,perceivedbe-
and conventions (see Krpan, 2020; Stanford, 2015). It havioral control is not directly observable, and testing
istruethatthesedisciplines(e.g.,philosophy,math,art) thetheoryhencereliesonvariouspossibleauxiliaryas-
also have their norms and conventions. However, be- sumptions, such as that this control can be assessed by
causedisconnectedpsychologistswouldbesubjectedto askingpeopletoreporttowhatextenttheyfeelincon-
a broad range of disciplines as part of their education trol over their behavior (Trafimow, 2009). It has been
but would not operate within those disciplines as part argued that one of the problems that impede psycho-
of their career (see section “Integrating Disconnected logicalknowledgeisthatpsychologistsoftenhavebeen
Psychology with the Academic System”), the detrimen- insufficiently creative with auxiliary assumptions, and
tal influence of their norms and conventions would be theythereforeeitherfailtoeffectivelytestexistingthe-
attenuated. It is important to emphasize these are my oriesortoproposetheoriesthatwouldrequireoriginal
views on how to maximize theoretical richness; I am auxiliaryassumptions(Trafimow,2009,2012,2021). It
not claiming it is the only way.1 Perhaps in the future is plausible that one of the reasons behind this prob-
psychologists will be able to use computer simulations lemisthatthethinkingofconnectedpsychologistsmay
todevelopdisconnectedtheorieswhiletheythemselves betooembeddedintheexistingnormsandparadigms,
willnotneedtopracticedisconnection. whichpreventsthemfromseeingmoreoriginalpossibil-
It could be argued that, without being aware of itiesinthisregard(Krpan,2020;Madiganetal.,1995).
what is happening in connected psychology, discon- Therefore, without the awareness of these norms and
nected psychologists would not progress beyond folk paradigms, disconnected psychologists might be freer
psychology;thatis,beyondnaïveunderstandingofmen- to generate completely different auxiliary assumptions,
tal states and behaviors (Bering, 2006; Fletcher, 1995; which could in turn improve theory testing and lead to
Goldman, 1993). However, I argue that this would not bettertheories.
be the case for several reasons. First, all disconnected Apartfromstrivingtoapplypsychologicalmethodto
psychologists would have a strong training in philoso- their ideas and theories, and avoiding reading schol-
phy and would therefore critically approach their val- arlytextsfromconnectedpsychology,disconnectedpsy-
ues, intuitions, inferences, and observations. Second, chologists would have complete freedom to choose a)
disconnected psychologists would systematically docu- whattheywanttostudy; b)howtheywanttostudyit;
menttheirobservations,ideas,andtheoriesacrosstheir and c) how to document and convey their ideas. Con-
lifetime and build upon them, which over time should cerning their choice of what to study, it is possible that
allow them to move beyond naïve intuitions and de- somedisconnectedpsychologistswouldfocusonaspe-
velop comprehensive and multilayered models of psy- cific topic, such as food consumption, prejudice, pro-
chological phenomena. Finally, constant emphasis on environmental behavior, or anything else they find in-
psychological method would necessitate that discon-
nectedpsychologistsovercometheirinitialmentalmod- 1Interestingly, one of the reviewers of this article (Wes
Bonifay)hasproposedtheideaofsuperconnectedpsychology,
els of the world and develop an understanding of hu-
in which psychologists would be “encouraged to investigate
manmindandbehaviorthatisbeyondimaginationand
the world’s intellectual, cultural, and creative diversity”, but
superstition.
“in addition” to following the work of connected psycholo-
An additional argument supports the notion that
gists,ratherthan“instead”. Inanutshell,thismeansthatpsy-
disconnected psychologists can advance psychological chologistswouldreceiveatrainingsimilartowhatIpropose
knowledge to a greater degree if they are unaware of inthesection“EducationofaDisconnectedPsychologist”,but
developments in connected psychology. Any possible they would remain part of psychology as a field. Whereas I
scientificmethodthatcanbeusedtoputsomeone’sthe- amskepticalofconnectedpsychologybecauseIthinkthatits
ories about human mind and behavior to the test re- incentivestructures,norms,andconventionspreventfullyex-
lies on auxiliary assumptions (Trafimow, 2009). That ploringthespaceofpossibletheoriesandmethods,Idoagree
is, theories are made of ideas and concepts that are that superconnected psychology could perhaps loosen norms
andconventionsandallowforagreaterdiversityofthinking,
not directly observable, and testing them using some
which would advance psychological knowledge compared to
scientific method therefore requires developing a set of
thecurrentstateofthefield.
===== PAGE 4/16 =====
4
teresting and important. However, given the freedom SaferandTang,2009).
of choice that is not determined by norms and condi- Concerning how disconnected psychologists would
tionsofthefield,itispossiblethatmanyofthemwould tackle and study the topics on which they want to fo-
chooseamoreholisticapproachandstudyalargenum- cus, the complete freedom of choice would likely re-
ber of different topics in relation to each other to get a sult in a wide range of different approaches. Some of
more complete understanding of human mind and be- theresearchersmight,likeconnectedpsychologists,ob-
havior (e.g., Choi et al., 2007). Because psychological serve other people, test them, or measure their behav-
phenomena and the environment in which they occur ior,andovertimedevelopuniquemethodologicalways
are complex systems, which means that these phenom- thatwouldbealignedwiththeseendeavors.2 However,
ena are interconnected and dependent on a variety of giventhetendencyforself-observationpresentinmany
occurrences in the world, understanding specific sub- humans (Fenigstein, 2009; Fenigstein et al., 1975), it
jects such as prejudice may also require understand- ispossiblethatmanydisconnectedpsychologistswould
ing many other subjects such as culture, sleep, food also choose the self as the subject and focus on in-
consumption, humor, perception of physical space, etc. trospection—i.e., the examination of their own inter-
even if they may not seem obviously related (Bar-Yam, nal states. Introspection has been used as a tool for
1997;Eidelson,1997;Morowitz,2018;Sawyer,2005). gaining knowledge by various thinkers throughout his-
Science has in fact been criticized for overemphasizing tory,fromBuddha(Stanley,2012)throughphilosophers
specialization both because many phenomena it stud- such as Husserl (Gutland, 2018) or Emerson (1982) to
ies can be understood only in a limited way when iso- writers such as Huxley (1954). Moreover, an entire in-
latedfromtherichnessoftheworldinwhichtheyoccur, tellectual movement highly influential in the 19th cen-
andbecausespecializationtendstodegraderesearchers tury—Romanticism—was grounded upon introspection
themselves by making them unidimensional and less (Holbrook, 1997). Although early psychologists such
abletoapplytheirknowledge(e.g.,Moghaddam,1989, as William James used introspection as a research tool
1997; Popper, 1959; Sabine, 1917). Therefore, by al- (Stanley, 2012), it gradually fell out of favor with psy-
lowing researchers to approach their topics holistically chologists, starting with behaviorism, because it was
and study what they desire, disconnected psychology criticized for being inadequate to provide an unbiased
might address this criticism of science more generally window into the functioning of human mind neces-
andacademicpsychologymorespecifically. sarytoestablishpsychologyasascience(Boring,1953;
It is also possible that disconnected psychologists Pronin,2009). Thisis,however,paradoxical,giventhat
wouldbemorelikelytofocusonstudyingbigquestions psychologyisoneoftherarescientificdisciplineswhere
that are shaped by their direct existential experiences, researchers have adirect experience of thephenomena
suchashowtoovercomesuffering,howtoachieveone’s being studied (unlike in physics for example where re-
fullcreativeandspiritualpotential,howtodesignaso- searcherscannotdirectlyexperiencewhatitisliketobe
cietythatwouldbegroundedinpsychologicalprinciples
thatcanpreventtheoccurrenceofglobalissuessuchas
2AlthoughinthepresentarticleandKrpan(2020)Iargue
that disconnected psychology would generate novel method-
violenceorinequality,etc. Humanshavehadalongtra-
ologies,itispossiblethatmanyresearcherswouldsimplyrein-
ditionofattemptingtoanswersuchquestions,whichis
ventthewheelandcomeupwithtoolsandtechniquessimilar
documentedinworksofvariousthinkersfromdifferent
to what already exists, especially given that in today’s world
historical periods (e.g., Rahula, 1974; Plato, 2007), in-
itisextremelydifficulttobefullydisconnected,andthatdis-
cluding psychologists (e.g., Frankl, 1959; Freud, 1962; connectedpsychologistswouldbeexposedtotopicsinmathe-
Jung, 1968; Maslow, 1965; Skinner, 1948). However, maticssuchasprobability(seesection“EducationofaDiscon-
investigatingthesequestions,especiallywithamethod- nected Psychologist) that influenced statistical approaches in
ological rigor that was not required of earlier thinkers, psychology. In a nutshell, I claim that disconnected psychol-
would be highly difficult in the realm of current psy- ogy would result in novel methods because it would remove
chology for various reasons. Most importantly, get- various obstacles (e.g., rules, norms, conventions) that pre-
tingtenure,whichisdependentonpublications(which ventscholarsfromfullyexploringthespaceofpossibletheo-
riesandmethods,andbecausetheywouldsystematicallydoc-
would not be the case in disconnected psychology, as
umentthese“unconstrained”explorationsacrosstheirlifetime
discussed in the next section), favors focusing on hot
andbuilduponthem,whichmightresultinauniqueintellec-
topics, narrow topics, or topics where there are many
tualformation. Ifdisconnectedpsychologyweretobeimple-
gaps in the literature because this makes it easier for
mented but resulted in similar theories and methods as con-
one to publish more and get cited (Anseel et al., 2004; nectedpsychology,itwouldmeanthatconnectedpsychology
Csiszar et al., 2020; De Rond and Miller, 2005; Moher already generates an optimal number of diverse ideas, and
et al., 2018; Nosek et al., 2012; Paulus et al., 2015; disconnectedpsychologyisnotneeded.
===== PAGE 5/16 =====
5
anatom)andshouldhencecapitalizeonthis. construingatopicmaybydefaultpromptdifferenttheo-
The potential of introspection in psychology there- riesaboutthistopic. Anotherreasonwhydiverseforms
foreremainsuntapped,anddisconnectedpsychologists of expression may increase the diversity of thought is
could potentially push its boundaries. Unlike early that these forms differ in their “temporal horizon” of
sages or later intellectuals who used introspection to completion. Forexample, researchersexpressingthem-
gain knowledge, they would be required to make this selvesinshorterformsmayexpecttofinishtheminsev-
tool more rigorous given the emphasis of disconnected eral months or a year, whereas those expressing them-
psychologyonmethod,buttheywouldalsohaveatdis- selvesinlongerformsmayexpecttofinishtheminsev-
posal various technological tools of self-quantification eral years to decades. Different temporal horizons are
that have become available in the recent era (Maltseva in turn known to impact certain qualities of language
and Lutz, 2018; Swan, 2012, 2013) and can be used that people use, such as abstractness (Trope and Liber-
to measure various behaviors or physiological states in man, 2010). Importantly, although disconnected psy-
many creative ways. Because introspection implies us- chologistswouldbeallowedtousevariousformsofex-
ing observations about oneself in the context of one’s pression, they would be asked to write abstracts and
surroundings and circumstances to gradually develop keywordsfortheirtextstomakeiteasiertorelatethem
generalprinciplesabouthumanmindandbehavior,itis toconnectedpsychology,whichIexplaininthenextsec-
likely that many disconnected psychologists would em- tion.
ploy an inductive approach to theory building (Locke Finally, to paint a more lifelike portrait of a dis-
andLatham,2005). Althoughseveralphilosophershave connected psychologist, I discuss some qualities and
criticized this approach, most famously Popper (1963), traits that may characterize them. Because discon-
psychologistLocke(2007)arguedthattheopposite,de- nected psychology would require knowledge of various
ductiveapproach,mayretardtheprogressofpsycholog- subjects that would be necessary to independently de-
icalsciencebecauseitencouragesprematuretheorizing velop psychological method and enhance diversity of
andoftenleadstoformulatingpredictionsafterthefact. thought, this person would need to have a tendency to
Many influential theories in psychology, such as Beck’s be a renaissance individual, such as Émilie du Châtelet
cognitive theory of depression (Clark and Beck, 1999) (Zinsser, 2007) or Leonardo da Vinci (Heller, 2015).
or Bandura’s (1986) social cognitive theory, and in sci- Thisvariantofpsychologywouldalsolikelyattractpeo-
encemoregenerally,suchasNewton’s(1687)theoryof ple who have a desire to break with norms and tradi-
gravity,wereinfactbasedoninduction(Locke,2007). tions and start one’s own path found in historical fig-
Disconnected psychologists would have the freedom ures such as Diogenes the Cynic (Cutler, 2014), Bud-
to document their ideas and research using any shape dha (Rahula, 1974), Tolstoy (Bartlett, 2013), Amelia
or form of expression for two reasons: because this Earhart(Rich,2005),AynRand(1963),Gandhi(1997),
could further improve the diversity of thought and in- IdaB.Wells(2020),orNikolaTesla(Valentinuzzietal.,
crease intrinsic motivation. These forms of expression 2016). In addition, disconnected psychology may in-
mayinvolvetextsofanylength,fromshorttoverylong, volve working more individually and outside of large
and any styles that suit the researchers, from essays to organizationsorsocietiesandmaythussuitpeoplesim-
diaries, novels, poems, or anything else that naturally ilartoFranzKafka(DeleuzeandGuattari,1986),Emily
emergesthroughoutthecourseoftheircareers. Itisex- Dickinson (Dickinson and Ward, 1986), or Ferdinand
pected that allowing researchers to choose or develop Cheval, a French postman who spent thirty-three years
theirownformofexpressionmayincreaseintrinsicmo- of his life building Le Palais Ideal on his own (Man-
tivationbecauseofgivingthemgreaterautonomy(Ryan ley and Sloan, 1997). Of course, this does not imply
and Deci, 2000). There are several reasons why di- that disconnected psychologists would not collaborate
verse forms of expression may enhance the diversity of withindividualsfrommanydiversefieldsoutsideofpsy-
thought. Forexample,eachformofwritingcorresponds chology and from their personal life. Finally, because
to a different schema of how information and relation- disconnected psychology would require researchers to
ships among them are organized (Rumelhart, 1980). be highly skeptical when evaluating the arguments re-
A typical psychology article is organized into introduc- gardingpsychologicalmethodappliedtotheirideasand
tion, method, results, and discussion (Madigan et al., theories, theywouldlikelyhaveskepticalphilosophical
1995) and therefore corresponds to a specific way of inclinations concerning empiricism that characterized
mentallyconstruingatopic. Becauseanytheoryisinits DavidHume(2003)orImmanuelKant(1997).
essence a way of organizing information and relation- Intermsofpersonalitytraits,adisconnectedpsychol-
ships among them (Deutsch, 1966), it is possible that ogist may therefore score high on openness to experi-
different forms of writing that allow different ways of ence (McCrae, 1987), psychological reactance (Hong
===== PAGE 6/16 =====
6
and Faedda, 1996), need for cognition (Cacioppo and gain a fundamental understanding of chance and de-
Petty, 1982), personality intrinsic motivation (Amabile velop the ability to approach their ideas regarding psy-
et al., 1994), the propensity to experience awe (Yaden chological phenomena quantitatively. Philosophy, with
et al., 2018), or reflection (Trapnell and Campbell, the emphasis on the philosophy of science, logic, epis-
1999), and low on affiliation group and affiliation ex- temology, and ethics would prepare them to think crit-
clusion concern as fundamental social motives (Neel et icallyaboutknowledge,toevaluateevidenceandargu-
al.,2016). ments, and to consider the ethical dimension of their
Overall, although in this section I describe how I see work. Philosophy classes would ideally incorporate
ahypotheticaldisconnectedpsychologist,itisimportant both Western and non-Western approaches to avoid a
that readers do not think that I intend for this descrip- biased perspective. Engineering, with the special em-
tion to be set in stone. I hope that disconnected psy- phasis on topics linked to electrical engineering (e.g.,
chology and its characteristics will be an ongoing de- mechatronics, engineering and applied physics, elec-
batethatwillaccountformanydifferentviewpointsand trical engineering, quantum computing, robotics, etc.)
individual differences. I next outline my ideas regard- would teach students the preliminary skills to invent
inghowdisconnectedpsychologycouldbeincorporated and build their equipment and devices that could be
intoacademia. usedtostudyhumanbehaviorandcollectdata. Finally,
through computer science, with the emphasis on pro-
IntegratingDisconnectedPsychologywiththe gramming and software engineering, students would
AcademicSystem gaintheknowledgetolaterdeveloptheirownsoftware
for data analysis or to maximize their ability to use al-
In this section, I discuss essential points regarding
readyavailablesoftware.
how disconnected psychology could exist within the
Subjects that would encourage diversity of thinking
current academia. These involve the university train-
and open-mindedness are art, music, history, litera-
ingofdisconnectedpsychologists,howtheywouldpub-
ture, creative writing, anthropology, biology, chemistry,
lishtheirwork,howpsychologydepartmentswouldhire
physics,culturalstudies,etc. Thesearethesubjectsthat
them and what their role in these departments would
students would not need to master beyond the intro-
be, and how funding bodies would make decisions re-
ductory level, and the overall list of the subjects they
gardingthegrantproposalstheysubmit.
would take would depend on the university’s offer and
EducationofaDisconnectedPsychologist theirpreferences. Creativewritingwouldbemandatory
throughout the entire course of undergraduate studies
As is common for most academic subjects (Ilieva et becauseitwouldbeimportantthatstudentsunderstand
al., 2019; Rauhvargers, 2013; Usher et al., 2019), dis- and learn different writing styles so they can adopt or
connected psychology could be studied at an under- developastylethatsuitsthembesttoexpresstheirown
graduate and graduate level, culminating with a doc- disconnectedpsychologyideas.
toral degree that would be required to eventually ap- Finally, students would also have a disconnected psy-
ply for an academic position. When developing the chology class that would be taught by a disconnected
undergraduate and graduate training that will be out- psychologistworkingattheuniversity. Forthefirstgen-
lined below, I considered the following key criteria: eration of disconnected psychology students, it would
a) that the training needs to equip students with the need to be taught by a connected psychologist who
skills that make them highly competitive for jobs out- has a strong training in quantitative and qualitative
side of academia, given that the number of academic methodologyandstatisticsorbyanotherqualifiedindi-
positions is relatively low (Larson et al., 2013); b) that vidual(e.g.,aphilosopherofscienceand/orlogic). This
the training needs to provide students with the skills course would neither be graded nor have formal lec-
to develop their own psychological method; c) that the tures. Itwouldstretchacrossthedurationofundergrad-
training needs to encourage diversity of thinking and uatestudiesanditspurposewouldbetoallowstudents
open-mindedness; and d) that the training should be tostartdevelopingtheirdisconnectedpsychologyideas
compatible with the current university education sys- (i.e.,theideasandtheoriesabouthumanmindandbe-
tem. haviorgroundeduponpsychologicalmethod). Therole
Undergraduate subjects that would be essential for ofthedisconnectedpsychologistwouldbetoconstantly
providing students with the skills to develop their own challenge the students concerning their application of
psychologicalmethodaremathematics,philosophy,and psychological method so they can improve their think-
several computer science and engineering related sub- ing in this regard and develop their own unique ap-
jects. Mathematics,withthespecialemphasisonproba- proach.
bility, calculus, and algebra would ensure that students
===== PAGE 7/16 =====
7
As part of the disconnected psychology course, stu- cases a student would be accepted for a doctorate but
dents would also be encouraged to independently receive a master’s degree if they are unable or unwill-
search for “outsider” thinkers and build their own in- ingtocompletethedoctorate,dependingonthemodel
ventoryofsuchthinkers. Thetermoutsiderthinkerhasa of graduate studies that the university practices (Ilieva
similarmeaningtothetermindependentscientist. These et al., 2019; Rauhvargers, 2013; Usher et al., 2019).
are individuals who are financially independent (e.g., Students would be accepted to the master’s program
due to having a job or another source of wealth) but based on their performance on the disconnected psy-
arenotaffiliatedtoauniversityoranotheracademicin- chology undergraduate program. Other undergradu-
stitution and independently study a topic of interest to ate degrees would also be acceptable if they contain a
them(Segen,1992). Forexample,atthetimewhenAl- strong training regarding courses that are at the core
bert Einstein introduced the special theory of relativity, of disconnected psychology because they provide stu-
in1905,hewasanoutsiderthinkerbecauseheworked dents with the skills to develop their own psychologi-
attheSwissPatentOfficeandindependentlydeveloped cal method as previously discussed (i.e., mathematics,
his ideas without being affiliated to a university (Pais, philosophy,andseveralcomputerscienceandengineer-
1982; Rynasiewicz and Renn, 2006). Some examples ing related subjects). Admission would be based on
of contemporary outsider thinkers are John O. Camp- grades as prescribed by the university and on a per-
bell,whoappliedtheDarwinianevolutionaryparadigm sonal statement outlining the student’s interests and
to the understanding of the universe (Campbell, 2015, disconnected psychology ideas they have developed so
2016),andJulianBarbour,whosemaintopicofinterest far. For a direct admission to the PhD, students would
is the relativity of time (Barbour, 2001). Investigating needtohaveeitheranundergraduateoramaster’sde-
outsiderthinkerswouldbeimportantforstudentstoun- gree in disconnected psychology, given that those who
derstandthatacademicthinkingaboutscienceisnotthe startthePhDshouldalreadybeintheprocessofdevel-
only way and get a broad overview of how science can oping their ideas regarding psychological phenomena
be creatively approached from many different perspec- grounded in psychological method. Admissions would
tives. also be dependent on grades as prescribed by the uni-
Studentswhowouldchoosetowriteanundergradu- versityinquestion,andthestudentwouldneedtosub-
ate dissertation would write it within the disconnected mitacomprehensiveproposaldescribingtheprogressof
psychology course, which means that the focus of the their disconnected psychology thinking so far and how
dissertationwouldbeondevelopingtheirideasregard- they are planning to develop it throughout the course
ing psychological phenomena and proposing a method ofthestudies. Inthisregard,originality,andtheuseof
to support these ideas. The dissertation would not psychological method in defense of their ideas and/or
haveaspecificformatorstructure;studentswouldonly theories about psychological phenomena would be the
be asked not to exceed a pre-determined word count, maincriteriaforevaluatingtheproposals.
whereastheywouldhavethefreedomregardingevery- Students pursuing a master’s degree in disconnected
thingelse. Ideally,thedissertationwouldnotbegraded psychologywouldneedtocompletefourcoreadvanced
because its main purpose would be to encourage stu- courses within the areas of mathematics, philosophy,
dents to start formally developing their ideas in an in- computer science, and engineering that would further
trinsically rewarding way rather than motivating them enhance their skills to develop their own psychologi-
with extrinsic factors such as grades (Lin et al., 2003). cal method. They would also be required to select two
However, if the university would require the disserta- courses aimed at encouraging the diversity of thinking
tion to be graded, the main criteria would be original- fromtheoptionsthatwouldrangefromart,music,his-
ityofideasregardingpsychologicalphenomenaandthe tory, and literature all the way to biology, chemistry,
rigor with which these ideas are supported by a pro- or physics. The exact number of courses they would
posed psychological method. All other subjects would need to take would depend on the usual structure of
begradedinlinewiththeestablishedcriteriaofagiven a master’s degree at the university in question. Fi-
university, and acceptance to undergraduate studies in nally,studentswouldberequiredtotakeadisconnected
disconnected psychology would also be determined by psychology course that would not involve formal lec-
theuniversitycriteria. turesandwouldhelpthemtocontinuedevelopingtheir
The structure of graduate studies would be in accor- ideasgroundedinpsychologicalmethodinconsultation
dancewiththestructurethattheuniversityinquestion with a disconnected psychologist, which would culmi-
endorses. Typically, there would be a master’s degree nate in a dissertation. Similar to the undergraduate
and a doctoral degree. The master’s and doctoral de- course, the dissertation would not have a specific for-
grees would be separate in some cases, and in some mat or structure (apart from the word-count), and the
===== PAGE 8/16 =====
8
aimwouldbetooutlinethedevelopmentoftheirideas lined (Pascarella et al., 2005). Likewise, the postgrad-
so far and propose a psychological method in support uate degree would be compatible with any universities
oftheideas. Thedissertationwouldneedtobegraded, thatteachtherequiredsubjects. Importantly, thetrain-
as required by most universities, and the main criteria ing I suggest indicates that becoming a disconnected
wouldbetheoreticaloriginalityandrigorofthepsycho- psychologist would be highly demanding. It would re-
logicalmethodproposedtoprobethetheory. quire students to be exceptionally self-disciplined and
Studying for a doctorate would require working considerably stretch their intellect. The training there-
on a dissertation in consultation with the supervi- foreaddressesapotentialcriticismofdisconnectedpsy-
sor—another disconnected psychologist. The supervi- chology,accordingtowhichthisdisciplinehasbeende-
sor would not impose any topics or methodological velopedforindividualswhoaretoo“lazy”tostayupto
ideas upon the students. The role of the supervisor datewithcuttingedgedevelopmentsinconnectedpsy-
would be to challenge their methodology and ensure chology and continue reading new articles and books.
thatitprovidesastrongargumentregardingobservabil- Quite to the contrary, although disconnected psycholo-
ity and nonaccidentality, and to challenge the original- gists would not follow connected psychology or stay in
ity of their theories regarding psychological phenom- touchwithitsliterature,theywouldhaveadifficulttask
ena. In consultation with the supervisor, they would ofmasteringvariousskillssotheycandeveloptheirown
also determine which courses to undertake to further psychologicalmethod.
develop their skills to independently develop psycho-
logical method and enhance their creativity and diver- Disconnected Psychologist in a Psychology Depart-
sityofthinking. Adoctoraldissertationwouldagainnot ment
have any formal structure, apart from the word count,
Once a person has completed a PhD in disconnected
and would be a more advanced version of the master’s
psychology,theywouldbecomeeligibletoapplyforthe
dissertationwherestudentswouldneedtopresentthe-
entry level academic positions (e.g., post-doc, assistant
oretical ideas developed so far and propose a method
professor, lecturer) in a psychology department. The
justifying these ideas. They would defend their disser-
main objective of the department would be to hire a
tation in front of a committee of several disconnected
disconnected psychologist who has the highest poten-
psychologists. Because a PhD student would develop
tialofadvancingpsychologicalknowledge,whichisthe
their methodology from scratch, it would be necessary
goal of disconnected psychology (Krpan, 2020). That
that they are examined by other disconnected psychol-
is,theywouldneedtoidentifyacandidatewhosetheo-
ogists who have been trained in skills that are neces-
reticalideasaremost“disconnected”,whichmeansthat
sary to thoroughly evaluate methodology and identify
they are very different from what has so far been done
thepotentialstrengthsandweaknesses.
in connected psychology, and whose proposed method-
Overall, beyond providing students with the knowl-
ologyinsupportoftheseideasisofexceptionalquality.
edge to develop psychological method and encourag-
Thecandidatewouldberequiredtosubmitapieceof
ing their diversity of thought, the undergraduate and
writing that would outline their main theoretical ideas
graduatetrainingIproposewouldequipthemwiththe
andmethodologicalapproachesaswellasdescribehow
skills to be competitive for jobs outside of academia.
their thinking has progressed over time. I suggest that
Forexample,expertiseinsubjectssuchasmathematics,
connectedpsychologistswouldevaluatethedisconnect-
computer science, and engineering is highly demanded
ednessofthecandidate,giventhattheyhavetheknowl-
(e.g., Department for Education, 2015, 2016). In com-
edge of connected psychology necessary to understand
binationwithvarioustransferrableskills(Assiter,2017;
whathassofarbeendoneandhowdifferentthecandi-
Bridges, 1993), such as problem solving, time manage-
date’s work is. The methodological quality would ide-
ment, analytical thinking, or written and verbal com-
ally be evaluated by a panel of disconnected psycholo-
munication, and with the propensity to value diversity
gistsfromthesameorotheruniversities,giventhatthey
(Hunt et al., 2017) that the training would encourage,
wouldhavethenecessaryskillstodothis. However,es-
this expertise would make them valuable to many or-
pecially at the beginning when there are no other dis-
ganizations. Theproposedtrainingwouldalsobecom-
connectedpsychologistsavailable,thiscouldbedoneby
patible with the current university systems in various
other psychologists in the department who have strong
countries(Ilievaetal.,2019;Rauhvargers,2013;Usher
quantitative/qualitativeandphilosophicalskills,andby
et al., 2019). The undergraduate degree would oper-
membersofaphilosophydepartmentwhospecializein
ate in line with many liberal arts programs that offer
thephilosophyofscienceand/orlogic.
courses from a range of disciplines but could also be
Basedonthisevaluationprocess,apoolofmostcom-
taught at any university that offers the subjects I out-
petitive candidates would be selected. I propose that,
===== PAGE 9/16 =====
9
rather than the faculty members then deciding about sequentially make their work more similar. Instead of
the hire, the final decision should be made by “letting constantly comparing their work to the work of con-
the chance decide” (i.e., by randomly drawing a candi- nected psychologists, statistically speaking their high-
date from the pool). This may seem questionable and est probability of developing a unique view of psycho-
unethical,butIarguethatallowingthefacultytomake logicalphenomenathatwouldcontributetopsycholog-
thechoicewouldactuallybeunethical. Itiswellknown icalknowledgewouldbebybeinginfluencedbytheim-
thatluckplaysalargeroleinscientificsuccess,andpre- mense number of life circumstances and continuously
dicting the future success of a young academic would advancing their previous ideas in interaction with their
be very difficult because the number of quality indica- environment(seeKrpan,2020).
tors (e.g., publications, grants, etc.) would be insuf- Adisconnectedpsychologistwouldhaveseveralroles
ficient (Haslam and Koval, 2010; Hegarty and Walton, within the department. First, as I already discussed
2012;Janosovetal.,2020;Liuetal.,2018;Noseketal., in the previous section on education, they would di-
2012; Pluchino et al., 2018; Sinatra et al., 2016). This rect the disconnected psychology course where they
gets even more difficult for an entry-level disconnected would not teach about their ideas but instead super-
psychologistgiventheabsenceofthequalityindicators vise undergraduate and master’s disconnected psychol-
(e.g.,disconnectedpsychologistsdonotpublishinjour- ogy students. They would also serve as supervisors
nals,aswillbeoutlinedinthenextsection). Thechoice of disconnected psychology PhD students. In addition,
that the faculty would make may therefore be highly theywouldteachacourseon“disconnectedpsychology
uncertain and driven by arbitrary heuristics and biases for connected psychologists” (for undergraduate and
(Kahneman et al., 2001). In such a circumstance, it is master’s students) where they would lecture about the
fairertowardthecandidatestoletthechancedecide. It methodological approach at the core of disconnected
would be advisable to bypass the random choice only psychologyandabouttheirownideas. Theywouldalso
when the faculty can make a convincing argument, be- overseethehiringofotherdisconnectedpsychologyfac-
yond any reasonable doubt, that the candidate has al- ultymembers,eitherattheirownuniversityoratother
ready made an exceptional contribution to psycholog- universities. Whereasdisconnectedpsychologistswould
ical knowledge or is highly likely to do so. Hiring of beactivecontributorstotheirdepartments,theywould
more senior academic positions (e.g., associate profes- be discouraged from collaborating with connected psy-
sors,seniorlecturers,professors)wouldnotneedtorely chologists so they can continue developing their own
onchancebecausetheseindividualswouldnotbehired “disconnected”agenda.
based mostly on their potential to advance psycholog-
ical knowledge but based on how much they have ad- PublishingDisconnectedPsychology
vanced it so far. The hiring process I have described
Given that publishing in disconnected psychology
applies to the early stage of disconnected psychology
wouldbedecoupledfromhiringandcareerprogression,
when factors that can predict the success of these psy-
it would have two main purposes: to allow connect-
chologists are still unknown. It is possible that in the
ing the work of disconnected psychologists with con-
future,whenmoredataareavailable,amoresystematic
nected psychology in order to increase psychological
andstatisticallygroundedprocesswillbepossible.
knowledge (see Krpan, 2020), and to communicate re-
One could argue that, if disconnected psychologists
searchers’ideastothepublic. Beyondthesemaingoals,
are hired based on their advancement of psychological
thefollowingconsiderationsdiscussedbyotherthinkers
knowledge (e.g., the degree of disconnectedness), they
(e.g., Anseel et al., 2004; Csiszar et al., 2020; De Rond
wouldinfactstartfollowingconnectedpsychologyand
and Miller, 2005; Green, 2017; Nosek and Bar-Anan,
constantlycomparetheirideasagainsttheworkofcon-
2012; Nosek et al., 2012; Paulus et al., 2015; Tijdink
nected psychologists. However, they should be disin-
etal.,2014;Watson,2019)wouldbeincorporatedinto
centivizedtodososimplybecausethisapproachwould
thepublishingstructure: a)researchersshouldbemore
be more likely to result in their work being more “con-
intrinsicallymotivatedtoworkontheirpublications;for
nected”. For example, as I have discussed in the first
example, by finding fulfillment in their ideas and ad-
section when describing a “typical” disconnected psy-
vancement of psychological knowledge rather than be-
chologist, such practices would make them more likely
ing driven by metrics such as impact factor and jour-
to adopt the writing conventions as well as unwritten
nal reputation; b) researchers should be given greater
rules, values, and assumptions of connected psychol-
autonomy in deciding what to publish; c) frequent
ogy(e.g.,BudgeandKatz,1995; Madiganetal.,1995;
publishing should be disincentivized to avoid knowl-
Maul et al., 2016; Roediger, 2003; Sternberg, 2017;
edge pollution (i.e. a large number of publications of
Teo, 2009) that would shape their thinking and con-
low quality that make incremental or no contribution);
===== PAGE 10/16 =====
10
d) peer review process should be public; and e) peer becausearesearcherwouldneedtoreviewanotherpub-
review process should involve crowdsourcing, which lication for each manuscript they publish, they would
means that other scientists and members of the public likely be disincentivized from publishing too much be-
arecontinuouslyallowedtocommentonthearticleand cause this would lead to doing many reviews, and as a
theresearchermaycontinuouslyimprovetheirideasin resulttheywouldhavelesstimetofocusontheirideas.
interactionwiththem. Although readers could potentially rate the publica-
In line with these objectives, the publishing process tions, and a rating-based quality indicator could there-
would operate as follows. All articles would be pub- forebedeveloped(e.g.,likesorstars),Iwoulddiscour-
lished on one platform, and there would be no individ- agethistypeofqualityindicators. Itiswell-knownthat,
ual journals. Current examples of such platforms are inthecurrentpublishingsystem,manyresearcherscon-
public repositories such as arXiv (Nosek and Bar-Anan, sistentlytrytogamethemetrics,whichcanleadtoques-
2012). Several blockchain-based publishing reposito- tionable research practices and motivate researchers to
ries have also recently been proposed (e.g., Leible et writepublicationswiththeaimtoachieveacertainrat-
al., 2019; Stojmenova Duh et al., 2019). A discon- ing rather than to generate knowledge (e.g., Csiszar
nected psychologist would upload their publication to et al., 2020; Nosek and Bar-Anan, 2012; Nosek et al.,
theplatform,whichwouldcountaspublishing,andthis 2012; Paulus et al., 2015). This should be avoided
is when the ongoing public peer review process would indisconnectedpsychologybecausepublicationsshould
start. Any researchers or members of the public would notbeproducedforratings,buttoadvanceknowledge.
be welcome to comment on the publication, and the Overall, disconnected psychologists would have a
researcher would be invited to address the comments, complete freedom regarding the shape, form, and
and to indicate whether they made any changes in the lengthofthepublication. Theywouldonlyberequired
publicationinrelationtothecomments. to write a 1–2-page summary of the publication, and
However, it would be expected that another discon- to write 5-10 keywords that correspond to psycholog-
nected psychologist would undertake a comprehensive ical phenomena covered in the publication. As pre-
review of the publication to identify and challenge its viously discussed (Krpan, 2020), connected psychol-
most important limitations, to which the author would ogists would be in charge of browsing disconnected
be expected to respond and change the manuscript ac- psychology publications so they can continuously test
cordingly. The publishing platform would have an in- themincombinationwiththeories,methodologies,and
builtmotivationalsystemthatwouldencouragediscon- approaches from connected psychology and determine
nected psychologists to both review others’ work and the ones that best explain psychological phenomena
to avoid publishing excessively. It would be expected of interest, thus advancing knowledge. Abstracts and
that, for one piece of work published, a disconnected keywords would enable currently available algorithms
psychologist would need to review another publication (e.g., Extance, 2018; Tshitoyan et al., 2019) to au-
of similar length. An algorithm would be created that tomatically explore disconnected psychology literature
would give recommendations to the researcher regard- and link it to relevant connected psychology publica-
ing which publication to review. Researchers who do tionscoveringsimilarphenomena.
not review another publication for a certain amount of
time after they have published their own work would DisconnectedPsychologyResearchFunding
earn badges of dishonor which would be visible to ev-
The final important step of integrating disconnected
eryone, and which would indicate to others not to re-
psychology with academia is discussing how research
view any current or future publications they produce.
withinthisdomaincouldbefundedbeyondtheresearch
Also, the algorithm would stop recommending their
allowances that departments or institutions typically
publicationtootherdisconnectedpsychologistsforare-
give to their staff members. Because funding bodies
view.
usuallyhavetheirownobjectives,policies,andfunding
Iexpectthissystemtocreateaneffectivepeer-review
criteria, here I do not propose specific guidelines that
culture because it would target reputation and reci-
everyone could apply, but I simply discuss main issues
procity as important motivators for scientists and hu-
thattheseinstitutionsmaywanttoconsider.
manbeingsmoregenerally(NosekandBar-Anan,2012;
Similar to the hiring decisions I have discussed, the
Nowak and Sigmund, 1998; Roughgarden, 2010), but
main objective of the funding bodies should be to fi-
also because researchers who would not review other’s
nance proposals that have the highest potential of ad-
work would not have a comprehensive in-depth review
vancing psychological knowledge, which is the goal
of their own work and would therefore less easily con-
of disconnected psychology (Krpan, 2020). In other
vince others to take their work seriously. Importantly,
words,theyshouldidentifyproposalsthatoutlinetheo-
===== PAGE 11/16 =====
11
riesdrasticallydifferentfromwhathasbeendonesofar therefore necessitate a radical transformation of psy-
and devise methodology of exceptional quality in sup- chology as a field. The article should therefore not
port of these theories. Whereas a pool of high-quality be seen as proposing a set of rules and practices that
proposalscouldbeselectedineachfundingroundbased “must” characterize disconnected psychology. My main
on reviews by a committee of connected and discon- aimwastopaintdisconnectedpsychologyasaconcrete
nectedpsychologists,Iamskepticalthat“human”deci- practice rather than an “abstract utopia” (see Bloch,
sions about which proposals to eventually fund would 1986; Levitas, 1990) to foster discussions about how it
maximize knowledge production in the long run. Vari- couldbeimplementedandoperate. Theeventualshape
ousresearchhasshownthatreviewersevaluatinggrant and organization of the discipline should eventually be
applications typically have very low agreements (e.g., determinedbycontinuousinteractionsamongmanyin-
Pier et al., 2018). Moreover, research has uncovered dividualswithdiverseviewpointsandbackgroundswho
that larger grants do not necessarily lead to more sig- are interested in advancing psychological knowledge.
nificant discoveries and proposed that targeting diver- Even if in this article I discuss the more practical ver-
sity rather than excellence would likely maximize the sion of disconnected psychology, I want to emphasize
efficiency of funding and advance science to a greater thatmyfavoriteversionwouldbeamostradicalversion
degree (Fortin and Currie, 2013). Finally, Pluchino et imaginable.
al. (2018) used agent-based modelling to show that
the most effective strategy for public funding of re- AuthorContact
search to maximize innovation would be to distribute
DarioKrpan,ORCiD:0000-0002-3420-4672
equal amounts of capital (even if small) across differ-
Department of Psychological and Behavioural Sci-
ent applicants. This is because funding strategies that
ence,LondonSchoolofEconomicsandPoliticalScience,
award few selected individuals based on their previous
LondonWC2A2AE,UK
achievementsincombinationwiththefundingproposal
E-Mail: D.Krpan@lse.ac.uk
typicallyneglecttheroleofrandomnessindetermining
success. Based on these considerations, I suggest that
ConflictofInterestandFunding
fundingshouldbeequallydistributedamongalldiscon-
nected psychology proposals that pass the quality bar The author declares that there is no conflict of in-
in each funding round, or that funding should be ran- terest. The author received no specific funding for this
domlyallocatedtoseveralproposalsthatpassthequal- article.
itybar.
Disconnected psychologists would also, however, be AuthorContributions
highly competitive to fund their research in different
Conceptualization: Dario Krpan. Writing - Original
creative ways. For example, because in the absence of
Draft Preparation: Dario Krpan. Writing - Review and
traditionalacademicconfinestheywouldbemorelikely
Editing: DarioKrpan.
totacklebigquestionsthattroubleallhumanbeings,as
Ihavediscussed,itispossiblethattheirresearchwould OpenSciencePractices
be appealing to the public and therefore more suitable
This article is theoretical and as such received no
forcrowdfunding(Vachelardetal.,2016).
Open Science badges. The entire editorial process, in-
Conclusion cludingtheopenreviews,ispublishedintheonlinesup-
plement.
Overall, in this article I outlined my ideas on how
disconnectedpsychologycouldpracticallyfunctionand References
be incorporated into academia. It is important to em-
Ajzen, I. (1988). Attitudes, personality, and behavior.
phasizethatthisarticledescribesonepossiblevisionof
Dorsey.
disconnected psychology—the one that is aligned with
Amabile, T. M., Hill, K. G., Hennessey, B. A., & Tighe,
thecurrentacademicandeducationalsystem—whereas
E. M. (1994). The work preference inventory:
other more radical visions that would completely over-
Assessing intrinsic and extrinsic motivational
throw the current academic and educational structure
orientations. Journal of Personality and Social
arealsopossible. Idecidedtofocusonthismore“tradi-
Psychology, 66(5), 950–967. https://doi.org/
tional”versionofdisconnectedpsychologybecauseitis
10.1037//0022-3514.66.5.950
likely more “practical” (i.e., easier to implement) than
themoreradicalvariant. However,eventhismoreprac-
tical version would require a massive sea change and
===== PAGE 12/16 =====
12
Anseel, F., Duyck, W., De Baene, W., & Brysbaert, Csiszar, A., Gingras, Y., Power, M., Wouters, P., Griese-
M. (2004). Journal impact factors and self- mer, J. R., Kehm, B. M., & et al. (2020). Gam-
citations: Implications for psychology journals. ingthemetrics:Misconductandmanipulationin
American Psychologist, 59(1), 49–51. https:// academicresearch.MITPress.
doi.org/10.1037/0003-066x.59.1.49 Cutler,I.(2014).CynicismfromDiogenestoDilbert.Mc-
Assiter,A.(2017).Transferableskillsinhighereducation. Farland;Company.
Routledge. De Rond, M., & Miller, A. N. (2005). Publish or per-
Bandura, A. (1986). Social foundations of thought and ish. Journal of Management Inquiry, 14(4),
action:Asocialcognitivetheory.PrenticeHall. 321–329. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 /
Barbour,J.(2001).Theendoftime:Thenextrevolution 1056492605276850
inphysics.OxfordUniversityPress. Deleuze,G.,&Guattari,F.(1986).Kafka:Towardami-
Bartlett,R.(2013).Tolstoy:Arussianlife.ProfileBooks. norliterature.UniversityofMinnesotaPress.
Bar-Yam, Y. (1997). Dynamics of complex systems. Department for Education. (2015). Employment and
Perseus. earnings outcomes of higher education gradu-
Benjamin, D. J., Berger, J. O., Johannesson, M., Nosek, ates: Experimental statistics using the Longitu-
B. A., Wagenmakers, E.-J., Berk, R., Bollen, dinal Education Outcomes (LEO) data: Further
K. A., Brembs, B., Brown, L., Camerer, C., & breakdowns. https://assets.publishing.service.
et al. (2017). Redefine statistical significance. gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/
Nature Human Behaviour, 2(1), 6–10. https:// attachment_data/file/573831/SFR60_2016_
doi.org/10.1038/s41562-017-0189-z LEO_main_text_v1.1.pdf
Bering, J. M. (2006). The folk psychology of souls. Be- Department for Education. (2016). Graduate outcomes
havioral and Brain Sciences, 29(5), 453–462. (LEO): Employment and earnings outcomes of
https://doi.org/10.1017/s0140525x06009101 higher education graduates by subject stud-
Bloch,E.(1986).Theprincipleofhope.MITPress. ied and graduate characteristics in 2016/17.
Boring,E.G.(1953).Ahistoryofintrospection.Psycho- https : / / assets . publishing . service . gov.
logical Bulletin, 50(3), 169–189. https://doi. uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/
org/10.1037/h0090793 attachment_data/file/790223/Main_text.pdf
Bridges, D. (1993). Transferable skills: A philosoph- Deutsch, K. W. (1966). On theories, taxonomies, and
ical perspective. Studies in Higher Education, models as communication codes for organiz-
18(1), 43–51. https://doi.org/10.1080/ ing information. Behavioral Science, 11(1), 1–
03075079312331382448 17.https://doi.org/10.1002/bs.3830110102
Budge, G. S., & Katz, B. (1995). Constructing psy- Dickinson, E., & Ward, T. V. W. (1986). The letters of
chological knowledge. Theory and Psychology, emilydickinson.HarvardUniversityPress.
5(2), 217–231. https://doi.org/10.1177/ Eidelson,R.J.(1997).Complexadaptivesystemsinthe
0959354395052003 behavioral and social sciences. Review of Gen-
Cacioppo,J.T.,&Petty,R.E.(1982).Theneedforcog- eral Psychology, 1(1), 42–71. https://doi.org/
nition.JournalofPersonalityandSocialPsychol- 10.1037/1089-2680.1.1.42
ogy,42(1),116–131.https://doi.org/10.1037/ Emerson,R.W.(1982).Natureandselectedessays.Pen-
0022-3514.42.1.116 guinBooks.
Campbell, J. O. (2015). Darwin does physics. CreateS- Extance, A. (2018). How AI technology can tame the
paceIndependentPublishingPlatform. scientific literature. Nature, 561(7722), 273–
Campbell, J. O. (2016). Universal darwinism as a pro- 274. https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-018-
cess of bayesian inference. Frontiers in Systems 06617-5
Neuroscience, 10. https://doi.org/10.3389/ Fenigstein, A. (2009). Private and public self-
fnsys.2016.00049 consciousness. In M. R. Leary & R. H. Hoyle
Choi, I., Koo, M., & Choi, J. A. (2007). Individual (Eds.), Handbook of individual differences in
differences in analytic versus holistic think- socialbehavior(pp.495–511).GuilfordPress.
ing. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, Fenigstein,A.,Scheier,M.F.,&Buss,A.H.(1975).Pub-
33(5), 691–705. https://doi.org/10.1177/ lic and private self-consciousness: Assessment
0146167206298568 and theory. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Clark, D. A., & Beck, A. T. (1999). Scientific founda- Psychology, 43(4), 522–527. https://doi.org/
tions of cognitive theory and therapy of depres- 10.1037/h0076760
sion.JohnWiley.
===== PAGE 13/16 =====
13
Feynman, R. P. (1998). Cargo cult science. The Art and Hunt,V.,Prince,S.,Dixon-Fyle,S.,&Yee,L.(2017).De-
ScienceofAnalogCircuitDesign,55–61.https:// livering through diversity. McKinsey; Company.
doi.org/10.1016/b978-075067062-3/50008-x https://www.mckinsey.com/~/media/
Fletcher,G.J.O.(1995).Thescientificcredibilityoffolk mckinsey / business % 20functions / people %
psychology.Erlbaum. 20and % 20organizational % 20performance /
Fortin,J.-M.,&Currie,D.J.(2013).Bigsciencevs.little our % 20insights / delivering % 20through %
science:Howscientificimpactscaleswithfund- 20diversity/delivering-through-diversity_full-
ing.PLoSONE,8(6).https://doi.org/10.1371/ report.pdf
journal.pone.0065263 Huxley, A. (1954). The doors of perception and heaven
Frankl, V. E. (1959). Man’s search for meaning. Beacon andhell.Harper;Row.
Press. Ilieva,J.,Killingley,P.,Tsiligiris,V.,&Usher,A.(2019).
Freud, S. (1962). Civilization and its discontents. W.W. The shape of global higher education: Interna-
Norton. tionalcomparisonswitheurope.BritishCouncil.
Gandhi, M. K. (1997). Hind swaraj and other writings. https://www.britishcouncil.org/sites/default/
CambridgeUniversityPress. files/k006_02_the_shape_of_global_higher_
Goldman, A. I. (1993). The psychology of folk psy- education_in_europe_final_v5_web.pdf
chology. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 16(1), Janosov,M.,Battiston,F.,&Sinatra,R.(2020).Success
15–28. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1017 / and luck in creative careers. EPJ Data Science,
s0140525x00028648 9(1). https://doi.org/10.1140/epjds/s13688-
Green, C. D. (2017). Publish and perish: Psychology’s 020-00227-w
most prolific authors are not always the ones Jung,C.(1968).Thearchetypesandthecollectiveuncon-
weremember.TheAmericanJournalofPsychol- scious(2nded.)Bollingen.
ogy, 130(1), 105–119. https://doi.org/10. Kahneman, D., Slovic, P., & Tversky, A. (2001). Judg-
5406/amerjpsyc.130.1.0105 ment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases.
Gutland, C. (2018). Husserlian phenomenology as a CambridgeUniversityPress.
kindofintrospection.FrontiersinPsychology,9. Kant, I. (1997). Prolegomena to any future metaphysics.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2018.00896 CambridgeUniversityPress.
Haslam,N.,&Koval,P.(2010).Predictinglong-termci- Koch,S.(1981).Thenatureandlimitsofpsychological
tation impact of articles in social and person- knowledge: Lessons of a century qua "science."
ality psychology. Psychological Reports, 106(3), American Psychologist, 36(3), 257–269. https:
891–900. https://doi.org/10.2466/pr0.106.3. //doi.org/10.1037/0003-066x.36.3.257
891-900 Krpan, D. (2020). Unburdening the shoulders of gi-
Hegarty, P., & Walton, Z. (2012). The consequences of ants: A quest for disconnected academic psy-
predictingscientificimpactinpsychologyusing chology. Perspectives on Psychological Science,
journal impact factors. Perspectives on Psycho- 15(4), 1042–1053. https://doi.org/10.1177/
logical Science, 7(1), 72–78. https://doi.org/ 1745691620904775
10.1177/1745691611429356 Larson,R.C.,Ghaffarzadegan,N.,&Xue,Y.(2013).Too
Held, L., & Ott, M. (2018). On p-values and bayes fac- many phd graduates or too few academic job
tors.AnnualReviewofStatisticsandItsApplica- openings: The basic reproductive numberr0in
tion,5(1),393–419.https://doi.org/10.1146/ academia.SystemsResearchandBehavioralSci-
annurev-statistics-031017-100307 ence, 31(6), 745–750. https://doi.org/10.
Heller,A.(2015).Renaissanceman.Routledge. 1002/sres.2210
Holbrook, M. B. (1997). Romanticism, introspection, Leible, S., Schlager, S., Schubotz, M., & Gipp, B.
and the roots of experiential consumption: (2019). A review on blockchain technology
Morristheepicurean.ConsumptionMarketsand andblockchainprojectsfosteringopenscience.
Culture, 1(2), 97–163. https://doi.org/10. Frontiers in Blockchain, 2. https://doi.org/10.
1080/10253866.1997.9670295 3389/fbloc.2019.00016
Hong, S.-M., & Faedda, S. (1996). Refinement of Levitas, R. (1990). Educated hope: Ernst Bloch on
the hong psychological reactance scale. Edu- abstract and concrete utopia. Utopian Studies,
cational and Psychological Measurement, 56(1), 1(2), 13–26. https://doi.org/www.jstor.org/
173–182. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / stable/i20718993
0013164496056001014 Lin, Y.-G., McKeachie, W. J., & Kim, Y. C. (2003). Col-
Hume,D.(2003).Atreatiseofhumannature.Dover. lege student intrinsic and/or extrinsic motiva-
===== PAGE 14/16 =====
14
tion and learning. Learning and Individual Dif- ingscientistsforhiring,promotion,andtenure.
ferences, 13(3), 251–258. https://doi.org/10. PLOSBiology,16(3).https://doi.org/10.1371/
1016/s1041-6080(02)00092-4 journal.pbio.2004089
Liu, L., Wang, Y., Sinatra, R., Giles, C. L., Song, C., & Morowitz,H.J.(2018).Themind,thebrainandcomplex
Wang, D. (2018). Hot streaks in artistic, cul- adaptivesystems.Routledge.
tural,andscientificcareers.Nature,559(7714), Neel, R., Kenrick, D. T., White, A. E., & Neuberg, S. L.
396–399. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586- (2016). Individual differences in fundamental
018-0315-8 socialmotives.JournalofPersonalityandSocial
Locke, E. A., & Latham, G. P. (2005). Goal setting Psychology, 110(6), 887–907. https://doi.org/
theory: Theory building by induction. In K. G. 10.1037/pspp0000068
Smith & M. Hitt (Eds.), Great minds in man- Newton,I.(1687).Philosophiænaturalisprincipiamath-
agement: The process of theory development ematica.TheRoyalSociety.
(pp.128–150).OxfordUniversityPress. Nosek, B. A., & Bar-Anan, Y. (2012). Scientific utopia:
Locke,E.A.(2007).Thecaseforinductivetheorybuild- I.openingscientificcommunication.Psycholog-
ing. Journal of Management, 33(6), 867–890. ical Inquiry, 23(3), 217–243. https://doi.org/
https://doi.org/10.1177/0149206307307636 10.1080/1047840x.2012.692215
Loftus, G. R. (1996). Psychology will be a much better Nosek, B. A., Spies, J. R., & Motyl, M. (2012). Sci-
science when we change the way we analyze entific utopia: II. restructuring incentives and
data.CurrentDirectionsinPsychologicalScience, practices to promote truth over publishabil-
5(6),161–171.https://doi.org/10.1111/1467- ity. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 7(6),
8721.ep11512376 615–631. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 /
Madigan,R.,Johnson,S.,&Linton,P.(1995).Thelan- 1745691612459058
guageofpsychology:Apastyleasepistemology. Nowak, M. A., & Sigmund, K. (1998). Evolution of
American Psychologist, 50(6), 428–436. https: indirect reciprocity by image scoring. Nature,
//doi.org/10.1037/0003-066x.50.6.428 393(6685), 573–577. https://doi.org/10.
Maltseva, K., & Lutz, C. (2018). A quantum of self: A 1038/31225
study of self-quantification and self-disclosure. Pais, A. (1982). ‘Subtle is the Lord...‘: The science and
Computers in Human Behavior, 81, 102–114. the life of Albert Einstein. Oxford University
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2017.12.006 Press.
Manley, R., & Sloan, M. (1997). Self-made worlds: Vi- Pascarella, E. T., Wolniak, G. C., Seifer, T. A., Cruce,
sionaryfolkartenvironments.Aperture. T.M.,&Blai,C.F.(2005).Liberalartscolleges
Maslow,A.H.(1965).Eupsychianmanagement.Richard andliberalartseducation:Newevidenceonim-
D.Irwin. pacts.ASHEHigherEducationReport,31(3),1–
Maul, A., Torres Irribarra, D., & Wilson, M. (2016). 148.https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1002/
Onthephilosophicalfoundationsofpsycholog- aehe.3103
ical measurement. Measurement, 79, 311–320. Paulus, F. M., Rademacher, L., Schäfer, T. A., Müller-
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.measurement.2015. Pinzler, L., & Krach, S. (2015). Journal im-
11.001 pact factor shapes scientists’ reward signal in
McCrae, R. R. (1987). Creativity, divergent thinking, theprospectofpublication.PLOSONE,10(11).
and openness to experience. Journal of Person- https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.
ality and Social Psychology, 52(6), 1258–1265. 0142537
https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.52.6. Pier, E. L., Brauer, M., Filut, A., Kaatz, A., Raclaw,
1258 J., Nathan, M. J., Ford, C. E., & Carnes, M.
Moghaddam, F. M. (1989). Specialization and despe- (2018). Low agreement among reviewers eval-
cialization in psychology: Divergent processes uating the same nih grant applications. Pro-
inthethreeworlds.InternationalJournalofPsy- ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
chology,24(1-5),103–116.https://doi.org/10. 115(12), 2952–2957. https://doi.org/10.
1080/00207594.1989.10600036 1073/pnas.1714379115
Moghaddam, F. M. (1997). The specialized society: The Plato.(2007).Therepublic.PenguinClassics.
plight of the individual in an age of individual- Pluchino, A., Biondo, A. E., & Rapisarda, A. (2018).
ism.Praeger. Talent versus luck: The role of randomness in
Moher,D.,Naudet,F.,Cristea,I.A.,Miedema,F.,Ioan- success and failure. Advances in Complex Sys-
nidis, J. P., & Goodman, S. N. (2018). Assess-
===== PAGE 15/16 =====
15
tems, 21(03n04), 1850014. https://doi.org/ Safer, M. A., & Tang, R. (2009). The psychology of
10.1142/s0219525918500145 referencing in psychology journal articles. Per-
Popper, K. R. (1959). The logic of scientific discovery. spectives on Psychological Science, 4(1), 51–53.
Hutchinson. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1745-6924.2009.
Popper, K. R. (1963). Conjectures and refutations: The 01104.x
growthofscientificknowledge.Routledge. Sawyer, R. (2005). Social emergence: Societies as com-
Pronin, E. (2009). The introspection illusion. In M. P. plexsystems.CambridgeUniversityPress.
Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental social Segen, J. C. (1992). The dictionary of modern medicine.
psychology (vol. 41) (pp. 1–67). Academic ParthenonPublishingGroup.
Press. Shrout, P. E., & Rodgers, J. L. (2018). Psychology, sci-
Rahula, W. S. (1974). What the Buddha taught. Grove ence,andknowledgeconstruction:Broadening
Press. perspectives from the replication crisis. Annual
Rand,A.(1963).Forthenewintellectual:Thephilosophy Review of Psychology, 69(1), 487–510. https:
ofAynRand.Penguin. //doi.org/10.1146/annurev-psych-122216-
Rauhvargers, A. (2013). Global university rankings 011845
and their impact: Report ii. brussels. Euro- Sinatra, R., Wang, D., Deville, P., Song, C., & Barabási,
pean University Association. https : / / eua . A.-L. (2016). Quantifying the evolution of in-
eu / downloads / publications / global % dividual scientific impact. Science, 354(6312).
20university%20rankings%20and%20their% https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aaf5239
20impact%20-%20report%20ii.pdf Skinner,B.(1948).Waldentwo.PrenticeHall.
Rich, D. L. (2005). Amelia earhart: A biography. Smith- Stanford, P. K. (2015). Unconceived alternatives and
sonianBooks. conservatism in science: The impact of profes-
Roediger, H. L. (2003). Focus on academia: sionalization,peer-review,andbigscience.Syn-
The complete academic. https : / / www . these, 196(10), 3915–3932. https://doi.org/
psychologicalscience.org/observer/focus-on- 10.1007/s11229-015-0856-4
academia-the-compleat-academic Stanley, S. (2012). Intimate distances: William james’
Rosnow, R. L., & Rosenthal, R. (1989). Statistical pro- introspection,buddhistmindfulness,andexpe-
cedures and the justification of knowledge in rientialinquiry.NewIdeasinPsychology,30(2),
psychological science. American Psychologist, 201–211. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j .
44(10),1276–1284.https://doi.org/10.1037/ newideapsych.2011.10.001
0003-066x.44.10.1276 Sternberg,R.J.(2017).Psychology1011/2:Theunspo-
Roughgarden, T. (2010). Algorithmic game theory. kenrulesforsuccessinacademia.AmericanPsy-
Communications of the ACM, 53(7), 78–86. chologicalAssociation.
https://doi.org/10.1145/1785414.1785439 Stojmenova Duh, E., Duh, A., Droftina, U., Kos, T.,
Rumelhart,D.E.(1980).Schemata:Thebuildingblocks Duh, U., Simoniˇc Korošak, T., & Korošak, D.
ofcognition.InR.J.Spiro,B.C.Bruce,&W.F. (2019). Publish-and-flourish: Using blockchain
Brewer(Eds.),Theoreticalissuesinreadingcom- platform to enable cooperative scholarly com-
prehension(pp.33–58).Erlbaum. munication.Publications,7(2),33.https://doi.
Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (2000). Self-determination org/10.3390/publications7020033
theory and the facilitation of intrinsic motiva- Swan,M.(2012).Sensormania!theinternetofthings,
tion,socialdevelopment,andwell-being.Amer- wearablecomputing,objectivemetrics,andthe
ican Psychologist, 55(1), 68–78. https://doi. quantified self 2.0. Journal of Sensor and Actu-
org/10.1037/0003-066x.55.1.68 atorNetworks,1(3),217–253.https://doi.org/
Rynasiewicz, R., & Renn, J. (2006). The turning point 10.3390/jsan1030217
foreinstein’sannusmirabilis.StudiesinHistory Swan,M.(2013).Thequantifiedself:Fundamentaldis-
andPhilosophyofSciencePartB:StudiesinHis- ruption in big data science and biological dis-
tory and Philosophy of Modern Physics, 37(1), covery.BigData,1(2),85–99.https://doi.org/
5–35. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.shpsb.2005. 10.1089/big.2012.0002
12.002 Teo, T. (2009). Philosophical concerns in critical psy-
Sabine, G. H. (1917). Philosophical and scientific spe- chology. In R. J. Spiro, B. C. Bruce, & W. F.
cialization.ThePhilosophicalReview,26(1),16– Brewer (Eds.), Critical psychology: An introduc-
27. tion(2nded.)(pp.36–54).Sage.
===== PAGE 16/16 =====
16
Tijdink, J. K., Verbeke, R., & Smulders, Y. M. (2014). dings capture latent knowledge from materials
Publication pressure and scientific misconduct science literature. Nature, 571(7763), 95–98.
in medical scientists. Journal of Empirical Re- https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-1335-8
search on Human Research Ethics, 9(5), 64–71. Usher, A., Ilieva, J., Killingley, P., & Tsiligiris, V.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1556264614552421 (2019). The shape of global higher education:
Trafimow, D. (2009). The theory of reasoned action. The americas. British Council. https://www.
Theory and Psychology, 19(4), 501–518. https: britishcouncil.org/sites/default/files/k006_
//doi.org/10.1177/0959354309336319 03_the_shape_of_global_higher_education_
Trafimow,D.(2012).Theroleofauxiliaryassumptions americas_final_web.pdf
forthevalidityofmanipulationsandmeasures. Vachelard, J., Gambarra-Soares, T., Augustini, G., Riul,
Theory and Psychology, 22(4), 486–498. https: P., & Maracaja-Coutinho, V. (2016). A guide to
//doi.org/10.1177/0959354311429996 scientific crowdfunding. PLOS Biology, 14(2).
Trafimow, D. (2014). Considering quantitative and https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.
qualitative issues together. Qualitative Research 1002373
in Psychology, 11(1), 15–24. https://doi.org/ Valentinuzzi, M. E., Ortiz, M. H., Cervantes, D., &
10.1080/14780887.2012.743202 Leder, R. S. (2016). Nikola tesla: Why was he
Trafimow, D. (2021). A taxonomy of major premises so much resisted and forgotten? [retrospectro-
and implications for falsification and verifica- scope]. IEEE Pulse, 7(6), 61–68. https://doi.
tion. International Studies in the Philosophy of org/10.1109/mpul.2016.2606472
Science, 33(4), 211–229. https://doi.org/10. Watson, R. (2019). Predatory journals and the pollu-
1080/02698595.2021.1964845 tionofacademicpublishing.JournalofNursing
Trapnell, P. D., & Campbell, J. D. (1999). Private self- Management,27(2),223–224.https://doi.org/
consciousnessandthefive-factormodelofper- 10.1111/jonm.12739
sonality:Distinguishingruminationfromreflec- Wells, I. B. (2020). Crusade for justice: The autobiogra-
tion. Journal of Personality and Social Psychol- phyofIdaB.Wells.UniversityofChicagoPress.
ogy,76(2),284–304.https://doi.org/10.1037/ Yaden,D.B.,Kaufman,S.B.,Hyde,E.,Chirico,A.,Gag-
0022-3514.76.2.284 gioli,A.,Zhang,J.W.,&Keltner,D.(2018).The
Trope,Y.,&Liberman,N.(2010).Construal-leveltheory developmentoftheaweexperiencescale(awe-
of psychological distance. Psychological Review, s):Amultifactorialmeasureforacomplexemo-
117(2), 440–463. https://doi.org/10.1037/ tion. The Journal of Positive Psychology, 14(4),
a0018963 474–488.https://doi.org/10.1080/17439760.
Tshitoyan,V.,Dagdelen,J.,Weston,L.,Dunn,A.,Rong, 2018.1484940
Z., Kononova, O., Persson, K. A., Ceder, G., Zinsser, J. P. (2007). Emilie du Châtelet: Daring genius
& Jain, A. (2019). Unsupervised word embed- oftheenlightenment.Penguin.