
===== PAGE 1/41 =====
Opendata:NotApplicable
Meta-Psychology,2024,vol8,MP.2021.2757 Openmaterials:Yes Editedby:BrentonWiernik
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2021.2757 OpenCode:Yes Reviewedby:VictoriaSavalei,CaseyGiordano
Articletype:OriginalArticle Openandreproducibleanalysis:Yes Analysisreproducedby:RickardCarlsson
PublishedundertheCC-BY4.0license Openreviewsandeditorialprocess:Yes AllsupplementaryfilescanbeaccessedatOSF:
Preregistration:No https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/9U3ZC
The Devil is Mainly in the Nuisance Parameters: Performance of
Structural Fit Indices Under Misspecified Structural Models in SEM
Moritz Heene1, Michael Maraun2, Nadine Juliana Glushko3, and Sunthud Pornprasertmanit4
1DepartmentofPsychology,Ludwig-Maximilians-UniversitätMünchen,Germany
2DepartmentofPsychology,SimonFraserUniversity,Burnaby,B.C.,Canada
3Independentscholar
4ChulalongkornUniversity,Bangkok,Thailand
To provide researchers with a means of assessing the fit of the structural component
of structural equation models, structural fit indices- modifications of the composite
fit indices, RMSEA, SRMR, and CFI- have recently been developed. We investigated
the performance of four of these structural fit indices- RMSEA-P, RMSEA , SRMR ,
S S
andCFI -,whenpairedwithwidelyacceptedcutoffvalues,intheserviceofdetecting
S
structuralmisspecification. Inparticular,bywayofsimulationstudy,foreachofseven
fitindices-3compositeand4structural-,andthetraditionalchi-squaretestofperfect
compositefit,weestimatedthefollowingrates: a)TypeIerrorrate(i.e.,theprobabil-
ity of (incorrect) rejection of a correctly specified structural component), under each
offourdegreesofmisspecificationinthemeasurementcomponent;andb)Power(i.e.,
theprobabilityof(correct)rejectionofanincorrectlyspecifiedstructuralmodel),under
eachconditionformedofthepairingofoneofthreedegreesofstructuralmisspecifica-
tionwithoneoffourdegreesofmeasurementcomponentmisspecification. Inaddition
tosamplesize,theimpactsoftwomodelfeatures,incidentaltomodelmisspecification-
numberofmanifestvariablesperlatentvariableandmagnitudeoffactorloading-were
investigated. Theresultssuggestedthat,althoughthestructuralfitindicesperformed
relativelybetterthanthecompositefitindices,noneofthegoodness-of-fitindexwith
a fixed cutoff value pairings was capable of delivering an entirely satisfactory Type I
errorrate/Powerbalance,[RMSEA ,.05]failingentirelyinthisregard. Oftheremain-
S
ingpairings;a)RMSEA-PandCFI sufferedfromaseverelyinflatedTypeIerrorrate;
S
b)despitethefactthattheyweredesignedtopickuponstructuralfeaturesofcandi-
datemodels,allpairings-andespecially,RMSEA-PandCFI -manifestedsensitivitiesto
S
modelfeatures,incidentaltostructuralmisspecification;andc)although,inthemain,
behavinginasensiblefashion,SRMR wasonlysensitivetostructuralmisspecification
S
whenitoccurredatarelativelyhighdegree.
Keywords: structuralequationmodeling,modelfit,goodness-of-fit,modelmisfit,fit
indices,cutoffvalues,modeltest,theorytesting
population model T, in a particular population, a can-
didate model C is misspecified vis à vis T if it im-
The remarkable growth in quantitative theory relat-
poses restrictions such that it cannot be the case that
ing to structural equation modeling (SEM) that has
{B,Γ,Φ,Ψ,...} = {Bˆ,Γˆ,Φˆ,Ψˆ,...} . Thus, for example,
occurred during the past four decades, has equipped T C
a model C is misspecified in the event that it restricts
the researcher with tools of unprecedented power with
to zero, a regression parameter linking two latent vari-
which to estimate and test an equally remarkable di-
ables,when,infact,theparameterisnonzerounderT.
versity of candidate models. Because parameter esti-
Traditionally,approachestothedetectionofmisspec-
mates—morebroadly,researchimplications—attaching
ification have relied upon a sample-based estimate of
to a particular candidate model can be taken seri-
the difference between the population covariance ma-
ously, only if the model is a reasonable approximation
trix Σ and the covariance matrix Σ˜(Θ) implied under a
to reality, the detection of—and assessment of degree
particular candidate model, wherein Θ contains model
of—model misspecification has become a topic of in-
parameters;or,inotherwords,onasample-basedquan-
creasing importance. Letting {B,Γ,Φ,Ψ,...} be the
T tificationofthedegreeofmisfit.
numerical values assumed by the parameters of a true
===== PAGE 2/41 =====
2
Evidently,misfitisafunctionofbothmisspecification torloadings(e.g.,BreivikandOlsson,2001;Chenetal.,
error and sampling error. Yuan (2005) classifies misfit- 2008; Fan and Sivo, 2007; Heene et al., 2011, 2012;
based approaches to the detection of misspecification SarisandSatorra,1993;Sarisetal.,2009;Yuan,2005).
into two categories: binary hypothesis tests—notably, It is important to stress that these nuisance parameters
the chi-square test of the hypothesis pair [H : Σ = have nothing to do with the degree of the misspecifi-
0
Σ˜(Θ),H : ΣanyGramianmatrix]—and goodness-of-fit cation as they are entirely unrelated to incorrectly im-
1
indices. Jöreskog’s (1969) early warnings to the ef- posed model restrictions. Their effects on Power are
fect that, as sample size becomes large, even trivial rathercomplexandcanbedifferentfordifferentparam-
degrees of model misspecification will lead to rejec- etersofthemodelastheabove-mentionedliteraturehas
tion of H by the chi-square test, were highly influen- shown and it is therefore essential to investigate their
0
tial, however, and goodness-of-fit indices have become, effectsinthisstudy.
nowadays,thechiefmeansbywhichresearchersadjudi- Evenifnotemployedinconjunctionwithfixedcutoff
catemodelmisspecification. Curiously,perhapsbecause values, there exist serious, and still largely unresolved,
the practical interpretation of such fit indices is rarely difficultiesattendanttotheemploymentofgoodness-of-
straightforward, it has come to be a commonplace for fit indices in the service of adjudicating degree of model
applied researchers to pair fit indices with cutoff val- misspecification. A general problem is that the relation-
ues recommended by methodological experts, Hu and ship between degree of sample-based misfit—i.e., the
Bentler (1999) work on the latter topic being consid- extent of disagreement between Σ and Σˆ(θ)—and can-
erably the most cited. Of course, to pair a goodness- didate model misspecification is exceedingly complex.
of-fit index with a fixed cutoff value—hereafter, called Hayduk(2014)observedthatthereisnonecessitythat
a GFICV pairing or strategy—is to create a de facto bi- acandidatemodelinwhich,forexample,thereisfalsely
naryhypothesistestingprocedure, and, accordingly, an fixedtozero,asingleregressioncoefficientlinkingtwo
inferentialtooloftheverysamesortastheheavilycrit- latent variables1, will yield a Σˆ(θ) which differs appre-
icized chi-square test of the pair [H : Σ = Σ˜(Θ),H : ciablyfromΣ. Tothecontrary,itisentirelypossiblethat
0 1
ΣanyGramianmatrix]. a misspecification possessing of significant theoretical
Notsurprisingly,then,theemploymentofGFICVpair- implications will result in but a small overall difference
ings in the service of adjudicating model misspecifi- between Σ and Σˆ(θ). And because they are functions of
cation has, itself, been heavily criticized. In the first Σ−Σˆ(θ), under such a circumstance, and even in con-
place, it has been pointed out that, although Hu and junction with a respectable sample size, the chi-square
Bentler explicitly conditioned their recommendations test statistic and goodness-of-fit indices, alike, may not
respectingcutoffvaluesonthespecifictypeofconfirma- depart appreciably from zero (equivalently, may fail to
toryfactoranalyticmodelwhichfeaturedintheirwork, signalthepresenceofmisspecification).
researchers seem to have interpreted these values as A second difficulty relates to the issue of the type of
global standards broadly applicable across the domain misspecification with respect to which a goodness-of-
ofSEM.Jacksonetal.(2009),forexample,foundthat, fit index is sensitive. Traditional goodness-of-fit indices
although almost 60% of studies explicitly employed or are composite or broad-band, in the sense that they are
referencedHu’sandBentler’srecommendations,infew functions of Σ − Σˆ(θ), the latter of which captures, in
of these studies was there evidence that “...warnings a nonparticularized fashion, misspecification occurring
about strict adherence to Hu and Bentler’s suggestions ineitherofthemeasurement(i.e.,therelationshipsbe-
werebeingheeded”(p. 18). Inthesecondplace,being tweenlatentvariablesandindicators)orstructural(i.e.,
that a given GFICV pairing is a species of binary infer- therelationshipsamonglatentvariables)componentof
ential decision-making machinery, its decision-making acandidatemodel. Aswhenaresearcherformalizeshis
performancecanbeefficientlycharacterizedintermsof orhertheoryabouttheinterplayoflearnedhelplessness,
the dual concepts of Power (i.e., the probability that it anxiety,andsocialstressindeterminingthetrajectoryof
will yield a (correct) rejection of a misspecified candi- depression,inaspecificationoffixedandfreeregression
date model) and Type I error rate (i.e., the probability parameters linking latent variables, psychological the-
that it will yield an (incorrect) rejection of a (correctly ory is, of course, most immediately instantiated in the
specified model). GFICV pairings have, then, been crit- structural component of a candidate model. Arguably,
icizedongroundsthatthePowertheydeliverturnsout then, it is the detection of structural misspecification
to be a function of not only sample size and extant de-
gree of misspecification, but, also, manifold model fea- 1And which, in consequence, asserts a falsehood which
couldpotentiallyservetoadverselyinfluencethedevelopment
tures,incidentaltomisspecification,amongthese,num-
of psychological theory as related to the causal interplay of
berofindicatorsperlatentvariableandmagnitudeoffac-
constructs.
===== PAGE 3/41 =====
3
that is of paramount importance. If the validity of this misspecification—to those of the traditional composite
line of argumentation is granted, then it must also be indices. A key secondary issue on which we hope to
grantedthatitisofcriticalimportancetotheprogressof shedsomelight,isthesensitivityoftheperformanceof
psychologicalscience,thatresearchershaveavailableto structuralfitindicestothenuisancefactor,misspecifica-
them, goodness-of-fit indices, the sensitivities of which tioninthemeasurementcomponentsofmodels.
aretunedtomisspecificationoccurringwithinthestruc- The organization of the manuscript is as follows:
turalcomponentofthecandidatemodelstheytest. firstly, we present a brief overview of each of the
Unfortunately, traditional composite fit indices turn structural fit indices, RMSEA-P, RMSEA , SRMR , and
S S
out to be notably insensitive to misspecification occur- CFI ;secondly,wedescribethedesignofthesimulation
S
ringwithinthestructuralcomponentofcandidatemod- study; and, finally, we report and discuss the results,
els. In their investigation of the issue, McDonald and emphasizingtheimplicationsforappliedresearch.
Ho(2002)reviewed14SEMstudiesandfoundthatthe
measurement components of candidate models were StructuralFitIndices
better fittingthan their structuralcounterparts, therel-
LettherebeacandidatemodelT featuringmendoge-
atively smaller contribution to global misfit they made,
nouslatentvariableswith pindicators,andnexogenous
serving to mask misspecification on the structural side latentvariableswithqindicators[m+n= K;p+q=S]. In
of the coin. As they concluded, “the fit of the compos-
matrix algebra notation, the model implied covariance
ite model can appear satisfactory when the few con-
matrixisgivenas
straints implied by the path model are not, in fact,
correctly specified” (McDonald and Ho, 2002, p. 75).
In response to the need for such, a number of au- Σ=ΛΩΛ′+Θ,Σ=ΛΩΛ′+Θ,Σ=ΛΩΛ′+Θ,Σ=ΛΩΛ′+Θ,(1)
thors have attempted to create fit indices possessing
wherein: Λ is an S ×K matrix containing the factor
of a narrow-band sensitivity to misspecification in the
loadings of the S indicators on the K latent variables;
structural components of candidate models. The struc-
ΩistheK×K covariancematrixofthelatentvariables;
turalfitindicesthusfardeveloped—RMSEA-P(McDon-
andΘistheS×S covariancematrixoftheerrortermsof
ald & Ho, 2002; Williams & O’Boyle, 2011), RMSEA ,
S
theindicators(cf. Bollen,1989,foradetailedaccount).
SRMR ,andCFI (thelatterthree,courtesyofHancock
S S ThematrixΩ,whichissolelyafunctionofthestructural
andMueller,2011)—aremodificationsofthecomposite
componentofmodelT,isgivenas
fitindices,RMSEA,SRMR,andCFI(hencelowercase‘s’
denotes“structural”).
In what follows, we investigate the performance of (cid:34) Φ ΦΓ′[(I-B)−1]′ (cid:35)
Ω=
RMSEA-P, RMSEA S, SRMR S, and CFI S, in the service (I-B)−1ΓΦ [(I-B)−1](ΓΦΓ′+Ψ)[(I-B)−1]′
of detecting structural misspecification, when paired
(2)
with widely accepted cutoff values. In particular, by InΩ,Φisthen×ncovariancematrixoftheexogenous
way of simulation study, for each of seven fit in- latentvariables; Bisanm×mmatrix,theij-thelement
dices—3 composite and 4 structural—and the tradi-
ofwhichisthestructuralimpact(regressioncoefficient)
tional chi-square test of the pair [H : Σ = Σ˜(Θ),H :
0 1 of the j-th endogenous latent variable on the i-th en-
ΣanyGramianmatrix],weestimatethefollowingrates:
dogenous latent variable on the i-th endogenous latent
a)TypeIerrorrate(i.e.,theprobabilityofincorrectre- variable;Γisanm×nmatrix,theij-thelementofwhich
jectionofacorrectlyspecifiedstructuralmodel), under
is the structural impact (regression coefficient) of the
condition of each of four degrees of misspecification in
j-th exogenous latent variable on the i-th endogenous
the measurement component; b) Power (i.e., the prob- latentvariable;andΨisthem×mcovariancematrixof
ability of correct rejection of an incorrectly specified
disturbances (i.e., the residuals attaching to the struc-
structural model), under each condition formed of the
turalequationsofthelatentendogenousvariables).
pairing of one of three degrees of structural misspecifi-
cationwithoneoffourdegreesofmisspecificationinthe RMSEA-P
measurement component. In addition to sample size, (cid:104) (cid:105) (cid:104) (cid:105)
Let χ2 d =χ2 −df and χ2 d =χ2 −df be
the impacts of two model features incidental to struc- T T T T SS SS SS SS
turalmisspecification—numberofmanifestvariablesper thechi-square teststatistics(noncentralityparameters)
latentvariableandmagnitudeoffactorloadings—arein- for candidate model T and its structurally saturated
vestigated. Wewillbeparticularlyinterestedincompar- counterpart (wherein are free to be estimated, all pos-
ingtheperformancesofthestructuralfitindices—these, sible directional paths linking latent variables), respec-
designedfortheexpresspurposeofdetectingstructural tively;χ2 P =χ2 T−χ2 SS;anddf T,df SS,anddf Pbethethree
associateddegreesoffreedom.
===== PAGE 4/41 =====
4
RMSEA-P (McDonald & Ho, 2002; Williams & magnitudeofthefactorloadingsandnumberofindicators
O’Boyle,2011)is,then,givenas per latent variable (Hancock & Mueller, 2011; Heene
et al., 2011; Saris & Satorra, 1988; Saris et al., 2009;
(cid:115) (cid:115) Savalei, 2012). Because its key ingredient is a quan-
max  dχ f2 P (− Nd −f P 1),0 = max(cid:32)
(df
−d T d−
f
d )S (S N−1),0(cid:33) t bi ufi tca ati co on mo pf ot nh ee nd ti esc lere mp ea nn tcy ofb te ht ew mee on dΩ e˜ lT iman pd lieΩ˜ dSS c, oe va ac rih
-
P T SS
(3) ancematrix,RMSEA canbeunderstoodashavingbeen
S
Evidently, RMSEA-P is interpretable as the amount constructedexplicitlywiththeaimthatitcapturemisfit
of misfit contributed by the structural component of T solelyinthestructuralcomponentofacandidatemodel,
per degree of freedom. Obviously, smaller values of and,accordingly,thatitbefreeoftheeffectsofinciden-
RMSEA-Pcorrespondtobetterstructuralfit. talmodelfeaturessuchasthoserelatedtothemeasure-
ment component (see Hancock and Mueller, 2011, p.
RMSEA S 319).
Let
df =
K(K+1)
−t ,
SRMR
S
model 2 model Let Ωˆ [Ωˆ ] be the ij-th element of Ωˆ [Ωˆ ] and
SSij Tij SS T
wherein t model is the number of free parameters in ωˆ (sat)ij be the ij-th element of Ωˆ sat, the saturated (just-
{Φ,Γ,B,Ψ},undercandidatemodelT;
identified) covariance matrix of the structural model.
SRMR , recognizable as a structurally oriented special-
S
(cid:16) (cid:17) izationofthestandardizedrootmeansquaredresidual,
F˜ =ln|Ω˜ |+tr Ω˜ Ω˜−1 −ln|Ω˜ |−K,
model T SS T SS isthendefinedas
wherein Ω˜ [Ω˜ ] is the K ×K covariance matrix of the
T SS
latent variables implied by T (i.e., T’s structurally sat-
(cid:118)(cid:117)(cid:116)
 2
du era nt te lyd ,Fc ˜o mu odn et le qr up aa nrt t] i; fiea sn td heT˜ dm io sd ce rl e= pan(n cy− b1 e) tF w˜ m eo ed nel.
T
E anvi d- SRMR S = K(K2 +1)(cid:88)
i
z iωˆ (cid:112)SS ωˆi Tj i− iωˆωˆ TT jjij (5)
its structurally saturated counterpart, and T˜ is a
model
The index is bound below by zero, with smaller val-
pseudo test statistic. RMSEA (Hancock and Mueller,
S
uesindicativeofbetterstructuralfit.
2011)is,then,givenas
CFI
(cid:115) (cid:115) S
(cid:32) (cid:33) (cid:32) (cid:33)
T˜ −df F˜ −1
max model model,0 = max model ,0 Let
df (N−1) df (N−1)
model model (cid:16) (cid:17)
(4) F˜ null =ln|Ωˆ null|+tr Ωˆ SSΩˆ− nu1 ll −ln|Ωˆ SS|−K,
It is clear, by inspection, that smaller values of
RMSEA S correspondtobetterstructuralfit. wherein Ωˆ null is the K ×K covariance matrix of the la-
Hancock and Mueller (2011) warn against the em- tent variables implied by T’s structurally null counter-
ployment of T˜ as a test statistic in formal binary part (wherein are fixed to zero, all possible directional
model
hypothesistestingcontexts,andemphasize,instead,its pathslinkinglatentvariables);T˜ null =(N−1)F˜ null;and
roleasacomponentofdescriptivestructuralfitindices.
K(K+1) K(K−1)
That being said, the employment of T˜ −df as df = −K = .
model model null 2 2
an estimator of noncentrality does carry with it a tacit
presumption that T˜ is at least approximately dis- CFI S, a structural variant of the CFI composite fit in-
model
dex which quantifies the proportional improvement in
tributedasanoncentralchi-squarevariate. Itisnotyet
structural fit achieved by the candidate model relative
knownwhetherthisisareasonablepresumption. Anes-
toitsstructurallynullcounterpart,isthendefinedas
sential difference between RMSEA-P and RMSEA can
S
beexpressedasfollows. RMSEA-Pisachi-square-based
(cid:104) (cid:105)
indexwhichcapturesthedifferenceincompositemodel max (T˜ −df ),0
model model
fitbetweencandidatemodelT anditsstructurallysatu- CFI S =1− (cid:104) (cid:105)
ratedcounterpart. Beingthatitissimplythedifference max (T˜ model−df model),(T˜ null−df null),0
betweenchi-squarestatisticsderivingfromtwodistinct max(cid:104) (n−1)F˜ −df ,0(cid:105)
model model
estimated model implied covariance matrices, it is—in =1−
(cid:104) (cid:105)
theory, if not in actuality—dependent upon model fea- max (n−1)F˜ −df ,(n−1)F˜ −df ,0
model model null null
tures, incidental to structural misspecification, such as (6)
===== PAGE 5/41 =====
5
CFI isboundedabovebyunity,withlargevaluesin- theory instantiated in a true population model, our ap-
S
dicativeofbetterstructuralfit. proachwastoselectlargestandardizedregressioncoef-
ficients.
DesignoftheSimulationStudy Peterson and Brown (2005) reported that approxi-
mately 97% of published standardized regression coef-
TruePopulationModels
ficients lie within the interval [-.5,.5] units (M = .06,
To arrive at true population models of the sort en- SD = .21). Accordingly, we selected an arbitrary set of
countered in social research, we relied upon both a eight standardized regression coefficients lying within
Google Images search of the phrase, “structural equa- the interval [.30,.57]. The lower and upper bound of
tionmodel”,andourcombinedmodelingexperience. In thisintervalcorrespondstothe87thand99thpercentile,
particular, we determined, a) both the number of latent respectively,ofarandomvariablefollowingatruncated
variables and number of indicators per latent variable, normal distribution X ∼ N (.06,.21,−.82,.82). The
trunc
b)thecomplexityofthestructuralcomponent(i.e.,the rationale for selecting regression coefficients from this
numberofpathwayslinkinglatentvariables)rathertyp- percentileintervalwastodefinenontrivial(i.e.,strong)
ical of published social research in which SEM is em- misspecifications in terms of the difference between
ployed. AreviewercommentedthattheGoogleImages population regression weights and their counterparts
search we undertook is likely to be inadequate to the of the misspecified models being incorrectly set to zero
task of identifying the sorts of structural models com- andtoassessthepoweroffitindexcutoffvaluesunder
monly arising within the social sciences. In response, suchnontrivialmisspecifications.
we ran a Google Scholar search using the phrase “dou- Correlations among the three exogenous latent vari-
ble mediation model” because a double latent media- ables were set to ρ = .30, ρ = .50, and ρ = .40,
η1η2 η1η3 η2η3
tionmodel(asdescribedinthenextparagraph)wasthe and,accordingly,werecomparabletothosereportedin
model that appeared most often in our Google Images HuandBentler(1999).
websearch. TheGoogleScholarsearchyielded585hits Figure1depictsthestructuralcomponentofthetrue
per June 05, 2022, showing that a double latent medi- populationmodelsemployedinthesimulationstudy.
ation model is indeed commonly applied in the social
sciences. On the other hand, we stress the point that MeasurementComponent.
our chosen model structure should not be regarded as
Misspecification in the measurement component of
prototypical of psychological research in the sense that
a candidate model, the magnitudes of the factor load-
it represents a core model of applied SEM enabling us
ings of the true population model (cf. Browne et al.,
to extrapolate our results to various other model struc-
2002; Hancock and Mueller, 2011; Heene et al., 2011;
tures. Hence, the actual reason that wechose this kind
Schonemann, 1981), and the number of indicators per
of model structure was to investigate how structural fit
latent variable (Breivik & Olsson, 2001; Heene et al.,
indicesandtheircutoffvaluesperformunderthosecir-
2011;Kenny&McCoach,2003),aremodelfeatures,in-
cumstanceswhereintheyencounteracommonly,hence,
cidentaltostructuralmisspecification,whichhavebeen
typicallyhighly-parametrizedmodel.
shown to have an impact upon the performance of fit
indices. Factor loading sizes were based on the re-
StructuralComponent.
sults concerning typical factor loadings of psychologi-
Althoughconfirmatoryfactoranalyticmodelsarethe cal questionnaires Peterson (2000) and cognitive per-
typicalfocusinSEMsimulationstudies,complexSEMs, formance tests (Carroll, 1993, pp. 592–593). To allow
possessing of structural components, are the norm in foranassessmentoftheirrelativeimpactsontheperfor-
appliedresearch. Thestructuralcomponenthereincre- mance,asdetectorsofstructuralmisspecification,ofthe
ated as typical of those arising in applied research, fit indices, herein, under investigation, variants of the
was a double latent mediation model with six latent true population model were created. In particular, the
variables (3 exogenous, 3 endogenous) linked by eight double mediation structural core was paired with each
pathways.2 Standardized regression coefficients were ofthemeasurementcomponentsyieldedbycrossingthe
selected with the guidance of the study by Peterson followingfactors:
and Brown (2005), in which is presented the distribu-
tion of 1,504 standardized regression weights appear- 2Thoughtheirtreatmentisbothbeyondthescopeof, and
ing in published articles in social and behavioral jour- irrelevant to the concerns of, the present research, we ac-
nals. Because misspecification relating to even a single knowledge the deeper scientific difficulties attendant to the
employmentofmediationmodelsinsocialresearch(see,e.g.,
path in the structural component of a candidate model
Griceetal.,2015;Kline,2015;Tate,2015).
mayconstituteasignificantsubstantiveviolationofthe
===== PAGE 6/41 =====
6
Figure1
Structuralcomponentoftruepopulationmodels.
ζ
4
η .50
1
ζ
6
η .25
.30 4
.57
.31
.50 η
6
η
2 .30
.31 .47
.40
η
5
.55
η
3
ζ
5
• Numberofindicatorsperlatentvariable: 5or10 MeasurementComponent.
# 5
• Magnitude of factor loadings: small (randomly Each of the four candidate structural components
sampled from the [.4,.6] interval) or large (ran- was paired with a measurement component wherein
domlysampledfromthe[.6,.8]interval) allmeasurementerrorcorrelationswererestrictedtobe
zero. Accordingly,measurementmodelmisspecification
• Magnitude of measurement error correlations: was induced under all instances in which a candidate
zero (no correlated measurement errors), small model happened to be paired with a true population
(randomly sampled from the [-.1,.1] interval), modelwhereinwerepresentnon-zeromeasurementer-
medium (randomly sampled from the [-.2,.2] in- ror correlations. More specifically, the latter three lev-
terval), or large (randomly sampled from the [- els of the magnitude of measurement error correlations
.3,.3]interval). factor—i.e.,small,medium,andlarge—canbetakenas
correspondingtothree(ascending)degreesofmeasure-
All told, then, data was simulated under each of six-
mentmodelmisspecification.3
teentruepopulationmodels.
NotationalConvention
CandidateModels
Each of the sixty-four distinct pairings of
StructuralComponent.
candidate model with true population model
Candidatemodelswerebasedononeoffourdistinct is uniquely representable in terms of an S-
structural components, each representing a particular M notational scheme (employed as a label-
degree of structural misspecification. In particular, ei- ing device in the results section), wherein
ther zero [no structural misspecification], one, two, or
3Measurement component misspecification was opera-
three of the eight nonzero structural pathways of the
tionalizedintermsofmeasurementerrorcorrelationsforthe
truepopulationmodelswere,ineachcandidatemodel,
reasonthatthelatterrepresentacommonphenomenoninthe
settozero. Figures2to4depictthethreemisspecified
socialsciences. Coleetal.(2007)foundthat26.6%to31.9%
structuralcomponents. of articles published in five prominent APA journals involved
theestimationofmeasurementerrorcorrelations.
===== PAGE 7/41 =====
7
Misspecification 1
Figure2
Structuralcomponentofcandidatemodelscontainingonemisspecification
ζ
4
η
1
ζ
6
η
4
η
η 6
2
η
5
η
3
ζ
5
Misspecification 2
# 2
Figure3
Structuralcomponentofcandidatemodelscontainingtwomisspecifications
ζ
4
η
1
ζ
6
η
4
η
η 6
2
η
5
η
3
ζ
5
# 3
===== PAGE 8/41 =====
8
Misspecification 3
Figure4
Structuralcomponentofcandidatemodelscontainingthreemisspecification
ζ
4
η
1
ζ
6
η
4
η
η 6
2
η
5
η
3
ζ
5
S = degreeofstructuralcomponentmisspecification the decision that the structural component of a candi-
(0 [no structural component misspecifications], 1 [1 date model was correctly specified. The nominal Type
# 4
omitted nonzero pathway], 2 [2 omitted nonzero I error rate of the chi-square test of the hypothesis pair
pathways], 3 [3 omitted nonzero pathways]) and [H : Σ = Σ˜(Θ),H : ΣanyGramianmatrix] was set to
0 1
M = degreeofmeasurementcomponentmisspecification .05.
(0 [no measurement component misspecification], 1
[omission of measurement error correlations, when, in GeneralDetails
the true population model, they are of small magni-
Typically, Power is a function of sample size. In
tude], 2 [omission of measurement error correlations,
the service of elucidating the relation between sam-
when, in the true population model, they are of
ple size and the Power to detect structural misspeci-
medium magnitude], 3 [omission of measurement
fication yielded by each of the seven GFICV pairings,
error correlations, when, in the true population model,
and the chi-square test, three different levels of sample
they are of large magnitude]). Thus, the notation
size (N = 150,250,and1000) were selected. The two
0-1 indicates the pairing of a candidate model with a
smaller sample size conditions, especially the one with
true population model, wherein there is no structural
N = 250, reflect rather typical sample size conditions
misspecification, but a mild degree of measurement
in applied SEM (MacCallum & Austin, 2000; Shah &
componentmisspecification;2-3,apairingunderwhich
Goldstein, 2006; Westland, 2010). These typical sam-
there is both structural misspecification (the candidate
ple sizes may be too small to yield sufficient Power,
model omits 2 nonzero pathways) and the greatest
which is why we also chose the sample size condition
degreeofmeasurementcomponentmisspecification.
of 1000 to ensure greater Power. Candidate models
werefitbymaximumlikelihood,underconditionofthe
Cutoffvalues
multivariate normality of the indicators.4 For each of
For each of the composite fit indices (and its struc-
tural counterpart(s)), cutoff values were as suggested 4Though normally distributed data can seldom be found
inthesocialsciences(Micceri,1989),intheserviceofmain-
by Hu and Bentler (1999) or Hancock and Mueller
tainingcomparabilitywithothersimulationstudiesdevotedto
(2011) and Williams and O’Boyle (2011), respectively.
theinvestigationoftheperformanceofGFICVpairings,maxi-
Accordingly,eachofRMSEA(RMSEA-P,RMSEA )<.05,
S mumlikelihoodestimationundermultivariatenormalitywas
SRMR (SRMR ) < .08, and CFI (CFI ) > .95, returned
S S
===== PAGE 9/41 =====
9
the4[degreeofstructuralcomponentmisspecification] with the chi-square test, in each subsection, are ad-
× 4 [degree of measurement component misspecifica- dressed first—can be found in the Appendix. In the
tion] × 2 [number of indicators per latent variable] × shadedmain-panelsofTable3,foreachGFICVpairing,
2 [magnitude of factor loadings] × 3 [sample size] = and under each of the two conditions of no misspeci-
192 conditions, 1000 simulated samples were gener- fication in the measurement component, and misspec-
ated. Equivalentlyand,perhaps,moretransparently: a) ification in the measurement component, we offer the
16 populations were defined under the crossing of the readersynopticrecapitulationsoftheresultsdiscussed,
factorsnumberofindicatorsperlatentvariable,magni- herein.
tudeoffactorloadings,andmagnitudeofmeasurement
error correlations; b) for each population, there was a Candidate models absent misspecification in the
fixed set of parameter values of each of the structural measurementcomponent
and measurement variety; c) the structural parameter
Chi-squaretest: TypeIerrorrateandPower.
values were constant over population; d) the measure-
mentparametervalueswereuniquetoeachpopulation; Table 4 contains the results for the chi-square test
e) under each population—i.e., on the basis of a single pairedwithanominalTypeIerrorrateof.05.
fixed set of values—and for each of the sample sizes With respect to Type I error rate, key findings were
n={150,250,1000},1000simulateddatasetsweregen- as follows: i) irrespective of condition, the true Type
erated. The simulation was programmed in R (R Core I error rate exceeded the nominal counterpart; and ii)
Team, 2015) using the package simsem, version .5-11 thedegreeofinflationinTypeIerrorratewasadecreas-
(Pornprasertmanit et al., 2015). The simulation code ing[increasing]functionofN[numberofindicatorsper
canbedownloadedfromhttps://osf.io/4by5m/. latent variable]. The explanation for the first of these
In simulation designs wherein certain of the condi- relations– which, at various points in our discussion of
tions correspond to the circumstance of factor load- theresults,wewillhaveoccasiontoinvoke–,residesin
ings of a small magnitude and/or small sample size, the fact that, for small sample sizes, the distribution of
improper solutions must be expected (Driel, 1978). thechi-squareteststatisticdepartsappreciablyfromits
Herein, simulated samples yielding of improper solu- theoretical (null) sampling distribution5 (see Bentler &
tions were replaced by fresh simulated samples, until Yuan,1999,forasimilarconclusion).
the number of proper solutions was equal to the pre- The second relation is consonant with the results of
specified1000(seeCurranetal.,2002forasimilarap- Moshagen (2012), who demonstrated that, under the
proach). Under each of the 192 conditions, for each stateof H true,thedepartureofthedistributionofthe
0
of the 7 GFICV pairings, and the chi-square test, we chi-square test statistic from its theoretical counterpart
present—overthe1000simulations—boththeTypeIer- is exacerbated by increments to the order of the input
rorrate(forthecaseofnomisspecificationinthestruc- covariance matrix (see Yuan, 2005; Yuan et al., 2017
tural component) or Power (for the case of misspec- forapproachestotheameliorationoftheeffect).
ification in the structural component), and the mean With respect to Power, key findings were as follows:
andstandarddeviationofthequantity(fitindexorchi- i) as one would expect, holding constant all other fac-
square test statistic) in question. For purposes of expo- tors,Powerwasanincreasingfunctionofdegreeofstruc-
sition, a Type I rate of .05 [Power of .8] was viewed as tural misspecification; ii) Power ranged over the inter-
constitutingacceptableperformance. val[.216, 1], andreachedacceptablelevels(> .80)un-
der64%oftheconditions;iii)Powerwasanincreasing
Results functionofbothnumberofindicatorsperlatentvariable
(cf. SarisandSatorra,1988,whomakethesameobser-
With the aim of improving stringency and clarity, re-
vation)andmagnitudeoffactorloadings(see,also,Han-
sults are displayed separately for conditions wherein
cock and Mueller, 2011; Heene et al., 2011; Schone-
the candidate model does, and does not, feature mis-
mann, 1981 for a theoretical explanation of the effect,
specification in the measurement component. Specif-
ically, conditions featuring a pairing of candidate and
employed(e.g.,Browneetal.,2002;Curranetal.,2002;Hu
true model of type S-0 (i.e., in which there is present, &Bentler,1999;Marshetal.,1988).
nomisspecificationinthemeasurementcomponent)are 5In particular, whereas, in the case of a variate X dis-
presented first. Though we discuss, in the body of the tributedascentralχ2,µ =df and
X
text, results relating to the composite fit indices, for (cid:112) (cid:112)
σ = 2·df = 2·µ ,
only the chi-square test and GFICV pairings involving X X
structural fit indices, do we present the corresponding
forthemean,standarddeviationpairingsdisplayedinTable4,
tables. Tables for composite fit indices—which, along σˆ ≪ (cid:112) 2·µˆ .
X X
===== PAGE 10/41 =====
10
see Heene et al., 2011; Schonemann, 1981); iv) al- misspecification combined with large magnitude of fac-
thoughPowerstandardlyincreasedwithN,whendegree tor loadings. When degree of structural misspecification
ofstructuralmisspecificationwaseithersmallormoder- wasatitshighestlevel,and,inconsequence,Powerwas
ate, and under condition of five indicators per latent nonzero, Power was a decreasing [increasing] function
variable,Poweryieldedby N =250waslowerthanthat ofN [numberofindicatorsperlatentvariable,magnitude
yielded by N = 150. This counterintuitive effect can be of factor loadings]. The simulated population value of
explained, once again, with reference to the fact of the SRMR,underconditionofgreatestdegreeofmisspecifi-
poorcorrespondence,atsmallN,betweentheempirical cation,loadingsofsmallmagnitude,andfiveindicators
andtheoreticalsamplingdistributionsofthechi-square per latent variable, was .031, a value considerably be-
test statistic; in particular, to the findings of Curran et neath the .08 cutoff level. The fact that, as is evident
al. (2002), who demonstrated that, under condition of fromAppendix2,themeanofthesamplingdistribution
smallN,themeanofthechi-squareteststatisticexceeds ofSRMRtendstodecreasewithincreasing N (see,also,
that of the corresponding non-central χ2 distribution. Marsh, Hau, and Wen, 2004), implies that the problem
As is evident from the 3-0 column of Table 4, the ef- cannotberemediatedbyrecoursetotheusualtacticof
fect is mitigated under increasing degree of structural increasingsamplesize.
misspecification; v) when degree of structural misspeci-
CFI>.95: TypeIerrorrateandPower.
fication was either small or moderate, under condition
ofsmallmagnitudeoffactorloadingsandfiveindicators
Results for CFI paired with a cutoff value of .95 are
perlatentvariable,Powerwasuncharacteristicallylow.
presented in Appendix 3. With respect to Type I er-
ror rate, key findings were as follows: i) in contradis-
RMSEA<.05: TypeIerrorrateandPower.
tinction to the results for the GFICV pairings involving
For [RMSEA < .05], results are presented in Ap- SRMRandRMSEA,theTypeIerrorrateyieldedbyCFI
pendix1. Ascanbeseen,therein,underallconditions, variedwidely–from0to.999–overconditions; ii)was
the Type I error rate and Power were identically zero. adecreasingfunctionof N;andiii)for N <1000,wasa
This state of affairs is consonant with the {mean, stan- decreasing [increasing] function of magnitude of factor
dard deviation} pairings which accompany these rates, loadings[numberofindicatorsperlatentvariable].
within which the mean is always less than .05, and the With respect to Power, the key findings were: i)
standard deviation, small. Based on these results, it Powerreachedacceptablelevels(>.80)underonly22%
canbeconcludedthat,althoughtheresearcheremploy- of conditions; ii) for N < 1000, and holding constant
ing this particular GFICV pairing will never risk falsely all other factors, Power was an increasing function of
rejecting a structurally correct candidate model, they, degreeofstructuralmisspecification;iii)Powerwasade-
on the other hand, will never correctly reject a false creasing function of N, with rates essentially zero un-
candidate model. Even in the extreme case wherein der condition that N = 10007; iv) Power was a decreas-
the candidate model is most severely misspecified (i.e., ing[stronglyincreasing]functionofmagnitudeoffactor
whereintherearethreeomittedpathways),thepopula- loadings8 [numberofindicatorsperlatentvariable].
tion factor loadings are of small magnitude, and there
are five indicators per latent variable, the population 6We used a finite population of 1,000,000 subjects to ap-
valueofRMSEAisonly(approximately).0226. Thisre- proximatethepopulationRMSEA,SRMR,andCFI.TheRsyn-
taxcanbedownloadedfromhttps://osf.io/wurt6/.
sult once again highlights the aforementioned distinc-
7Forthiseffect,theexplanationisanalogoustothatintro-
tion between model misspecification and model misfit,
ducedinthecaseofthechi-squareteststatistic;namelythat,
inasmuchasthat,itdemonstratesthataseriouslymis-
under condition of small N, the mean of the chi-square test
specified candidate model may yet yield a model im-
statisticonwhichCFIisbased,exceedsthatofthecorrespond-
pliedcovariancematrixthatisclosetothetruepopula- ing(theoretical)non-centralχ2distribution(seeCurranetal.,
tioncounterpart. 2002).Infact,undersmallNandgreatestdegreeofstructural
misspecification,evenwhentheloadingsareofsmallmagni-
SRMR<.08: TypeIerrorrateandPower.
tude,andthereisonlyfiveindicatorsperlatentvariable,the
simulated population mean of CFI (.956) still exceeded the
For SRMR paired with the usual cutoff value of .08,
.95cutoffvalue.
valuesfortheTypeIerrorrateandPowerarepresented
8Theexplanationfortheeffectresidinginthefactthat,all
in Appendix 2. Under all conditions, the Type I er-
thingsbeingequal,themagnitudeofthecovariancebetweena
ror rate was equal to zero. Acceptable Power (> .80)
pairofindicatorsisanincreasingfunctionofthemagnitudeof
–Powergreaterthanzero,moreover–wasachievedonly
thefactorloadingsofeach. Accordingly,eveninthepresence
under condition of highest level of degree of structural of structural misspecification, loadings of smaller magnitude
willyieldarelativelysmallseparationbetweenthemodelim-
===== PAGE 11/41 =====
11
RMSEA-P<.05: TypeIerrorrateandPower. the true (population) model possessing of factor load-
ings of small magnitude10; indicating, of course, that
ResultsfortheRMSEA-ParedisplayedinTable5.
the distribution of RMSEA is sensitive to model fea-
The Type I error rate: i) ranged over the interval [0, S
tures,incidentaltothestructuralcomponent.
.213] and, overall, was mildly inflated under 58% of
conditions; and ii) was a decreasing function of N (at SRMR <.08: TypeIerrorrateandPower.
S
N = 1000, brought to levels beneath .05). Power: i)
AsisevidentfromTable7,theresultsbearingonthe
reached acceptable levels (> .80) under 90% of condi-
GFICVpairingofSRMR andcutoffvalueof.08arerel-
tions; ii) was an increasing function of degree of struc- S
ativelystraightforward.
tural misspecification; and iii) in cases in which degree
Underallconditions,theTypeIerrorratewasessen-
ofstructuralmisspecificationwaseithersmallormoder-
tially zero. Power, on the other hand, was near zero
ate,wasstronglyincreasinginbothmagnitudeoffactor
underallconditions,exceptingthatofhighestdegreeof
loadingsandnumberofindicatorsperlatentvariable.
misspecification, under which, irrespective of the levels
RMSEA <.05: TypeIerrorrateandPower. ofotherfactors,wasessentiallyunity.
S
Table6presentstheresultsforthepairingofRMSEA S CFI S >.95: TypeIerrorrateandPower.
andacutoffvalueof.05.
Table8presentsresultsfortheGFICVpairingofCFI
As can be seen, over all conditions, as the case may S
andacutoffvalueof.95.
be,theTypeIerrorratewasegregiouslyhighandPower,
The Type I error rate: i) exceeded .05 under 58% of
essentially,unity. Inlightofthesurprisinglylargemeans
conditions,butwas,inthemain,broughttoacceptable
and standard deviations appearing throughout Table 6,
levelsatN =1000;ii)wasadecreasingfunctionofeach
both findings call for an explanation in terms of a poor
of N and number of indicators per latent variable, and
correspondence between the theoretical and empirical
wasstronglydecreasinginmagnitudeoffactorloadings.
distribution of RMSEA ; in particular, that both the
S
Power: i) ranged between .775 and unity and, ac-
mean and standard deviation of the empirical distribu-
cordingly, under all conditions, reached an acceptable
tionsexceedthoseoftheirtheoreticalcounterparts(see
level; ii) was an increasing function of degree of struc-
Curran et al., 2002; Yuan, 2005; see Appendix 4 for
tural misspecification, reaching unity when encounter-
atechnicalelucidationofthephenomenon). Forexam-
ing structural misspecification of the highest degree;
ple,thesimulatedpopulationRMSEA ,undercondition
S
and iii) when degree of structural misspecification was
of five indicators per latent variable, loadings of small
either small or moderate, was a decreasing function of
magnitude,andone(three)misspecifications,turnsout
magnitudeoffactorloadings,andonlyweaklyrelatedto
to be .278 (.459), which lies beneath each and every
N andnumberofindicatorsperlatentvariable.
oneofthemeansofTable6. Thestandarddeviationof
thetheoreticalcounterpart,underconditionofmisspec-
Candidatemodelscontainingmisspecificationinthe
ification,isgivenby
measurementcomponent
(cid:16) (cid:17) In what follows, we present results for candidate
Var χ2
SD(RMSEA S)= (cid:112) models containing misspecification in both the struc-
[df(N−1)]2 tural and measurement components; i.e., when con-
(7)
(cid:112) fronted by pairings of types S-1, S-2, and S-3. As will
2(df +2λ)
= (cid:112) , berecalled,measurementmisspecificationwasinduced
[df(N−1)]2 bypairingacandidatemodelabsentofmeasurementer-
rorcorrelations,withatruepopulationmodelinwhich
with λ denoting the noncentrality parameter of a non-
werepresentmeasurementerrorcorrelations,thelatter
central chi-square distribution and degrees of freedom
ofamagnitudeeithersmall,medium,orlarge.
df.
Underconditionoffiveindicatorsperlatentvariable, plied covariance matrices of each of a candidate model and
loadings of small magnitude, N = 250, and one (three) null model (under which the manifest variables are uncorre-
misspecifications, (7) yields a standard deviation equal lated)(seeHeeneetal.,2011).
to .011 (.021)9, a value which is, indeed, considerably 9Theassociatedsyntaxfilescanbefoundonhttps://osf.io/
muchsmallerthanthat–.162(.124)–whichappearsin k3n4x/andhttps://osf.io/8wa24/.
Table 6. This inflation of mean and standard deviation 10An R syntax illustrating this phenomenon can be down-
canbeshowntobeexacerbatedbythecircumstanceof loadedfromhttps://osf.io/pmfu8/andhttps://osf.io/hzxjs/
===== PAGE 12/41 =====
12
Chi-squaretest: TypeIerrorrateandPower. specificationinthestructuralcomponent,withtheformer
appearing to be the more decisive determiner; and iii)
As is patent in Table 9, under condition of misspeci-
waslargelyinsensitiveto N.
fication in the measurement component, the results for
the chi-square test paired with a nominal Type I error CFI>.95: TypeIerrorrateandPower.
rateof.05areparticularlysimple,inthat,forallcondi-
ThesituationrespectingthepairingofCFIandacut-
tions under which it was defined—i.e., 0-M, M = 1, 2,
offvalueof.95—presentedinAppendix7—is,initssim-
3—, the true Type I error rate was equal to unity, and,
plicity, similar to that of the pairing of the chi-square
forallconditionsunderwhichitwasdefined—S-M,S=
test. Specifically, over all conditions under which it
1,2,3—,powerwasequaltounity.
was defined, the Type I error rate was near, or equal
RMSEA<.05: TypeIerrorrateandPower. to, unity; and under all conditions under which it was
defined,Powerwasequaltounity.
ForRMSEApairedwiththeusualcutoffvalueof.05,
results are presented in Appendix 5. As can be seen, RMSEA-P<.05: TypeIerrorrateandPower.
therein,underconditionofmisspecificationinthemea-
Inlightoftheircomplexity,theresultsfor[RMSEA-P,
surement component, the Type I error rate yielded by
.05]aredepictedinbothTable10andFigure5.
this pairing: i) ranged from .006 to unity, was egre-
With respect to Type I error rate, key findings were
giously high under 94.4% of conditions, and, in fact,
as follows: i) it ranged within the interval [.002, .746]
was equal to unity under 83.3% of conditions; ii) was
and, under 86% of conditions, exceeded the .05 level;
an increasing function of each of degree of misspecifica-
ii) it was an increasing function of degree of misspecifi-
tion in the measurement component and number of in-
cation in the measurement component, this fact indica-
dicators per latent variable; and iii) was in the ballpark
tive of the sensitivity of [RMSEA-P, .05] to model fea-
of reasonable only under condition of lowest degree of
tures, incidental to structural misspecification; iii) it
misspecification in the measurement component, number
ofindicatorsperlatentvariableequalto5,andN =1000. manifested complex, conditional dependencies on N,
magnitude of factor loadings, and number of indicators
The Power yielded: i) exceeded the .8 threshold of ac-
per latent variable. With respect to Power, key findings
ceptabilityunder88%ofconditions,withtheonlyprob-
wereasfollows: i)under79%ofconditions,itreached
lematically low values occurring under S-1 conditions
acceptable (> .80) levels; ii) as with the Type I error
(i.e., those wherein misspecification in the measurement
rate, it was, under many combinations of factor lev-
component was of lowest degree); and ii) under con-
els, an increasing function of degree of misspecification
dition that number of indicators per latent variable was
in the measurement component, implying, once again,
equalto5,wasadecreasingfunctionof N.
the pairing’s sensitivity to model features incidental to
SRMR<.08: TypeIerrorrateandPower. structuralmisspecification;iii)whendegreeofstructural
misspecification was at its highest level, an acceptable
For the pair [SRMR, .08], values for the Type I er-
level of Power was achieved, irrespective of degree of
ror rate and Power are presented in Appendix 6. Evi-
misspecification in the measurement component (i.e., for
dently, under condition of misspecification in the mea-
all of pairings 3-1 to 3-3); iv) irrespective of degree of
surement component, the Type I error rate yielded by
misspecification in the measurement component, Power
this pairing: i) was either zero (72% of conditions) or
didnotreachacceptablelevelswhenmagnitudeoffactor
essentially unity (28%); ii) was a strongly increasing
loadingswassmall;v)whenN ≤250anddegreeofstruc-
functionofeachofdegreeofmisspecificationinthemea-
turalmisspecificationwaseithersmallormoderate(i.e.,
surementcomponentandnumberofindicatorsperlatent
for pairings 1-1 to 2-3), Power was a complex function
variable; iii) was a decreasing function of magnitude of
ofmagnitudeoffactorloadingsandnumberofindicators
factor loadings and N; and iv) approached unity under
perlatentvariable;vi)underconditionoffiveindicators
condition of small factor loadings and at least moder-
per latent variable and factor loadings of small magni-
atedegreeofmisspecificationinthemeasurementcompo-
tude,thePoweryieldedforpairings1-1to2-2wasoften
nent. Power yielded by this pairing: i) reached the .8
egregiouslylow.
threshold of acceptability under 47% of conditions, of
these,thevastmajorityofthe3-Mtype(3-Mconditions RandomForestAnalysis.
whereinpowerwasinadequate,thoseforwhichnumber
With the aim of coming to a finer-grained under-
of indicators per latent variable was equal to 5); ii) in
standing of the dependency of Power on S-M pairing,
general, was an increasing function of both degree of
misspecificationinthemeasurementcomponentandmis-
===== PAGE 13/41 =====
13
Figure5
RejectionRatesforMisspecifiedMeasurementandStructuralModelsfortheRMSEA-P
Loading size: Large Loading size: Small
55555555 1111111100000000 55555555 1111111100000000
Number of items Number of items
150 250 1000 150 250 1000 150 250 1000 150 250 1000
1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
Sample size
rewoP
Misspecification
0−0
0−1
0−2
0−3
1−0
1−1
1−2
1−3
2−0
2−1
2−2
2−3
3−0
3−1
3−2
3−3
magnitudeoffactorloading,numberofindicatorsperla- sensitive to the degree of misspecification in the mea-
tent variable, and N, a random forest analysis was car- surementcomponent. WithrespecttoPower,inlightof
ried out using the “caret” package (Wing et al., 2018). the Type I error rates observed, it was no surprise that,
Notice that this analysis was carried out only for the under all conditions, it exceeded the .8 threshold, and,
RMSEA-PandfurtherbelowfortheCFIsbecausePower infact,diverged,onlymarginally,fromunity.
rates of the other GFICVs varied so little that such
SRMR <.08: TypeIerrorrateandPower.
an analysis would have been uninformative. Because S
the simulation results being analyzed here were al-
InTable12arepresentedresultsfor[SRMR ,.08].
S
ready based on resampled data, cross-validations were
In regards the Type I error rate: i) As was the case
not employed. Scaled conditional variable importance
under condition of no misspecification in the measure-
(VIMP) measures—ranging between 0 and 100—were
mentcomponent,itwaslessthan.05—and,infact,near
calculated using the permutation accuracy importance
zero—under virtually all conditions (the exception be-
mode (e.g., Strobl et al., 2008)11. The random forest ing those cases in which N = 150, magnitude of fac-
regression explained 64.5% of the variance in Power.
tor loadings was small, and there were five indicators
ScaledVIMPmeasuresarereportedinTable1.
per latent variable, wherein it was still modest); and
As one would hope, degree of structural misspecifica-
ii) under condition wherein it was nonzero (i.e., those
tionhadthegreatestimpactuponPoweryieldedbythe conditions in which N = 150, magnitude of factor load-
GFICVpairingofRMSEA-Pand.05. Magnitudeofload-
ingswassmall,andtherewerefiveindicatorsperlatent
ings turned out to be a stronger predictor than number
variable), it was sensitive to the degree of misspecifica-
of indicators per latent variable, and N had negligible
tion in the measurement component. Respecting Power:
impact. i) it reached acceptable (> .80) levels only when de-
RMSEA S <.05: TypeIerrorrateandPower. 11It should be stressed that a VIMP for a particular predic-
tor captures all effects—direct impact and interactions of all
ResultsfortheGFICVpairingofRMSEA andacutoff
S
orders—involving the predictor. Accordingly, though a VIMP
valueof.05arepresentedinTable11.
captures the overall predictive efficacy of a given predictor,
Key findings for the Type I error rate are as follows:
it implies nothing about the partitioning of this efficacy into
i) under all conditions, it vastly exceeded the .05 level,
directandinteractioneffects.
approaching unity under 78% of conditions; ii) it was
===== PAGE 14/41 =====
14
greeofstructuralmisspecificationwasatitshighestlevel Table2
(whereinitwasuniformlynearunity).
Scaled VariableImportance Measures ofthe RandomFor-
CFI S <.95: TypeIerrorrateandPower. estAnalysisfortheRMSEA-P<.05
VariableImportance
ResultsforGFICVpairing[CFI ,.95]aredisplayedin
S
Misspecificationcondition 100.00
Table13.
Loadingsize 45.42
Respecting the Type I error rate: i) it ranged over
Number of items per latent 30.41
the entire interval [0, 1], exceeding the .05 rate un-
variable
der81%ofconditions,and,inmanyinstances,doingso
egregiously; ii) it was an increasing function of degree Samplesize 0.00
of misspecification in the measurement component; iii) it
wasstronglydecreasinginmagnitudeoffactorloadings;
iv)exceptingtheconditionwhereindegreeofmisspecifi-
cation in the measurement component was at its highest
level,was,inthemain,adecreasingfunctionof N;and fication in candidate models. Four pairings featured a
v) was satisfactory at N = 1000, save for the condition classicalcompositefitindexdesignedwiththeaimthat
itpicksuponanytypeofmisspecification,beitlocated
underwhichthemagnitudeoffactorloadingswassmall.
in the structural component or measurement compo-
AsforPower: i)under87%ofconditions,itreachedac-
ceptable (> .80) levels, in many instances, approaching nent, and four, a structural fit index invented expressly
with the aim that its sensitivity be focused exclusively
unity;ii)itmanifestedcomplexdependenciesondegree
onstructuralmisspecification.
ofmisspecificationinmeasurementcomponent;iii)itwas,
More particularly, for each pairing, the Type I error
under a number of factor combinations, a decreasing
functionofN;andiv)whendegreeofstructuralmisspec- rate(underconditionofnomisspecificationinthestruc-
tural component of the candidate model) and Power
ification was either small or moderate, was a decreas-
(under condition of each of three degrees of struc-
ing[increasing]functionofmagnitudeoffactorloadings
turalmisspecification)wasempiricallyestimatedunder
[numberofindicatorsperlatentvariable].
arangeofconditionsformedbycrossing: a)threelevels
RandomForestAnalysis. ofsamplesize; andb)thetwo,two,andthreelevelsof
three model features, incidental to structural misspec-
Arandomforestanalysisundertakentoassessthede-
ification, namely, magnitude of population factor load-
pendency of Power on the condition-defining factors,
ings,numberofindicatorsperlatentvariable,anddegree
explained 88.95% of the variance. Scaled VIMP mea-
ofmisspecificationinthemeasurementcomponent ofthe
suresarereportedinTable2.
candidatemodel.
Table1 Being as they are binary inferential decision-making
instruments,theperformanceofeachGFICVpairingcan
Scaled VariableImportance Measuresof the RandomFor- be captured with reference to the distributions of Type
estAnalysisfortheCFIs>.95 I error rates and values of Power, in conjunction with
VariableImportance the usual optimality criteria. Generally speaking, the
Misspecificationcondition 100.00 performance of a binary decision-making instrument is
deemed acceptable if: a) there is a means by which it
Loadingsize 65.84
can be set to an acceptably low value, the Type I error
Number of items per latent 9.06
rate; b) [conditional on satisfaction of a)] the Power it
variable
yieldsisanincreasingfunctionofdeparturefromH (in
Samplesize 0.00 0
this case, the degree of structural misspecification inher-
enttoacandidatemodel),andcanbemadeacceptably
As with RMSEA-P, the degree of structural misspecifi-
highbyrecoursetoselectionofsamplesize.
cation was the best predictor, followed by magnitude of
WithrespecttotheGFICVpairingswhich,herein,are
factorloadings, and(withaconsiderablylowerimpact)
the focus, a third, but related, desideratum is that its
number of indicators per latent variable. Sample size,
performance should not be sensitive to features of can-
onceagain,hadanegligibleimpact.
didatemodels,incidentaltostructuralmisspecification.
To this requirement, we add two qualifications: a) in
Discussion
light of the fact that the sole purpose for having added
In this study, we investigated the performance of themtothenot-insubstantialcomplementoffitindices,
eight GFICV pairings in detecting structural misspeci-
===== PAGE 15/41 =====
15
was to equip the researcher with a means of shedding intendedpurpose,itsuffersfromthedefectofrejecting
light on the quality of the structural claims made by many structurally correct models, merely because they
models,it’sespeciallyimportantthatthosepairingsfea- happentocontainmisspecificationinthemeasurement
turing structural indices be insensitive to misspecifica- component.
tions in the measurement component; b) it is more
RMSEA ,.05.
problematic for a pairing to be sensitive to factors, in- S
cidentaltostructuralmisspecification,and,additionally,
Because it yields a Type I error rate and Power es-
notundercontroloftheresearcher,thanincidental,and
sentially equal to unity under all conditions for which
under control of the researcher. Thus, for example, we
each is defined, it is not possible to achieve an accept-
would view to be a greater strike against a pairing, its
able Type I error rate/Power balance with this pairing.
sensitivitytooneorbothofthemagnitudeoffactorload-
Employment of [RMSEA , .05] is logically equivalent
S
ings or misspecification in the measurement component,
torejectingthestructuralcomponentofeachandevery
thanitssensitivitytothenumberofindicatorsperlatent
candidatemodel. Thatistosay,itwillrejectbothevery
variable (the researcher able to antecedently select a
structurally correct candidate model, and every struc-
valueofthefactor,numberofindicatorsperlatentvari-
turallymisspecifiedmodel.
able, which will ensure an optimal performance from
thepairing). SRMR ,.08.
S
Alltold,theseconsiderationssuggestthat,withinthe
With this pairing, the aim of creating a tool of de-
present context, the issue of performance can be seen
tection that is largely insensitive to misspecification in
as reducing to the issue of whether an acceptable Type
the measurement component is realized. The single
I error rate/Power balance—conventionally, the former
draw-back is that it will signal misspecification in the
in the vicinity of .05 and the latter in excess of, say,
structural component, only when this misspecification
.80—can be achieved through the antecedent selection
isrelativelypronounced. Alltold,awell-behaveddetec-
of levels of factors which are under control of the re-
torofstructuralmisspecification,aslongasthelatteris
searcher. Given that Power is coded to a specific de-
presentatarelativelyhighdegree.
gree of structural misspecification, underthose circum-
stanceswhereinanacceptablebalancecanbeachieved, CFI ,.95.
S
it will be essential to note the corresponding degree
of structural misspecification for which this holds. In Thispairingmanifestedasensitivitytobothdegreeof
what remains, we will endeavour to provide a global misspecificationinthemeasurementcomponentandinci-
assessment of the performance of each of the individ- dentalandnon-controllablefactor—magnitudeoffactor
ualGFICVpairings. Weaddressthosepairingsfeaturing loadings. Generally speaking, it matches the high Type
a structural fit index, and composite fit index, respec- Ierrorrateof[RMSEA-P,.05],whiledeliveringslightly
tively,inturn,attheendofeachsection,offerageneral better Power over all degrees of misspecification in the
recapitulation, highlighting general themes inherent to structuralcomponent.
the performances of the pairings within each set. Fi-
Generalrecapitulation.
nally, we address the issue of whether the former per-
formbetterthanthelatter,and,accordingly,succeedin All told, none of the GFICV pairings was capa-
making a useful contribution to the fit assessment re- ble of delivering an entirely satisfactory Type I error
sourcesavailabletothescientist. Foreasyreference,for rate/Power balance, [RMSEA , .05] failing entirely in
S
each pairing, the global assessments we formulate are this regard. Of the remaining pairings: a) [RMSEA-
echoedintheunshadedsectionsofTable3. P, .05] and [CFI , .95] suffered from a severely in-
S
flated Type I error rate; b) despite the fact that they
GFICVPairingsFeaturingaStructuralFitIndex
were designed with the aim that their sensitivity be fo-
RMSEA-P,.05. cused on structural features of candidate models, all
pairings—and especially, [RMSEA-P, .05] and [CFI ,
S
This pairing was sensitive to misspecification in the .95]—were, in fact, sensitive to model features, inci-
measurementcomponentand,undersuchmisspecifica- dentaltostructuralmisspecification;c)[RMSEA-P,.05]
tion,manifestedcomplexandconditionaldependencies and[CFI ,.95]weresensitivetomisspecificationinthe
S
on both the controllable factors, sample size and num- measurementcomponent;andd)aswouldbeexpected
ber of indicators per latent variable, and noncontrol- from an instrument which delivers a Type I error rate
lable factor, magnitude of factor loadings. Though, in
broadstroke,itbehavesinamannerconsonantwithits
===== PAGE 16/41 =====
16
closetozero,[SRMR ,.08]wasonlysensitivetostruc- CFI ,.95.
S S
tural misspecification when it occurred at a relatively
The sensitivity of this pairing is tuned almost exclu-
highdegree.
sively towards the detection of misspecification in the
measurementcomponent. Itwillreliablyrejectonlyifit
GFICVPairingsFeaturingaCompositeFitIndex
ispresent,misspecificationinthemeasurementcompo-
Chi-square,.05. nent and, on theother hand, will rejecta largepropor-
tion of structurally correct models that happen to fea-
This pairing was sensitive to the incidental, but con-
turemisspecificationinthemeasurementcomponent.
trollable,factor,numberofindicatorsperlatentvariable.
Although,underconditionofnomisspecificationinthe
Generalrecapitulation.
measurement component, it has decent power (and an
inflatedTypeIerrorrate),itssensitivityistunedinfavor Alltold,savefor[SRMR,.08],thebehaviorofwhich,
ofthedetectionofmeasurementcomponentmisspecifi- as a detector of structural misspecification, was disad-
cation, in that it will falsely reject any structurally cor- vantageously complex, the sensitivity of these pairings
rect model that happens to feature misspecification in wastunedemphaticallytowardsdetectionofmisspecifi-
themeasurementcomponent. cationinthemeasurementcomponent. Inparticular: a)
[RMSEA, .05], on the one hand, under condition of no
RMSEA ,.05.
S misspecification in the measurement component, was
wholly absent sensitivity to structural misspecification,
The sensitivity of this pair is tuned exclusively to-
and,ontheother,underconditionofmisspecificationin
wardsthedetectionofmisspecificationinthemeasure-
themeasurementcomponent,rejectedthevastmajority
ment component. Only when a model contains mis-
of structurally correct models; b) though possessing of
specification in the measurement component is Power
non-zero sensitivity to structural misspecification, irre-
nonzero(and,inthosecases,isalwaysnearunity). On
spective of the presence or absence of misspecification
the other hand, it rejects virtually all structurally cor-
inthemeasurementcomponent,thechi-squaretestand
rect models that happen to feature misspecification in
[CFI ,.95]canbeexpectedtorejectaveryhighpropor-
themeasurementcomponent. S
tionofstructurallycorrectmodels.
SRMR ,.08.
S
AretheStructuralIndicesSuperiortotheComposite
Thesensitivityofthispairingissomewhatlesshighly
Indices?
tuned to misspecification in the measurement compo-
nent than in the case of other composite indices. It As we have seen, composite fit indices are not well
is, however, possessing of a complex, highly condi- suited to the task of detecting structural misspecifica-
tional, relationship to the degree of misspecification tion, eitherbecausetheyareabsentsensitivitytostruc-
in the structural component, and the Power it deliv- turalmisspecification—[RMSEA,.05]—orbecausethey
ersisdependentupontheinteractionoftheincidental, will reject structurally correct models that happen to
non-controllable, factors, magnitude of factor loadings feature misspecification in the measurement compo-
and presence/absence of misspecification in the mea- nent; [Chi-square, .05] and [CFI S, .95]12. Though it is
surement component. Even in the presence of mis- closer to what is needed, the overall complexity of the
specificationinthemeasurementcomponent,areason- behaviour of [SRMR S, .08] renders it, yet, an undesir-
able Type I error rate/Power balance can almost be ableoption,whentheaimisthedetectionofstructural
assured, through appropriate selection of factor lev- misspecification.
els—specifically, the combination of N = 1000 and at Consequently, the question is not really whether the
least 10 indicators per latent variable—for high degree structuralfitindicesaresuperiortothecompositefitin-
of misspecification in the structural component. We dices,butwhetheranyofthenewstructuralindicesper-
should note that Maydeu-Olivares (2017) showed that form well enough as detectors of structural misspecifi-
theSRMRisapositivelybiasedestimatoranddeveloped cation,towarranttheiremploymentinappliedresearch
anasymptoticallyunbiasedestimatoroftheSRMR.Our
12Ifcorrect,McDonaldandHo(2002)observationthatthe
rather pessimistic overall results concerning Type I and
measurement components of the models fit by social scien-
Power rates of the biased, yet still widely used SRMR
tists, tend to be better fitting than their structural counter-
couldbeimprovedinfuturesimulationstudiesbyusing
parts, counts, here, as an exacerbating factor with respect to
itsasymptoticallyunbiasedcounterpart.
theexpectedperformancesofthesecompositefitindex-based
pairings.
===== PAGE 17/41 =====
17
contexts. Unfortunately,theanswer,here,also,issome-
what equivocal. The pairing [RMSEA , .05] is of no
S
use; despite its billing as a structural fit index, each of
[RMSEA , .05] and [CFI , .95] retains a band sensitiv-
S S
ity still too broad, each sensitive to misspecification in
the measurement component; and although behaving
in a manner consonant with its intended employment,
[SRMR , .08] will pick up on structural misspecifica-
S
tion,onlywhenitoccursatarelativelyhighdegree.
Limitations
Toprotectagainstthemakingofovergeneralizations
basedontheresultsofourstudy,wemustkeepinmind
that our results are tied to a specific model architec-
ture and to specific numerical sets of model parame-
ters. It is thus likely that rejection rates are different
for different models, and different numerical values of
modelparameterswillyielddistinctresults. Particularly,
our choice of standardized regression coefficients from
thedistributionofcoefficientscomingfromarticlesthat
used multiple linear regression models may also sub-
stantially deviate from the actual distribution of such
coefficients from structural equation models. Further
simulation studies could take on the herculean task to
extractanduselatentregressioncoefficientvaluesfrom
the literature for their simulations to yield simulation
designsthatareevenclosertorealityinthatregardthan
ours. Furthermore,wedidnotinvestigatetheimpactof
deviationsofthedatafromamultivariatenormaldistri-
bution. As most data in psychology are categorical, re-
sults might differ when a different estimator is used. It
shouldneverthelessbesaidthatapplyingthecommonly
suggestedfitindexcutoffvaluestocategoricaldatatend
to not discover data-model misfit (Xia & Yang, 2018).
Hence,theresultspresentedherearefairlyoptimistic.
===== PAGE 18/41 =====
18 Table3
SummaryofPerformanceofeachofEightGFICVPairings
GFICVPairing TypeIErrorRate Power
Chi-square,.05 Nomisspec. inmeas. comp. Nomisspec. inmeas. comp.
-Inflated[.078,.999],especiallyunderlarge[in- - Ranged over [.216,1], and acceptable (> .80)
cidental, controllable] number of indicators per under64%ofconditions
latentvariable - Though an increasing function of degree of
-Controllablebyincreasing N structuralmisspecification,notsoof N
-Increasingfunctionofboth[incidental,control-
lable] number of indicators per latent variable
and [incidental, non-controllable] magnitude of
factorloadings
Misspec. inmeas. comp.
-Uniformlyunity
Misspec. inmeas. comp.
-Uniformlyunity
GlobalAssessment:
No misspec. in meas. comp.: An acceptable Type I error rate/Power balance can be achieved for all degrees of
structuralmisspecification,byensuringthatboth N andnumberofindicatorsperlatentvariablearelarge.
Misspec. in meas. comp.: Model will always be rejected, even if containing no misspecification in structural
component.
Overall: Although,underconditionofnomisspecificationinthemeasurementcomponent,hasdecentpower(and
an inflated Type I error rate), its sensitivity is tuned in favor of the detection of measurement component misspec-
ification, in that it will falsely reject any structurally correct model that happens to feature misspecification in the
measurementcomponent.
RMSEA,.05 Nomisspec. inmeas. comp. Nomisspec. inmeas. comp.
-Uniformlynearzero -Uniformlynearzero
Misspec. inmeas. comp.
-Acceptable(>.80)under86%ofconditions
Misspec. inmeas. comp.
- Ranged over [.006,1]; equal to unity under
83.3%ofconditions
Continuedonnextpage
===== PAGE 19/41 =====
19
Table3–Continuedfrompreviouspage
GFICVPairing TypeIErrorRate Power
GlobalAssessment:
No misspec. in meas. comp.: It will neither falsely reject a structurally correct candidate model, nor reject a
structurallymisspecifiedmodel.
Misspec. inmeas. comp.: Modelwillmostalwaysberejected,evenifcontainingnomisspecificationinstructural
component.
Overall: Sensitivity tuned exclusively towards the detection of misspecification in the measurement component.
Only when a model contains misspecification in the measurement component is Power nonzero (and, then, is
always near unity). On the other hand, rejects virtually all structurally correct models that happens to feature
misspecificationinthemeasurementcomponent.
SRMR,.08 Nomisspec. inmeas. comp. Nomisspec. inmeas. comp.
-Uniformlynearzero - Acceptable (> .80) only when degree of struc-
tural misspecification at highest level and large
[incidental, non-controllable] magnitude of fac-
torloadings(nearzero,otherwise)
- When degree of structural misspecification at
highest level: decreasing function of N; increas-
ing function of both [incidental, controllable] #
of indicators per latent variable and [incidental,
non-controllable]magnitudeoffactorloadings
Misspec. inmeas. comp. Misspec. inmeas. comp.
-Large[approachingunity]under31%[28%]of -Acceptable(>.80)under47%ofconditions(of
conditions these, the vast majority of 3-M type and S-2 and
-Increasingfunctionofbothdegreeofmisspecifi- S-3 types in conjunction with small [incidental,
cationinmeasurementcomponentand[inciden- non-controllable]magnitudeoffactorloadings)
tal, controllable] # of indicators per latent vari- - In general, an increasing function of each de-
able gree of misspecification in measurement compo-
- Decreasing function of both N and [incidental, nent and degree of misspecification in structural
non-controllable]magnitudeoffactorloadings component;adecreasingfunctionof[incidental,
non-controllable]magnitudeoffactorloadings
-Largelyinsensitiveto N
Continuedonnextpage
===== PAGE 20/41 =====
20 Table3–Continuedfrompreviouspage
GFICVPairing TypeIErrorRate Power
GlobalAssessment:
No misspec. in meas. comp.: Acceptable Type I error rate/Power balance achievable only for highest degree
of structural misspecification and under condition that [incidental, non-controllable] magnitude of factor loadings
happenstoassumealargevalue.
Misspec. inmeas. comp.: UnfavorableTypeIerrorrate/Powerbalance.
Overall: Sensitivity somewhat less highly tuned to misspecification in the measurement component than in the
caseofothercompositeindices. However,possessingofacomplex,highlyconditionalrelationshiptothedegreeof
misspecification in structural component; the Power it delivers, dependent upon the interaction of the [incidental,
non-controllable] factors, magnitude of factor loadings and presence/absence of misspecification in the measure-
ment component. Even in the presence of misspecification in the measurement component, a reasonable Type I
error rate/Power balance can almost be assured, through appropriate selection of factor levels, for high degree of
misspecificationinthestructuralcomponent.
CFI,.95 Nomisspec. inmeas. comp. Nomisspec. inmeas. comp.
-Variedwidely[0,.999]overconditions - Acceptable (> .80) only when degree of struc-
- For N < 1000, a decreasing [increasing] func- tural misspecification at highest level and large
tion of [incidental, non-controllable] magnitude [incidental, non-controllable] magnitude of fac-
of factor loadings [[incidental,controllable] num- torloadings(nearzero,otherwise)
berofindicatorsperlatentvariable] - When degree of structural misspecification at
-ControllablebyincreasingN highest level: decreasing function of N; increas-
ing function of both [incidental, controllable] #
of indicators per latent variable and [incidental,
non-controllable]magnitudeoffactorloadings
Misspec. inmeas. comp. Misspec. inmeas. comp.
-Underallconditionsunityornearunity -Underallconditions,equaltounity
GlobalAssessment:
No misspec. in meas. comp.: The large value of N necessary to bring Type I error under control, reduces Power-
foralldegreesofstructuralmisspecification-tounacceptablylowlevels.
Misspec. inmeas. comp.: Modelwillmostalwaysberejected,evenifcontainingnomisspecificationinstructural
component.
Overall: Sensitivityistunedalmostexclusivelytowardsthedetectionofmisspecificationinthemeasurementcom-
ponent. It will reliably reject only if is present, misspecification in the measurement component and, on the other
hand, will reject the vast majority of structurally correct models that happen to feature misspecification in the
measurementcomponent.
Continuedonnextpage
===== PAGE 21/41 =====
21
Table3–Continuedfrompreviouspage
GFICVPairing TypeIErrorRate Power
RMSEA-P,.05 Nomisspec. inmeas. comp. Nomisspec. inmeas. comp.
- Mildly inflated under 58% of conditions, rang- -Acceptable(>.80)under90%ofconditions
ingover[0,.213] - Increasing function of degree of structural mis-
- Decreasing function of N (at N=1000, brought specification
tolevelsbeneath.05) - Under condition of small or moderate degree of
structural misspecification, strongly increasing in
eachof[incidental,non-controllable]magnitude
of factor loadings and [incidental, controllable]
numberofindicatorsperlatentvariable.
Misspec. inmeas. comp. Misspec. inmeas. comp.
- Ranging over [.002,.746], exceeded .05 level -Acceptable(>.80)under79%ofconditions
under86%ofconditions - Under many conditions, an increasing function
- Increasing function of [incidental, non- of [incidental, non-controllable] degree of mis-
controllable] degree of misspecification in mea- specificationinmeasurementcomponent
surementcomponent - When degree of structural misspecification at
- Complex conditional dependency on N, [in- highest level, acceptable power achieved irre-
cidental, non-controllable] magnitude of factor spective of degree of misspecification in measure-
loadings,and[incidental,controllable]numberof mentcomponent
indicatorsperlatentvariable.
GlobalAssessment:
No misspec. in meas. comp.: Increasing function of degree of structural misspecification and, in the main,
deliveringofanotunreasonableTypeIerrorrateandPower.
Misspec. in meas. comp.: Inflated Type I error rate and sensitive to degree of misspecification in measurement
component.
Overall: Though, in broad stroke, it behaves in a manner consonant with its intended purpose, it suffers from
the defect of being prone to rejecting structurally correct models that happen to feature misspecification in the
measurementcomponent.
RMSEA ,.05 Nomisspec. inmeas. comp. Nomisspec. inmeas. comp.
S
- Under 100% of conditions, egregiously high, -Under100%ofconditions,approachesunity
frequentlyapproachingunity
Misspec. inmeas. comp. Misspec. inmeas. comp.
-Egregiouslyhigh -Under100%ofconditions,approachesunity
Continuedonnextpage
===== PAGE 22/41 =====
22 Table3–Continuedfrompreviouspage
GFICVPairing TypeIErrorRate Power
GlobalAssessment:
No misspec. in meas. comp.: Model will always be rejected, even if containing no misspecification in structural
component.
Misspec. inmeas. comp.: Modelwillalmostalwaysberejected,evenifcontainingnomisspecificationinstructural
component.
Overall: Employment of this GFICV pairing is logically equivalent to rejecting the structural component of each
and every candidate model. That is to say, it will reject both every structurally correct candidate model, and every
structurallymisspecifiedmodel.
SRMR ,.08 Nomisspec. inmeas. comp. Nomisspec. inmeas. comp.
S
-Nearzerounderallconditions - Acceptable (> .80) only when degree of struc-
turalmisspecificationathighestlevel(near-zero,
otherwise), upon which, irrespective of condi-
tion,itwasessentiallyunity
Misspec. inmeas. comp. Misspec. inmeas. comp.
-Forallbutonecondition,beneath.05 - Acceptable (> .80) only when degree of struc-
tural misspecification at highest level, upon
which,irrespectiveofcondition,itwasessentially
unity
GlobalAssessment:
No misspec. in meas. comp.: As long as there is a high degree of structural misspecification to be detected,
deliversaverygoodTypeIerror/Powerbalance.
Misspec. inmeas. comp.: Aslongasthereisahighdegreeofstructuralmisspecificationtobedetected,deliversa
verygoodTypeIerror/Powerbalance.
Overall: A well-behaved detector of structural misspecification as long as the latter is present at a relatively high
degree.
CFI ,.95 Nomisspec. inmeas. comp. Nomisspec. inmeas. comp.
S
-Rangingover[0,.691],exceeded.05under58% -Underallconditions,approachesunity
ofconditions
- Decreasing function of each of N and [inciden-
tal, non-controllable] magnitude of factor load-
ings
Continuedonnextpage
===== PAGE 23/41 =====
23
Table3–Continuedfrompreviouspage
GFICVPairing TypeIErrorRate Power
Misspec. inmeas. comp. Misspec. inmeas. comp.
- Exceeded .05 under 81% of conditions (egre- -Acceptable(>.80)under87%ofconditions
giouslyhighunder42%ofthese) - Increasing function of degree of structural mis-
- Decreasing function of N and [incidental, non- specification
controllable]magnitudeoffactorloadings
- Entirely satisfactory at N = 1000 (save for con-
dition under which magnitude of factor loadings
small and number of indicators per latent vari-
ableequalto5)
GlobalAssessment:
No misspec. in meas. comp.: Sensitiveto[incidental,non-controllable]magnitudeoffactorloadings,but,inthe
main,deliversanotunreasonableTypeIerrorrate/Powerbalance.
Misspec. inmeas. comp.: HighTypeIerrorrate,goodPower.
Overall: Matching its relatively poor Type I error rate, and delivering, perhaps, slightly better power, delivers a
detectionperformanceverysimilartothatof[RMSEA-P,.05].
===== PAGE 24/41 =====
24 Table4
Chi-Square Test with alpha=.05: Type I error rate and Power (Means; Standard Deviations) under condition of no misspecification in measurement
component
TypeofMisspecificationinStructuralandMeasurementComponents
N #indic. Mag. 0-0 1-0 2-0 3-0
factor
loadings
TypeIerrorrate Power
150 5 Small .331 .378 .400 .704
(430.314;31.093)a (434.388;3.789)b (437.006;3.613)c (462.255;32.830)d
5 Large .355 .473 .576 .982
(431.129;31.278)a (442.033;31.761)b (45.17;32.132)c (516.198;34.649)d
10 Small .999 .999 .999 1
(2027.386;71.38)e (2034.388;71.409)f (2091.314;72.625)h (2091.314;72.625)h
10 Large .998 1 1 1
(2026.943;71.077)e (2046.817;72.087)f (2061.653;73.034)g (215.667;73.034)h
250 5 Small .194 .29 .267 .778
(414.896;3.023)a (42.563;29.932)b (424.449;3.285)c (469.218;33.007)d
5 Large .194 .377 .509 1
(415.402;29.825)a (432.539;31.044)b (445.615;32.041)d (555.860;37.283)d
10 Small .905 .936 .947 .998
(1875.671;63.029)e (1887.79;63.045)f (1895.884;63.388)g (1981.581;65.961)h
10 Large .903 .963 .987 1
(1876.805;63.19)e (1909.898;64.033)f (1933.931;65.104)g (2076.913;68.168)h
1000 5 Small .078 .216 .365 1
(400.784;28.508)a (419.164;29.646)b (433.179;3.661)d (61.227;41.457)d
5 Large .083 .771 .986 1
(401.06;28.437)a (468.132;32.912)b (519.477;36.942)c (953.811;55.151)d
10 Small .173 .415 .594 1
(1740.999;58.061)e (1784.095;6.224)f (1814.526;6.698)g (2153.156;71.288)h
10 Large .175 .889 .995 1
(1741.126;58.648)e (1869.571;62.825)f (1961.893;66.786)h (2547.044;79.068)h
Note. adf=394. bdf=395. cdf=396. ddf=397. edf=1700. fdf=1701. gdf=1702.,hdf=1702.
===== PAGE 25/41 =====
25
Table5
RMSEA-P<.05: TypeIerrorrateandPower(Means;StandardDeviations)underconditionofnomisspecificationinmeasurementcomponent
TypeofMisspecificationinStructuralandMeasurementComponents
N #indic. Mag. 0-0 1-0 2-0 3-0
factor
loadings
TypeIerrorrate Power
150 5 Small .105 .321 .419 .995
(.014;.028)a (.037;.041)b (.048;.043)c (.157;.033)d
5 Large .173 .842 .956 1
(.023;.033)a (.105;.046)b (.132;.041)c (.278;.031)d
10 Small .146 .689 .829 1
(.020;.031)e (.077;.045)f (.096;.042)g (.237;.032)h
10 Large .213 .982 .999 1
(.027;.036)e (.154;.041)f (.188;.038)g (.339;.029)h
250 5 Small .058 .351 .482 1
(.013;.022)a (.045;.034)b (.056;.032)c (.165;.026)d
5 Large .104 .931 .991 1
(.019;.027)a (.110;.033)b (.135;.029)c (.280;.023)d
10 Small .095 .774 .932 1
(.018;.027)e (.084;.034)f (.104;.030)g (.241;.024)h
10 Large .115 .999 1 1
(.019;.027)e (.157;.030)f (.190;.029)g (.336;.022)h
1000 5 Small 0 .401 .746 1
(.008;.013)a (.055;.017)b (.069;.014)c (.171;.013)d
5 Large .001 1 1 1
(.010;.015)a (.114;.014)b (.139;.014)c (.280;.012)d
10 Small 0 .984 1 1
(.009;.013)e (.091;.015)f (.109;.014)g (.242;.012)h
10 Large 0 1 1 1
(.009;.013)e (.159;.014)f (.190;.014)g (.339;.011)h
Note. adf=394. bdf=395. cdf=396. ddf=397. edf=1699. fdf=1700. gdf=1701. hdf=1702.
===== PAGE 26/41 =====
26 Table6
RMSEAs<.05: TypeIerrorrateandPower(Means;StandardDeviations)underconditionofnomisspecificationinmeasurementcomponent
TypeofMisspecificationinStructuralandMeasurementComponents
N #indic. Mag. 0-0 1-0 2-0 3-0
factor
loadings
TypeIerrorrate Power
150 5 Small .982 .996 1 1
(.380;.190)a (.439;.177)b (.476;.167)c (.552;.129)d
5 Large .942 1 1 1
(.239;.146)a (.369;.129)b (.418;.115)c (.518;.090)d
10 Small .977 1 1 1
(.324;.185)e (.425;.164)f (.453;.145)g (.546;.112)h
10 Large .807 1 1 1
(.134;.088)e (.315;.078)f (.372;.071)g (.483;.052)h
250 5 Small .986 1 1 1
(.358;.197)a (.428;.162)b (.474;.157)c (.558;.124)d
5 Large .911 1 1 1
(.173;.109)a (.337;.105)b (.391;.095)c (.497;.068)d
10 Small .967 1 1 1
(.269;.172)e (.386;.140)f (.434;.128)g (.533;.098)h
10 Large .716 1 1 1
(.095;.059)e (.298;.055)f (.357;.050)g (.474;.038)h
1000 5 Small .962 1 1 1
(.203;.125)a (.356;.121)b (.413;.113)c (.512;.078)d
5 Large .636 1 1 1
(.077;.042)a (.291;.042)b (.351;.037)c (.466;.026)d
10 Small .839 1 1 1
(.110;.06)e (.307;.062)f (.365;.058)g (.477;.038)h
10 Large .268 1 1 1
(.044;.026)e (.284;.025)f (.344;.025)g (.461;.017)h
Note. a df=394. b df=395. c df=396. d df=397. e df=1700. f df=1701. g df=1702.
===== PAGE 27/41 =====
27
Table7
SRMR <.08: TypeIerrorrateandPower(Means;StandardDeviations)underconditionofnomisspecificationinmeasurementcomponent
S
TypeofMisspecificationinStructuralandMeasurementComponents
N #indic. Mag. 0-0 1-0 2-0 3-0
factor
loadings
TypeIerrorrate Power
150 5 Small .011 .100 .210 .998
(.035;.016)a (.053;.021)b (.062;.023)c (.174;.035)d
5 Large 0 .004 .026 1
(.020;.008)a (.042;.013)b (.051;.014)c (.172;.022)d
10 Small 0 .020 .070 1
(.025;.010)e (.046;.016)f (.054;.016)g (.175;.027)h
10 Large 0 .001 .005 1
(.015;.007)e (.040;.011)f (.049;.011)g (.172;.019)h
250 5 Small .002 .042 .116 1
(.029;.012)a (.049;.017)b (.057;.018)c (.176;.029)d
5 Large 0 .001 .003 1
(.015;.006)a (.040;.011)b (.049;.011)c (.172;.018)d
10 Small 0 .003 .021 1
(.020;.008)e (.043;.013)f (.051;.013)g (.174;.020)h
10 Large 0 0 0 1
(.011;.005)e (.039;.008)f (.048;.009)g (.172;.015)h
1000 5 Small 0 0 .004 1
(.015;.006)a (.041;.010)b (.050;.010)c (.173;.014)d
5 Large 0 0 0 1
(.008;.003)a (.038;.005)b (.048;.005)c (.171;.009)d
10 Small 0 0 0 1
(.010;.004)e (.039;.006)f (.048;.007)g (.172;.010)h
10 Large 0 0 0 1
(.006;.002)e (.038;.004)f (.047;.004)g (.171;.007)h
Note. a df=394. b df=395. c df=396. d df=397. e df=1700. f df=1701. g df=1702.
===== PAGE 28/41 =====
28 Table8
CFI <.95: TypeIerrorrateandPower(Means;StandardDeviations)underconditionofnomisspecificationinmeasurementcomponent
S
TypeofMisspecificationinStructuralandMeasurementComponents
N #indic. Mag. 0-0 1-0 2-0 3-0
factor
loadings
TypeIerrorrate Power
150 5 Small .691 .874 .972 1
(.903;.080)a (.850;.096)b (.793;.109)c (.683;.102)d
5 Large .259 .805 .974 1
(.960;.044)a (.898;.060)b (.847;.069)c (.734;.064)d
10 Small .485 .872 .976 1
(.932;.065)e (.869;.079)f (.823;.088)g (.710;.080)h
10 Large .034 .778 .982 1
(.986;.017)e (.924;.034)f (.875;.043)g (.759;.041)h
250 5 Small .548 .883 .976 1
(.918;.076)a (.863;.084)b (.805;.097)c (.694;.091)d
5 Large .087 .801 .980 1
(.978;.029)a (.914;.047)b (.865;.054)c (.750;.048)d
10 Small .303 .862 .980 1
(.951;.058)e (.890;.067)f (.839;.075)g (.723;.069)h
10 Large .001 .775 .998 1
(.993;.008)e (.932;.023)f (.884;.030)g (.765;.031)h
1000 5 Small .150 .816 .988 1
(.971;.037)a (.905;.056)b (.851;.065)c (.737;.054)d
5 Large 0 .806 1 1
(.995;.005)a (.935;.017)b (.888;.021)c (.770;.021)d
10 Small .012 .811 .998 1
(.991;.011)e (.929;.026)f (.880;.033)g (.764;.028)h
10 Large 0 .865 1 1
(.998;.002)e (.939;.011)f (.892;.015)g (.774;.014)h
Note. a df=394. b df=395. c df=396. d df=397. e df=1700. f df=1701. g df=1702.
===== PAGE 29/41 =====
29
Table9
Chi-SquareTestwithα=.05: TypeIerrorrateandPower(Means;StandardDeviations)underconditionofmisspecificationinmeasurementcomponent
TypeofMisspecificationinStructuralandMeasurementComponents
N in# dic. lofM aa dca t ig no. r gs 0-1 0-2 0-3 1-1 1-2 1-3 2-1 2-2 2-3 3-1 3-2 3-1
TypeIerrorrate Power
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
150 5 Small (626.434; (1376.308; (2100.889; (630.07; (1377.715; (2101.238; (632.012; (1382.898; (2107.692; (659.21; (1407.572; (2134.852;
41.261) 56.688) 73.014) 40.88) 58.872) 69.158) 40.853) 57.36) 70.842) 42.174) 60.56) 70.911)
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
150 5 Large (616.177; (1299.231; (1945.89; (643.606; (1304.621; (1949.817; (633.003; (1314.782; (1962.647; (714.084; (1377.7; (2025.456;
40.694) 55.768) 70.135) 42.121) 56.132) 69.752) 41.621) 57.813) 70.633) 44.689) 59.288) 72.006)
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
150 10 Small (3101.012; (5741.721; (7336.88; (3105.078; (5745.742; (7344.04; (3114.66; (5754.578; (7352.072; (3167.06; (5806.056; (7405.765;
91.466) 115.506) 132.482) 92.019) 114.897) 135.767) 91.061) 118.182) 135.192) 90.842) 118.498) 132.787)
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
150 10 Large (3045.862; (5569.368; (7126.82; (3062.643; (5585.107; (7144.526; (3080.139; (5602.279; (7161.737; (3168.023; (5691.155; (7249.382;
88.735) 114.057) 129.608) 89.15) 114.692) 128.953) 89.68) 115.311) 130.213) 90.288) 113.86) 130.312)
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
250 5 Small (744.253; (1998.158; (3201.132; (745.471; (1999.411; (3204.912; (752.168; (2007.311; (3212.552; (794.3; (2046.057; (3259.877;
45.592) 71.193) 91.206) 45.225) 71.006) 88.565) 46.278) 69.901) 89.337) 47.779) 72.162) 90.271)
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
250 5 Large (721.446; (1861.31; (2938.99; (733.385; (1869.444; (2946.254; (748.093; (1886.345; (2966.679; (854.371; (1990.555; (3069.491;
45.183) 69.312) 86.909) 46.379) 70.355) 86.661) 46.653) 71.113) 87.221) 51.619) 72.711) 89.658)
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
250 10 Small (3670.652; (8070.76; (10731.60; (3698.877; (8074.304; (10738.22; (3686.892; (8090.854; (10752.261; (3773.633; (8175.731; (10834.85;
97.808) 136.42) 160.311) 98.049) 134.591) 159.313) 97.264) 135.732) 159.657) 98.557) 137.605) 157.185)
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
250 10 Large (3574.259; (7778.906; (10373.89; (3601.542; (7806.215; (10402.95; (3630.178; (7833.469; (10429.602; (3777.105; (7980.875; (10576.045;
94.311) 133.823) 155.727) 94.935) 134.299) 156.937) 94.96) 134.526) 155.645) 97.524) 135.019) 157.043)
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
1,000 5 Small (1721.843; (6741.821; (11562.18; (1725.671; (6738.672; (11572.745; (1745.905; (6770.145; (11608.003; (1912.96; (6925.838; (11775.474;
73.925) 135.384) 172.205) 74.269) 134.073) 174.588) 73.887) 133.48) 172.753) 81.497) 135.215) 175.423)
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
1,000 5 Large (1622.316; (6183.067; (10498.165; (1668.549; (6215.168; (10527.295; (1724.868; (6278.698; (10602.50; (2147.829; (6691.402; (11012.08;
72.727) 127.485) 166.345) 73.333) 127.676) 167.279) 75.94) 130.107) 164.523) 86.529) 134.448) 168.449)
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
1,000 10 Small (8908.935; (26530.76; (37168.66; (8935.182; (26551.58; (37191.801; (8980.032; (26602.14; (35853.69; (9322.338; (26939.91; (37578.06;
156.135) 248.236) 288.301) 155.587) 249.71) 287.653) 158.584) 248.704) 288.139) 161.794) 247.396) 288.668)
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
1,000 10 Large (8535.16; (25356.753; (35731.732; (8642.215; (25460.959; (35844.567; (8747.393; (25566.476; (35942.108; (9339.37; (26152.821; (36527.353;
156.434) 240.517) 284.392) 157.953) 240.401) 280.147) 159.587) 240.352) 282.703) 163.168) 241.18) 283.775)
===== PAGE 30/41 =====
30 Table10
RMSEA-P<.05: TypeIerrorrateandPower(Means;StandardDeviations)underconditionofmisspecificationinmeasurementcomponent.
N # Mag. 0-1 0-2 0-3 1-1 1-2 1-3 2-1 2-2 2-3 3-1 3-2 3-1
indic. factor
loadings
TypeIerrorrate Power
.111 .196 .369 .173 .153 .352 .359 .462 .705 .991 .992 .993
150 5 Small
(.016;.028) (.025;.035) (.047;.045) (.024;.033) (.022;.032) (.045;.046) (.042;.041) (.053;.042) (.080;.046) (.152;.035) (.149;.035) (.166;.037)
.212 .236 .353 .878 .634 .641 .948 .947 .953 1 1 1
150 5 Large
(.026;.037) (.030;.038) (.042;.043) (.112;.046) (.074;.047) (.075;.047) (.125;.041) (.124;.041) (.130;.040) (.270;.030) (.269;.031) (.270;.031)
.142 .167 .197 .517 .456 .486 .794 .823 .887 1 1 1
150 10 Small
(.020;.031) (.021;.035) (.024;.036) (.058;.042) (.052;.047) (.060;.045) (.090;.042) (.093;.041) (.102;.039) (.235;.031) (.235;.033) (.241;.032)
.255 .361 .459 .958 .984 .986 1 1 1 1 1 1
150 10 Large
(.032;.038) (.044;.044) (.053;.045) (.142;.044) (.147;.039) (.149;.039) (.184;.037) (.187;.036) (.191;.034) (.338;.029) (.339;.029) (.340;.029)
.077 .171 .463 .124 .156 .447 .362 .571 .83 1 1 .997
250 5 Small
(.015;.024) (.026;.031) (.053;.038) (.022;.028) (.027;.030) (.053;.035) (.047;.033) (.063;.032) (.089;.034) (.156;.027) (.158;.026) (.172;.026)
.132 .175 .349 .835 .716 .739 .980 .991 .996 1 1 1
250 5 Large
(.021;.028) (.026;.031) (.044;.037) (.091;.034) (.077;.036) (.079;.037) (.127;.031) (.126;.030) (.133;.029) (.273;.024) (.270;.023) (.271;.024)
.102 .294 .265 .810 .616 .660 .920 .928 .977 1 1 1
250 10 Small
(.02;.027) (.036;.035) (.037;.034) (.088;.036) (.068;.032) (.073;.036) (.099;.03) (.103;.028) (.105;.027) (.240;.025) (.239;.027) (.244;.027)
.175 .376 .474 .995 .996 .999 1 1 1 1 1 1
250 10 Large
(.027;.032) (.045;.036) (.054;.039) (.146;.031) (.149;.030) (.153;.029) (.187;.028) (.189;.027) (.192;.027) (.339;.022) (.339;.022) (.340;.022)
.002 .090 .746 .016 .051 .688 .607 .893 1 1 1 1
1,000 5 Small
(.012;.016) (.034;.021) (.072;.019) (.024;.018) (.031;.019) (.067;.017) (.063;.014) (.076;.014) (.099;.014) (.164;.013) (.165;.013) (.179;.014)
.002 .030 .235 .988 .909 .939 1 1 1 1 1 1
1,000 5 Large
(.012;.015) (.022;.019) (.046;.019) (.095;.016) (.082;.016) (.084;.015) (.129;.014) (.128;.014) (.135;.014) (.273;.011) (.270;.011) (.272;.011)
.049 .167 .333 .909 .905 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
1,000 10 Small
(.035;.018) (.051;.011) (.057;.016) (.079;.015) (.081;.013) (.103;.028) (.111;.013) (.116;.009) (.103;.015) (.243;.012) (.243;.014) (.236;.012)
.031 .262 .483 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
1,000 10 Large
(.025;.019) (.049;.019) (.059;.019) (.149;.014) (.151;.014) (.156;.014) (.189;.013) (.190;.013) (.193;.013) (.339;.010) (.339;.011) (.339;.011)
===== PAGE 31/41 =====
31
Table11
RMSEA <.05: TypeIerrorrateandPower(Means;StandardDeviations)underconditionofmisspecificationinmeasurementcomponent.
S
N 0-1 0-2 0-3 1-1 1-2 1-3 2-1 2-2 2-3 3-1 3-2 3-1
# Mag.
indic. factor
loadings
.989 .989 .995 .998 .997 .997 .998 1 1 1 1 1
150 5 Small
(.403;.197) (.383;.193) (.456;.210) (.426;.172) (.382;.161) (.425;.173) (.454;.156) (.451;.159) (.510;.170) (.560;.133) (.507;.130) (.537;.134)
.924 .940 .946 .948 .997 .996 1 1 1 1 1 1
150 5 Large
(.247;.167) (.235;.143) (.253;.152) (.757;.809) (.313;.131) (.319;.134) (.406;.130) (.381;.115) (.394;.113) (.527;.106) (.487;.083) (.482;.085)
.978 1 .972 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
150 10 Small
(.376;.203) (.423;.225) (.474;.238) (.444;.184) (.468;.207) (.506;.208) (.495;.157) (.506;.152) (.550;.161) (.590;.128) (.603;.118) (.623;.126)
.876 .927 .940 .999 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
150 10 Large
(.170;.111) (.228;.150) (.253;.155) (.318;.103) (.344;.106) (.360;.106) (.384;.080) (.407;.092) (.426;.099) (.496;.063) (.510;.070) (.519;.073)
.990 .998 .996 .995 .993 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
250 5 Small
(.354;.188) (.379;.184) (.451;.195) (.365;.165) (.381;.186) (.436;.179) (.424;.149) (.434;.149) (.503;.150) (.525;.124) (.519;.131) (.545;.120)
.896 .919 .949 .998 .997 .994 1 1 1 1 1 1
250 5 Large
(.180;.124) (.175;.105) (.204;.112) (.305;.111) (.276;.105) (.282;.110) (.363;.087) (.350;.087) (.363;.093) (.479;.070) (.464;.064) (.463;.063)
.981 .991 1 .982 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
250 10 Small
(.361;.195) (.479;.201) (.497;.184) (.587;.649) (.472;.166) (.463;.155) (.499;.156) (.539;.142) (.552;.196) (.579;.106) (.619;.121) (.632;.114)
.813 .929 .959 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
250 10 Large
(.130;.083) (.188;.103) (.213;.113) (.296;.063) (.320;.074) (.341;.086) (.368;.056) (.385;.066) (.403;.078) (.482;.040) (.494;.050) (.502;.054)
.961 .998 1 .998 .998 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
1,000 5 Small
(.222;.139) (.297;.159) (.476;.182) (.269;.132) (.288;.135) (.434;.161) (.344;.100) (.373;.120) (.497;.131) (.471;.080) (.458;.078) (.540;.101)
.661 .793 .977 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
1,000 5 Large
(.080;.042) (.095;.043) (.142;.045) (.254;.044) (.225;.043) (.238;.042) (.322;.037) (.309;.035) (.324;.034) (.447;.025) (.433;.023) (.436;.023)
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
1,000 10 Small
(.401;.186) (.593;.18) (.742;.176) (.437;.158) (.653;.197) (.917;.082) (.519;.128) (.634;.125) (.314;.143) (.584;.095) (.667;.103) (.701;.160)
.752 .975 .996 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
1,000 10 Large
(.087;.039) (.143;.047) (.171;.052) (.275;.028) (.290;.032) (.311;.034) (.350;.025) (.361;.028) (.374;.029) (.468;.017) (.475;.020) (.482;.021)
===== PAGE 32/41 =====
32 Table12
SRMR <.08: TypeIerrorrateandPower(Means;StandardDeviations)underconditionofmisspecificationinmeasurementcomponent
S
N
# Mag. 0-1 0-2 0-3 1-1 1-2 1-3 2-1 2-2 2-3 3-1 3-2 3-1
indic. factor
loadings
.014 .026 .081 .040 .049 .160 .111 .135 .287 .993 .979 .986
150 5 Small
(.036;.016) (.040;.018) (.048;.020) (.045;.018) (.044;.019) (.053;.025) (.056;.020) (.058;.019) (.070;.023) (.161;.034) (.152;.035) (.160;.039)
0 0 0 .071 .003 0 .018 .014 .022 1 1 1
150 5 Large
(.020;.009) (.021;.009) (.022;.009) (.055;.037) (.034;.012) (.033;.013) (.048;.013) (.047;.013) (.048;.014) (.173;.023) (.164;.023) (.164;.023)
0 .008 0 .008 .007 .014 .024 .031 .070 1 1 1
150 10 Small
(.025;.011) (.026;.011) (.028;.012) (.040;.014) (.039;.016) (.041;.015) (.050;.015) (.052;.015) (.054;.015) (.172;.027) (.168;.029) (.169;.026)
0 0 0 0 0 0 .004 .004 .006 1 1 1
150 10 Large
(.015;.006) (.016;.007) (.017;.007) (.038;.011) (.038;.010) (.037;.010) (.048;.010) (.048;.010) (.048;.010) (.171;.019) (.170;.019) (.169;.020)
.002 .005 .021 .003 .014 .044 .037 .055 .190 .998 .998 .992
250 5 Small
(.029;.013) (.034;.014) (.042;.016) (.036;.015) (.037;.016) (.046;.016) (.048;.015) (.053;.016) (.064;.019) (.158;.028) (.154;.028) (.158;.030)
0 0 0 0 0 0 .003 .001 .004 1 1 1
250 5 Large
(.015;.007) (.016;.007) (.019;.007) (.035;.010) (.031;.010) (.030;.010) (.045;.010) (.044;.010) (.045;.010) (.167;.018) (.164;.017) (.164;.018)
0 0 0 .024 0 0 .007 .010 0 1 1 1
250 10 Small
(.020;.009) (.024;.009) (.025;.008) (.047;.024) (.036;.011) (.037;.011) (.047;.012) (.048;.011) (.048;.010) (.172;.022) (.168;.022) (.168;.026)
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 .001 1 1 1
250 10 Large
(.012;.005) (.013;.005) (.014;.005) (.037;.008) (.036;.008) (.036;.008) (.047;.008) (.047;.008) (.047;.008) (.171;.015) (.169;.015) (.168;.015)
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 .002 .013 1 1 1
1,000 5 Small
(.016;.006) (.023;.008) (.037;.009) (.024;.009) (.025;.009) (.037;.009) (.040;.008) (.044;.008) (.057;.009) (.158;.014) (.152;.015) (.157;.016)
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 1
1,000 5 Large
(.008;.003) (.009;.004) (.013;.004) (.032;.005) (.028;.005) (.027;.005) (.043;.005) (.041;.005) (.042;.005) (.166;.009) (.163;.009) (.163;.009)
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 1
1,000 10 Small
(.014;.004) (.017;.003) (.018;.004) (.034;.006) (.033;.006) (.036;.009) (.044;.006) (.044;.005) (.044;.007) (.170;.010) (.164;.011) (.154;.011)
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 1
1,000 10 Large
(.007;.002) (.009;.002) (.010;.003) (.036;.004) (.035;.004) (.035;.004) (.046;.004) (.045;.004) (.046;.004) (.170;.007) (.168;.007) (.167;.007)
===== PAGE 33/41 =====
33
Table13
CFIs<.95: TypeIerrorrateandPower(Means;StandardDeviations)underconditionofmisspecificationinmeasurementcomponent
N
# Mag. 0-1 0-2 0-3 1-1 1-2 1-3 2-1 2-2 2-3 3-1 3-2 3-1
indic. factor
loadings
.714 .695 .815 .847 .826 .893 .963 .951 .981 .998 1 1
150 5 Small
(.896;.083) (.896;.083) (.858;.099) (.859;.090) (.876;.083) (.845;.094) (.810;.100) (.803;.103) (.749;.118) (.687;.101) (.714;.099) (.675;.104)
.276 .260 .313 .836 .650 .646 .959 .952 .951 1 1 1
150 5 Large
(.956;.052) (.960;.043) (.954;.050) (.763;.277) (.921;.058) (.916;.061) (.856;.074) (.868;.067) (.857;.067) (.731;.073) (.756;.060) (.756;.062)
.561 .667 .761 .839 .846 .889 .976 .969 1 1 1 1
150 10 Small
(.917;.074) (.901;.088) (.882;.098) (.870;.084) (.858;.099) (.836;.109) (.813;.091) (.802;.092) (.775;.100) (.699;.086) (.692;.085) (.666;.089)
.097 .215 .285 .693 .774 .833 .988 .988 .993 1 1 1
150 10 Large
(.979;.028) (.964;.044) (.957;.047) (.925;.044) (.916;.047) (.909;.047) (.874;.046) (.863;.052) (.852;.056) (.759;.045) (.753;.048) (.747;.050)
.582 .683 .815 .735 .764 .899 .949 .966 .990 1 1 1
250 5 Small
(.918;.074) (.905;.075) (.868;.090) (.894;.079) (.882;.092) (.848;.096) (.841;.086) (.824;.092) (.766;.102) (.725;.089) (.719;.093) (.684;.094)
.113 .096 .166 .647 .536 .565 .960 .952 .976 1 1 1
250 5 Large
(.975;.034) (.977;.027) (.969;.033) (.928;.049) (.938;.044) (.934;.047) (.882;.048) (.887;.049) (.876;.054) (.766;.049) (.774;.046) (.770;.046)
.531 .789 .898 .861 .920 .915 .983 1 1 1 1 1
250 10 Small
(.926;.067) (.884;.078) (.881;.068) (.817;.226) (.863;.076) (.862;.074) (.815;.087) (.790;.085) (.785;.110) (.713;.071) (.688;.079) (.676;.079)
.032 .112 .171 .685 .784 .831 .996 .997 .998 1 1 1
250 10 Large
(.987;.015) (.976;.025) (.970;.030) (.936;.026) (.927;.031) (.918;.038) (.883;.031) (.876;.037) (.865;.044) (.769;.030) (.764;.035) (.758;.037)
.207 .422 .912 .444 .537 .928 .916 .964 1 1 1 1
1,000 5 Small
(.965;.042) (.940;.058) (.863;.084) (.941;.055) (.931;.057) (.857;.083) (.894;.053) (.873;.066) (.784;.081) (.777;.052) (.779;.052) (.706;.068)
0 .001 .005 .459 .237 .354 .995 .989 .998 1 1 1
1,000 5 Large
(.995;.005) (.993;.006) (.986;.009) (.950;.017) (.959;.015) (.954;.016) (.905;.020) (.910;.019) (.899;.020) (.787;.019) (.794;.018) (.789;.019)
.618 1 1 .881 1 1 1 1 .978 1 1 1
1,000 10 Small
(.916;.067) (.843;.081) (.779;.086) (.883;.072) (.783;.095) (.642;.049) (.810;.072) (.744;.072) (.904;.057) (.719;.060) (.666;.067) (.642;.104)
0 .003 .008 .683 .787 .920 1 1 1 1 1 1
1,000 10 Large
(.995;.004) (.987;.008) (.982;.011) (.945;.010) (.904;.012) (.932;.014) (.894;.014) (.889;.015) (.882;.016) (.779;.013) (.777;.015) (.773;.015)
===== PAGE 34/41 =====
34
AuthorContact This article earned the Open Materials and Open
Codebadgeformakingmaterialsandcodeopenlyavail-
Moritz Heene, Department of Psychology, Ludwig-
able. It has been verified that the analysis reproduced
Maximilians-UniversitätMünchen,Germany. ORCIDiD:
the results presented in the article. The entire editorial
https://orcid.org/0009-0007-4956-2417. Correspon-
process,includingtheopenreviews,ispublishedinthe
dence regarding this article should be addressed to
onlinesupplement.
MoritzHeene,Email: heene@psy.lmu.de
Michael Maraun, Department of Psychology, Simon
References
FraserUniversity,Burnaby,B.C.,Canada.
NadineJulianaGlushko,Independentscholar. Bentler, P. M., & Yuan, K.-H. (1999). Structural equa-
Sunthud Pornprasertmanit, Faculty of Psychology, tion modeling with small samples: Test statis-
ChulalongkornUniversity,Bangkok,Thailand. tics. Multivariate Behavioral Research, 34(2),
181–197. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1207 /
ConflictofInterestandFunding S15327906Mb340203
Bollen, K. A. (1989). Structural equations with latent
The authors declare that there are no conflicts of in-
variables.JohnWiley&Sons.
terest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or
Breivik, E., & Olsson, U. H. (2001). Adding variables
publicationofthisarticle. Theauthorsreceivednospe-
to improve fit: The effect of model size on fit
cificfundingforthiswork.
assessment in lisrel. In R. Cudeck, S. Du Toit,
&D.Sörbom(Eds.),Structuralequationmodel-
AuthorContributions
ing:Presentandfuture:Afestschriftinhonourof
Conceptualization: Moritz Heene, Michael D. karljöreskog(pp.169–194).ScientificSoftware
Maraun, Nadine J. Glushko and Sunthud Pornprasert- International.
manit. Browne,M.W.,MacCallum,R.C.,Kim,C.T.,Andersen,
DataCuration: MoritzHeeneandSunthudPornprasert- B.L.,&Glaser,R.(2002).Whenfitindicesand
manit. residuals are incompatible. Psychological Meth-
Formal Analysis: Moritz Heene, Michael D. Maraun, ods, 7(4), 403–421. https://doi.org/10.1037/
NadineJ.GlushkoandSunthudPornprasertmanit. /1082-989x.7.4.403
Investigation: Moritz Heene, Michael D. Maraun, Carroll, J. B. (1993). Human cognitive abilities: A sur-
NadineJ.GlushkoandSunthudPornprasertmanit. vey of factor-analytic studies. Cambridge Uni-
Methodology: Moritz Heene, Michael D. Maraun, versity Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/
NadineJ.GlushkoandSunthudPornprasertmanit. CBO9780511571312
Project Administration: Moritz Heene, Nadine J. Chen,F.,Curran,P.J.,Bollen,K.A.,Kirby,J.,&Paxton,
GlushkoandSunthudPornprasertmanit. P. (2008). An empirical evaluation of the use
Resources: Moritz Heene, Nadine J. Glushko and of fixed cutoff points in rmsea test statistic in
SunthudPornprasertmanit. structural equation models. Sociological Meth-
Software: Moritz Heene and Sunthud Pornprasert- ods & Research, 36(4), 462–494. https://doi.
manit. org/10.1177/0049124108314720
Supervision: MoritzHeene. Cole, D. A., Ciesla, J. A., & Steiger, J. H. (2007).
Validation: Moritz Heene, Nadine J. Glushko and The insidious effects of failing to include
SunthudPornprasertmanit. design-driven correlated residuals in latent-
Visualization: MoritzHeeneandNadineJ.Glushko. variable covariance structure analysis. Psycho-
Writing - Original Draft Preparation: Moritz Heene, logical Methods, 12(4), 381–398. https://doi.
MichaelD.MaraunandNadineJ.Glushko. org/10.1037/1082-989X.12.4.381
Writing - Review & Editing: Moritz Heene, Michael D. Curran,P.J.,Bollen,K.A.,Paxton,P.,Kirby,J.,&Chen,
Maraun, Nadine J. Glushko, and Sunthud Pornprasert- F. (2002). The noncentral chi-square distribu-
manit tion in misspecified structural equation mod-
els: Finite sample results from a monte carlo
simulation. Multivariate Behavioral Research,
OpenSciencePractices 37(1), 1–36. https://doi.org/10.1207/
S15327906MBR3701_01
Driel, O. P. (1978). On various causes of improper so-
lutions in maximum likelihood factor analysis.
===== PAGE 35/41 =====
35
Psychometrika, 43(2), 225–243. https://doi. MacCallum, R. C., & Austin, J. T. (2000). Applications
org/10.1007/BF02293865 of structural equation modeling in psychologi-
Fan,X.,&Sivo,S.A.(2007).Sensitivityoffitindicesto cal research. Annual Review of Psychology, 51,
modelmisspecificationandmodeltypes.Multi- 201–226. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.
variateBehavioralResearch,42(3),509–529. psych.51.1.201
Grice, J. W., Cohn, A., Ramsey, R. R., & Chaney, J. M. Marsh, H. W., Balla, J. R., & McDonald, R. P. (1988).
(2015). On muddled reasoning and mediation Goodness-of-fit indexes in confirmatory factor
modeling. Basic and Applied Social Psychology, analysis: The effect of sample size. Psychologi-
37(4), 214–225. https://doi.org/10.1080/ calBulletin,103(3),391–410.https://doi.org/
01973533.2015.1049350 10.1037/0033-2909.103.3.391
Hancock, G. R., & Mueller, R. O. (2011). The re- Maydeu-Olivares,A.(2017).Assessingthesizeofmodel
liability paradox in assessing structural rela- misfitinstructuralequationmodels.Psychome-
tions within covariance structure models. Edu- trika, 82(3), 533–558. https://doi.org/10.
cational and Psychological Measurement, 71(2), 1007/s11336-016-9552-7
306–324. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / McDonald,R.P.,&Ho,M.-H.R.(2002).Principlesand
0013164410384856 practice in reporting structural equation analy-
Hayduk, L. A. (2014). Seeing perfectly fitting fac- ses. Psychological Methods, 7(1), 64–82. https:
tor models that are causally misspecified: Un- //doi.org/10.1037/1082-989X.7.1.64
derstanding that close-fitting models can be Micceri, T. (1989). The unicorn, the normal curve, and
worse. Educational and Psychological Measure- other improbable creatures. Psychological Bul-
ment, 74(6), 905–926. https://doi.org/10. letin, 105(1), 156–166. https://doi.org/10.
1177/0013164414527449 1037/0033-2909.105.1.156
Heene, M., Hilbert, S., Draxler, C., Ziegler, M., & Büh- Moshagen, M. (2012). The model size effect in sem:
ner, M. (2011). Masking misfit in confirmatory Inflated goodness-of-fit statistics are due to
factor analysis by increasing unique variances: the size of the covariance matrix. Structural
A cautionary note on the usefulness of cut- Equation Modeling: A Multidisciplinary Journal,
off values of fit indices. Psychological Methods, 19(1), 86–98. https://doi.org/10.1080/
16(3), 319–336. https://doi.org/10.1037/ 10705511.2012.634724
a0024917 Peterson, R. A. (2000). A meta analysis of variance ac-
Heene, M., Hilbert, S., Freudenthaler, H. H., & Büh- counted for and factor loadings in exploratory
ner, M. (2012). Sensitivity of sem fit indexes factor analysis. Marketing Letters, 11(3), 261–
with respect to violations of uncorrelated er- 275. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1023 / A :
rors. Structural Equation Modeling, 19(1), 36– 1008191211004
50. https://doi.org/10.1080/10705511.2012. Peterson, R. A., & Brown, S. P. (2005). On the use
634710 of beta coefficients in meta-analysis. Journal of
Hu, L.-t., & Bentler, P. M. (1999). Cutoff criteria for Applied Psychology, 90(1), 175–181. https://
fit indexes in covariance structure analysis: doi.org/10.1037/0021-9010.90.1.175
Conventional criteria versus new alternatives. Pornprasertmanit, S., Miller, P., & Schoemann, A.
StructuralEquationModeling,6(1),1–55.https: (2015). Simsem: Simulated structural equation
//doi.org/10.1080/10705519909540118 modeling. http : / / CRAN . R - project . org /
Jackson, D. L., Gillaspy Jr, J. A., & Purc-Stephenson, package=simsem
R. (2009). Reporting practices in confirmatory RCoreTeam.(2015).R:Alanguageandenvironmentfor
factor analysis: An overview and some recom- statistical computing. R Foundation for Statisti-
mendations. Psychological Methods, 14(1), 6– calComputing.http://www.R-project.org/
23.https://doi.org/10.1037/a0014694 Saris, W. E., & Satorra, A. (1988). Characteristics of
Kenny, D. A., & McCoach, D. B. (2003). Effect of the structural equation models which affect the
numberofvariablesonmeasuresoffitinstruc- power of the likelihood ratio test. Sociometric
tural equation modeling. Structural Equation Research,2,220–236.
Modeling, 10(3), 333–351. https://doi.org/ Saris, W. E., & Satorra, A. (1993). Power evaluations
10.1207/S15328007SEM1003_1 in structural equation models. In K. A. Bollen
Kline, R. B. (2015). The mediation myth. Basic and Ap- & J. S. Long (Eds.), Testing structural equation
plied Social Psychology, 37(4), 202–213. https: models(pp.181–204).Sage.
//doi.org/10.1080/01973533.2015.1049349
===== PAGE 36/41 =====
36
Saris, W. E., Satorra, A., & van der Veld, W. M. (2009).
Testingstructuralequationmodelsordetection
ofmisspecifications.StructuralEquationModel-
ing, 16, 561–582. https://doi.org/10.1080/
10705510903203433
Savalei,V.(2012).Therelationshipbetweenrootmean
square error of approximation and model mis-
specification in confirmatory factor analysis
models.EducationalandPsychologicalMeasure-
ment,72(6),910–932.
Schonemann,P.H.(1981).Powerasafunctionofcom-
munality in factor analysis. Bulletin of the Psy-
chonomicSociety,17(1),57–60.
Shah, R., & Goldstein, S. M. (2006). Use of struc-
tural equation modeling in operations man-
agement research: Looking back and forward.
JournalofOperationsManagement,24(2),148–
169. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jom.2005.05.
001
Strobl, C., Boulesteix, A.-L., Kneib, T., Augustin, T., &
Zeileis, A. (2008). Conditional variable impor-
tance for random forests. BMC Bioinformatics,
9(1), 307. https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-
2105-9-307
Tate,C.U.(2015).Ontheoveruseandmisuseofmedia-
tionanalysis:Itmaybeamatteroftiming.Basic
and Applied Social Psychology, 37(4), 235–246.
https://doi.org/10.1080/01973533.2015.
1062380
Westland,J.C.(2010).Lowerboundsonsamplesizein
structural equation modeling. Electronic Com-
merce Research and Applications, 9(6), 476–
487. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.elerap.2010.
07.003
Williams, L. J., & O’Boyle, E. H. J. (2011). The myth
of global fit indices and alternatives for assess-
inglatentvariablerelations.OrganizationalRe-
search Methods, 14(2), 350–369. https://doi.
org/10.1177/1094428110391472
Xia,Y.,&Yang,Y.(2018).RMSEA,CFI,andTLIinstruc-
turalequationmodelingwithorderedcategori-
caldata:Thestorytheytelldependsonthees-
timation methods. Behavior Research Methods.
https://doi.org/10.3758/s13428-018-1055-2
Yuan,K.-H.(2005).Fitindicesversusteststatistics.Mul-
tivariate Behavioral Research, 40(1), 115–148.
https://doi.org/10.1207/s15327906mbr4001_
5
Yuan, K.-H., Yang, M., & Jiang, G. (2017). Empirically
corrected rescaled statistics for sem with small
nandlargep.MultivariateBehavioralResearch,
52(6),673–698.
===== PAGE 37/41 =====
37
AppendixA
TableA1
RMSEA < .05: Type I error rate and Power (Means; Standard Deviations) under condition of no misspecification in
measurementcomponent
Mag.
#
N factor
indic. 0-0 1-0 2-0 3-0
loadings
TypeIerrorrate Power
150 5 Small 0(.022;.012) 0(.024;.011) 0(.024;.011) 0(.032;.01)
5 Large 0(.023;.011) 0(.026;.011) 0(.029;.010) .003(.044;.007)
10 Small 0(.036;.004) 0(.036;.004) 0(.036;.004) 0(.039;.004)
10 Large 0(.036;.004) 0(.037;.004) 0(.037;.004) 0(.042;.003)
250 5 Small 0(.013;.009) 0(.014;.009) 0(.015;.009) 0(.026;.007)
5 Large 0(.013;.009) 0(.018;.009) 0(.021;.009) 0(.04;.005)
10 Small 0(.020;.004) 0(.021;.004) 0(.021;.004) 0(.025;.003)
10 Large 0(.020;.004) 0(.022;.003) 0(.023;.003) 0(.03;.003)
1000 5 Small 0(.004;.004) 0(.007;.005) 0(.023;.002)
5 Large 0(.004;.004) 0(.013;.003) 0(.017;.003) 0(.037;.002)
10 Small 0(.004;.003) 0(.007;.003) 0(.008;.002) 0(.016;.001)
10 Large 0(.004;.003) 0(.010;.002) 0(.012;.002) 0(.022;.001)
AppendixB
TableB1
SRMR < .08: Type I error rate and Power (Means; Standard Deviations) under condition of no misspecification in
measurementcomponent
Mag.
#
N factor 0-0 2-0
indic. 1-0 3-0
loading TypeIerrorrate Power
150 5 Small 0(.060;.003) 0(.061;.003) 0(.061;.003) .020(.068;.005)
5 Large 0(.048;.003) 0(.050;.004) 0(.052;.004) .853(.092;.011)
10 Small 0(.065;.002) 0(.066;.002) 0(.066;.002) .155(.075;.004)
10 Large 0(.053;.003) 0(.056;.003) 0(.057;.003) .986(.102;.010)
250 5 Small 0(.046;.002) 0(.047;.002) 0(.047;.002) .020(.056;.005)
5 Large 0(.037;.002) 0(.040;.003) 0(.041;.003) .746(.087;.01)
10 Small 0(.050;.001) 0(.051;.001) 0(.051;.001) .063(.063;.004)
10 Large 0(.041;.002) 0(.044;.002) 0(.045;.002) .963(.094;.008)
1000 5 Small 0(.023;.001) 0(.024;.001) 0(.025;.001) .000(.038;.003)
5 Large 0(.019;.001) 0(.024;.002) 0(.026;.002) .511(.080;.005)
10 Small 0(.025;.001) 0(.027;.001) 0(.027;.001) .000(.045;.003)
10 Large 0(.020;.001) 0(.026;.001) 0(.028;.001) .982(.089;.004)
===== PAGE 38/41 =====
38
AppendixC
TableC1
CFI < .95: Type I error rate and Power (Means; Standard Deviations) under condition of no misspecification in mea-
surementcomponent
Mag.
#
N factor 0-0 2-0
indic. 1-0 3-0
loading TypeIerrorrate Power
150 5 Small .415(.954;.034) .466(.951;.034) .496(.949;.034) .786(.920;.039)
5 Large .011(.983;.013) .021(.979;.013) .039(.976;.014) .585(.947;.015)
10 Small .999(.845;.033) .999(.841;.033) .999(.840;.033) 1(.815;.033)
10 Large .834(.936;.014) .886(.933;.014) .925(.930;.014) .996(.913;.014)
250 5 Small .074(.981;.018) .094(.979;.019) .106(.977;.019) .568(.945;.024)
5 Large 0(.993;.007) 0(.989;.008) 0(.986;.008) .244(.957;.010)
10 Small .609(.944;.020) .677(.940;.020) .729(.938;.020) .981(.911;.020)
10 Large .002(.978;.008) .003(.974;.008) .005(.972;.008) .347(.953;.008)
1000 5 Small 0(.997;.004) 0(.995;.005) 0(.993;.005) .128(.959;.008)
5 Large 0(.999;.001) 0(.995;.002) 0(.992;.003) 0(.962;.004)
10 Small 0(.996;.004) 0(.993;.005) 0(.990;.005) .017(.962;.006)
10 Large 0(.998;.001) 0(.995;.002) 0(.992;.002) 0(.974;.002)
AppendixD
TechnicalElucidationofDepartureofMeanandStandardDeviationofRMSEAsfromTheoreticalCounterparts
BecauseRMSEA issimplythestandardRMSEAcomputedonthestructuralcomponentofacandidatemodel,and,
S
underparticularassumptions,thesamplingdistributionoftheRMSEAisknown(e.g.,Rigdon,1996;Steiger,1990),
the parameters of the sampling distribution of RMSEA can be analytically derived. If the particular assumptions
S
are satisfied, and H is true, it can be shown that χˆ2 of (4) has a central χ2-distribution. Accordingly, setting
0 misspec
asidethoseinstancesofanegativevalueofχˆ2 −χˆ2 ,thesquaredcounterpartofRMSEA ,RMSˆEA2 ,willalso
misspec model S S
haveapproximatelycentralχ2. Itfollows,then,that:
E(χˆ2 )−E(χˆ2 )
E(RMSEA2)= misspec model =0;
S df (N−1)
model
and
Var(χˆ2 ) 2df 2
Var(RMSEA2)= misspec = = .
S df (N−1) [df(N−1)]2 df(N−1)
model
AsshowninTable6,however,under H true[i.e.,acorrectlyspecifiedstructuralcomponent],theempiricalmeans
0
of RMSEAs are seldom close to zero. Now, as for the case of our models, with six indicators and 14 parameters
to be estimated (three correlations, eight paths, and three error variances), df is equal to (6(6+1)/2)−14 = 7.
Finally, with sample sizes of N = [150,250,1000], the theoretical standard deviation of RMSEA is computed to be
S
[.004, .002, .001]. It will be confirmed by inspection that the empirical standard deviations presented in Table 6
arenotevenclosetothesevalues. Alltold,itappearsthatthedistributionofRMSEA isnotwellapproximatedby
S
thetheoreticaldistributions,heretofore,bymethodologists,derived. Itwouldhavetobeconcludedthattheactual
distribution of RMSEA remains unknown; and there exists no logical basis for selecting cutoff values such as .05,
S
bymeansofreferencetothequantilesofdistributions,therelevanceofwhich,totheactualdistributionofRMSEA ,
S
isunknown.
===== PAGE 39/41 =====
39
AppendixE
TableE1
RMSEA<.05: TypeIerrorrateandPower(Means;StandardDeviations)underconditionofmisspecificationinmeasurementcomponent
N 0-1 0-2 0-3 1-1 1-2 1-3 2-1 2-2 2-3 3-1 3-2 3-1
# Mag.
indic. factor
loadings
TypeIerrorrate Power
150 5 Small .677 1 1 .705 1 1 .707 1 1 .869 1 1
(.062;.006)(.129;.004)(.170;.004)(.063;.006)(.129;.004)(.170;.004)(.063;.006)(.129;.004)(.170;.004)(.066;.005)(.130;.004)(.171;.003)
150 5 Large .566 1 1 .789 1 1 .993 1 1 .585 1 1
(.061;.006)(.124;.004)(.162;.004)(.065;.006)(.124;.004)(.162;.004)(.063;.006)(.124;.004)(.162;.004)(.073;.005)(.128;.004)(.165;.004)
150 10 Small 1 1 1 .999 1 1 1 1 1 .999 1 1
(.074;.002)(.126;.002)(.149;.002)(.074;.002)(.126;.002)(.149;.002)(.074;.002)(.126;.002)(.149;.002)(.076;.002)(.127;.002)(.149;.002)
150 10 Large 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
(.073;.002)(.123;.002)(.146;.002)(.073;.002)(.123;.002)(.146;.002)(.073;.002)(.123;.002)(.146;.002)(.073;.002)(.125;.002)(.147;.002)
250 5 Small .443 1 1 .444 1 1 .444 1 1 .487 1 1
(.060;.004)(.128;.003)(.169;.003)(.059;.004)(.127;.003)(.169;.003)(.06;.004) (.128;.003)(.169;.003)(.063;.004)(.129;.003)(.170;.003)
250 5 Large .269 1 1 .350 1 1 .350 1 1 .983 1 1
(.058;.004)(.122;.003)(.161;.003)(.058;.004)(.122;.003)(.161;.003)(.058;.004)(.122;.003)(.161;.003)(.063;.004)(.128;.003)(.164;.003)
250 10 Small 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
(.068;.002)(.122;.001)(.146;.001)(.069;.002)(.122;.001)(.146;.001)(.069;.002)(.122;.001)(.146;.001)(.068;.004)(.123;.001)(.146;.001)
250 10 Large 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
(.066;.002)(.12;.001) (.143;.001)(.067;.002)(.12;.001) (.143;.001)(.067;.002)(.12;.001) (.143;.001)(.067;.002)(.123;.001)(.146;.001)
1000 5 Small .105 1 1 .112 1 1 .112 1 1 .854 1 1
(.058;.002)(.127;.001)(.168;.001)(.058;.002)(.127;.001)(.168;.001)(.058;.002)(.127;.001)(.168;.001)(.062;.002)(.128;.001)(.169;.001)
1000 5 Large .006 1 1 .025 1 1 .025 1 1 .105 1 1
(.056;.002)(.121;.001)(.16;.001) (.057;.002)(.121;.001)(.16;.001) (.057;.002)(.121;.001)(.16;.001) (.057;.002)(.126;.001)(.161;.001)
1000 10 Small 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
(.065;.001)(.121;.001)(.144;.001)(.065;.001)(.121;.001)(.144;.001)(.065;.001)(.121;.001)(.144;.001)(.065;.001)(.122;.001)(.145;.001)
1000 10 Large 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
(.063;.001)(.118;.001)(.142;.001)(.064;.001)(.118;.001)(.142;.001)(.064;.001)(.118;.001)(.142;.001)(.064;.001)(.118;.001)(.143;.001)
===== PAGE 40/41 =====
40 AppendixF
TableF1
SRMR<.08: TypeIerrorrateandPower(Means;StandardDeviations)underconditionofmisspecificationinmeasurementcomponent
N 0-1 0-2 0-3 1-1 1-2 1-3 2-1 2-2 2-3 3-1 3-2 3-1
# Mag.
indic. factor
loadings
TypeIerrorrate Power
150 5 Small .003 1 1 .001 1 1 .002 1 1 .283 1 1
(.071;.003)(.093;.004)(.110;.005)(.071;.003)(.093;.004)(.110;.005)(.071;.003)(.094;.004)(.110;.004)(.078;.005)(.099;.005)(.117;.006)
150 5 Large 0 .004 .407 0 .012 .434 0 .019 .536 .966 .993 1
(.054;.004)(.068;.004)(.079;.005)(.059;.004)(.069;.004)(.081;.005)(.057;.004)(.074;.004)(.081;.005)(.098;.01) (.104;.011)(.113;.01)
150 10 Small .099 1 1 .116 1 1 .163 1 1 .952 1 1
(.077;.002)(.094;.003)(.104;.003)(.077;.002)(.095;.003)(.104;.003)(.078;.002)(.095;.003)(.104;.003)(.086;.004)(.102;.004)(.111;.004)
150 10 Large 0 .003 .161 0 .01 .29 0 .023 .374 .997 1 1
(.073;.003)(.071;.003)(.076;.004)(.062;.003)(.072;.003)(.078;.004)(.063;.003)(.073;.003)(.086;.004)(.105;.01) (.112;.009)(.116;.009)
250 5 Small 0 .97 1 0 .963 1 0 .977 1 .003 1 1
(.060;.002)(.085;.003)(.104;.003)(.06;.002) (.085;.003)(.104;.003)(.06;.002) (.086;.003)(.104;.003)(.067;.004)(.092;.004)(.111;.005)
250 5 Large 0 .023 .023 0 .003 .035 0 .065 .848 .995 1 1
(.045;.003)(.061;.003)(.073;.004)(.047;.003)(.062;.003)(.073;.004)(.048;.003)(.063;.003)(.089;.009)(.099;.009)(.109;.008)(.117;.008)
250 10 Small 0 .995 1 0 .996 1 0 .998 1 .101 1 1
(.065;.002)(.085;.002)(.096;.002)(.066;.002)(.085;.002)(.096;.002)(.066;.002)(.086;.002)(.096;.002)(.076;.003)(.094;.003)(.103;.003)
250 10 Large 0 1 1 0 1 1 0 1 1 .88 1 1
(.050;.002)(.062;.002)(.069;.003)(.052;.002)(.064;.003)(.07;.003) (.053;.002)(.065;.003)(.071;.003)(.1;.008) (.107;.007)(.111;.007)
1000 5 Small 0 .001 1 0 .001 1 0 .001 1 .729 .999 1
(.045;.001)(.076;.001)(.096;.002)(.045;.001)(.076;.001)(.096;.002)(.045;.001)(.076;.001)(.096;.002)(.054;.002)(.083;.002)(.104;.004)
1000 5 Large 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 .003 .999 1
(.032;.001)(.052;.001)(.066;.002)(.034;.001)(.053;.001)(.067;.002)(.036;.001)(.055;.001)(.067;.002)(.062;.002)(.083;.002)(.104;.004)
1000 10 Small 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 .999 1 .999
(.049;.001)(.073;.001)(.085;.001)(.049;.001)(.074;.001)(.085;.001)(.049;.001)(.074;.001)(.085;.001)(.074;.001)(.083;.002)(.094;.001)
1000 10 Large 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 .093 1 1
(.035;.001)(.051;.001)(.059;.001)(.038;.001)(.053;.001)(.061;.001)(.04;.001) (.054;.001)(.062;.001)(.061;.001)(.1;.004) (.105;.004)
===== PAGE 41/41 =====
41
AppendixG
TableG1
CFI<.95: TypeIerrorrateandPower(Means;StandardDeviations)underconditionofmisspecificationinmeasurementcomponent
N 0-1 0-2 0-3 1-1 1-2 1-3 2-1 2-2 2-3 3-1 3-2 3-1
# Mag.
indic. factor
loadings
TypeIerrorrate Power
150 5 Small 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
(.775;.04) (.456;.036)(.334;.03) (.772;.04) (.457;.037)(.335;.03) (.772;.039)(.454;.037)(.332;.031)(.747;.041)(.442;.038)(.323;.031)
150 5 Large .994 1 1 .999 1 1 1 1 1 .999 1 1
(.909;.017)(.712;.024)(.594;.026)(.89;.019) (.711;.024)(.593;.026)(.903;.017)(.708;.024)(.59;.026) (.86;.02) (.688;.024)(.573;.026)
150 10 Small 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
(.559;.033)(.308;.026)(.243;.021)(.559;.033)(.307;.026)(.241;.022)(.555;.033)(.306;.026)(.24;.022) (.539;.033)(.297;.025)(.234;.022)
150 10 Large 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
(.781;.019)(.554;.023)(.47;.022) (.778;.019)(.552;.023)(.468;.022)(.776;.019)(.55;.023) (.467;.022)(.761;.019)(.54;.022) (.458;.022)
250 5 Small 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
(.791;.028)(.461;.028)(.337;.023)(.791;.028)(.461;.028)(.336;.024)(.787;.029)(.459;.028)(.335;.023)(.763;.03) (.445;.028)(.324;.024)
250 5 Large .998 1 1 .998 1 1 .999 1 1 .999 1 1
(.919;.012)(.718;.018)(.597;.019)(.916;.012)(.716;.018)(.596;.019)(.912;.017)(.713;.018)(.593;.019)(.886;.013)(.694;.018)(.577;.019)
250 10 Small 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
(.600;.025)(.319;.02) (.25;.017) (.592;.025)(.319;.02) (.249;.017)(.598;.025)(.317;.02) (.248;.017)(.58;.025) (.309;.02) (.241;.017)
250 10 Large 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
(.810;.013)(.569;.017)(.481;.017)(.808;.013)(.567;.017)(.479;.017)(.805;.013)(.565;.017)(.477;.017)(.792;.017)(.555;.017)(.469;.017)
1000 5 Small 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
(.800;.012)(.464;.014)(.337;.012)(.8;.012) (.464;.014)(.337;.012)(.797;.012)(.461;.014)(.335;.012)(.772;.013)(.448;.014)(.325;.011)
1000 5 Large 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 .999 .999 .999
(.923;.005)(.721;.008)(.599;.009)(.919;.005)(.719;.009)(.598;.009)(.917;.005)(.716;.009)(.595;.009)(.891;.006)(.697;.009)(.579;.009)
1000 10 Small 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
(.623;.012)(.325;.01) (.253;.009)(.622;.012)(.325;.01) (.253;.009)(.619;.012)(.323;.01) (.251;.009)(.601;.012)(.314;.01) (.26;.009)
1000 10 Large 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
(.824;.006)(.576;.008)(.486;.008)(.822;.006)(.574;.008)(.484;.008)(.819;.006)(.572;.008)(.483;.008)(.804;.006)(.562;.008)(.474;.008)