
===== PAGE 1/16 =====
Meta-Psychology,2024,vol8,MP.2021.2918 Opendata:Yes Editedby:ThomasNordström
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2021.2918 Openmaterials:Yes Reviewedby:StefanGustafson,KazuhisaTakemura
Articletype:ReplicationReport Openandreproducibleanalysis:Yes Analysisreproducedby:LucijaBatinovi´c
PublishedundertheCC-BY4.0license Openreviewsandeditorialprocess:Yes AllsupplementaryfilescanbeaccessedatOSF:
Preregistration:Yes https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/VKSN2
Associations between Goal Orientation and Self-Regulated
Learning Strategies are Stable across Course Types,
Underrepresented Minority Status, and Gender:
A Replication of Muis and Franco (2009)
Brendan A. Schuetze1 and Veronica X. Yan1
1EducationalPsychologyDepartment,TheUniversityofTexasatAustin
Inthispre-registeredreplicationoffindingsfromMuisandFranco[2009; Contempo-
raryEducationalPsychology,34(4),306-318],collegestudents(N=978)fromacross
the United States and Canada were surveyed regarding their goal orientations and
learning strategies. A structural equation modelling approach was used to assess the
associations between goal orientations and learning strategies. Six of the eight sig-
nificant associations (75%) found by Muis and Franco replicated successfully in the
currentstudy. Masteryapproachgoalspositivelypredictedendorsementofalllearning
strategies (Rehearsal, Critical Thinking, Metacognitive Self-Regulation and Elabora-
tion). Performanceavoidancegoalsnegativelypredictedcriticalthinking, whileposi-
tivelypredictingmetacognitiveself-regulationandrehearsal. Evidenceformoderation
byassignmenttypewasfound. Noevidenceofthemoderationoftheseassociationsby
gender,underrepresentedminoritystatus,orcoursetype(STEM,Humanities,orSocial
Sciences) was found. The reliability of common scales used in educational research
andissuesconcerningthereplicationofstudiesusingstructuralequationmodelingare
discussed.
Keywords: SEMReplication;AchievementGoals;LearningStrategies;Heterogeneity
Motivationalbeliefsandlearningstrategiesareakey ented toward two types of goals (mastery or perfor-
theoretical mechanism of academic achievement, with mance) an that the goals can be positively or neg-
interest to learning scientists and educators alike. In atively valenced (approach or avoidance), thus cre-
recent years, research in both of these areas has in- ating four general goal orientations: performance-
creasinglygrappledwithfindingsthatmotivationalvari- approach, mastery-approach, performance-avoidance,
ables(Fongetal.,2019;Meeceetal.,2006)andlearn- and mastery-avoidance (see Elliot and McGregor,
ing strategies (Deemer, 2004) often behave differently 2001).
across socio-cultural contexts and identities. In this Performancegoalscenteraroundanindividual’sper-
study, we present a pre-registered replication of Muis formance in terms of grades and relative standing
and Franco’s (2009) study of the associations between among their peers. Mastery goals revolve around
goalorientationtheoryandlearningstrategies,withan the state of one’s knowledge. Approach orientation
extended set of analyses focused on determining the refers to the pursuit of positive outcomes (e.g., a high
extent to which these associations are moderated by grade or deep understanding), while avoidance orien-
contextual(coursetype,assignments)anddemographic tation means seeking to avoid negative outcomes (e.g.,
(gender,underrepresentedminoritystatus)variables. failing a class, misunderstanding a lecture or forget-
ting material). Putting these two axes (performance-
GoalOrientationTheory mastery and approach-avoid) together, the meaning of
the four broad goal orientations is clear. For example,
Goalorientationtheoryhasbeenaproductivewayof
performance-approach refers to the aim of achieving
understanding academic motivation by examining the
betterperformancethanfellowstudents,whilemastery-
type of goals that students adopt as a result of their
avoidancereferstothegoalofavoidinghavingnotmas-
personal background and classroom context (Meece et
teredthecoursecontent.
al., 2006). In its most common formulation, goal ori-
A multitude of studies have found that higher lev-
entation theory highlights that students can be ori-
===== PAGE 2/16 =====
2
elsofself-reportedapproach-goalorientationscorrelate studies have begun testing this hypothesis, often using
with (Senko et al., 2011), and also—in the case of in- the Motivated Strategies for Learning Questionnaire to
terventionstudies(e.g.,Fuchsetal.,1997)—cause(Ka- measure learning strategy uptake (MSLQ; Pintrich et
planandMaehr,2007)higherstudentperformance. Ul- al., 1991). The MSLQ subscales of critical thinking,
timately, it seems that approach goals are positively as- elaboration, and metacognitive self-regulation are typi-
sociated with performance, regardless of whether they cally classified as deep strategies, whereas the subscale
are performance or mastery in orientation and hold- ofrehearsalistypicallyclassifiedasashallowstrategy.
ing both types of goals simultaneously can contribute Senko et al. (2011) reviewed the studies that
to academic achievement (Harackiewicz et al., 1997; reported associations between goals and strategies.
Senkoetal.,2013). Among the 14 studies they found, the average asso-
ciation between performance-approach goals and sur-
IsTime-on-TasktheMechanism? face strategies was r = 0.20. Among 13 stud-
ies, the association between mastery-approach goals
Although the broader association between approach
and surface learning was also r = 0.20, indicating
goals and academic achievement appear relatively ro-
that perhaps both mastery-approach and performance-
bust across studies (Harackiewicz et al., 1997; Senko
approach goals were approximately equally predictive
et al., 2013), less is known about the mechanism by
of surface learning. However, Senko et al. were re-
whichmotivationalstatescausehigherperformance(as
porting average raw correlations, and not necessarily
alsodiscussedinthegrowthmindsetliterature,Yanand
values derived from a multiple regression analysis, so
Schuetze,2023). Someresearchers,suchasTabaketal.
thisanalysiscannotdeterminetheextenttowhichthese
(2009),haveputforththeoreticalmodelsshowingthat
types of goals predict surface learning over-and-above
motivationalbeliefsworkonacademicperformancepri-
theother. Amultipleregressionapproachisparticularly
marilythroughtherouteofincreasedtime-on-task(also
warranted in the context of goal orientation theory, as
called “task engagement,” “persistence,” “effort regula-
mastery-approachandperformance-approachgoalsare
tion”and“effortmanagement”;Liemetal.,2008). This
often positively correlated with one-another (Harack-
hypothesisseemsplausible. SincetheearlyworkofJ.B.
iewicz et al., 2002; e.g,. Mouratidis et al., 2018).
Carroll (Carroll, 1963, 1989), time-on-task has been
Therefore,inthefollowingparagraphswesummarizea
knowntobeakeypredictorofachievementinbothaca-
subset of the studies examining the links between goal
demic(e.g.,Lee,2018)andnon-academic(Macnamara
orientations and learning strategies to parse out find-
etal., 2014)domains. Itdoes notseem intuitivelynec-
ingsfromtheirregressionmodelsandsomeofthecom-
essary that higher achievement motivation causes stu-
mon methodological and sample-related choices made
dents to act in a qualitatively different manner. Rather,
bytheseresearchers.
motivated students may simply spend more time than
Liem et al. (2008) represents one particularly rigor-
students with lower achievement motivation, but in a
ous test of the hypothesized associations between goal
qualitativelysimilarmanner(YanandSchuetze,2023).
orientations and learning strategies in a large (N =
Quality,notjustQuantityofStudy 1475) nationally representative of Singaporean ninth
graderswithregardtotheirEnglishclasses. Theyfound
However, other researchers, particularly those who
that mastery-approach goal orientations predicted in-
study motivation using a goal orientation framework,
creasedreportingofusingbothdeepandsurfacelearn-
havearguedthatmotivatedstudentswillusemoreben-
ing strategies as measured by the MSLQ. Interestingly,
eficialstrategies(Engelschalketal.,2017;Senkoetal.,
performance-approach goal orientations were linked
2011). In other words, increased motivation benefits
only to deep learning, not shallow learning, while
thequalityandquantityofstudy. Underthishypothesis,
performance-avoidance goals were linked to surface
students with higher approach (both mastery and per-
learningandnotdeeplearning. SenkoandMiles(2008)
formance) goal endorsement will preferentially engage
recruited 260 undergraduate students from a general
indeeperlearningstrategies,whicharealsolinkedwith
psychology course and found that mastery-approach
higher achievement (Muis and Franco, 2009). Deeper
goals, but not performance-approach goals, were pre-
learning strategies are those that engage students in
dictive of both higher deep and surface learning strate-
critical thinking, monitoring comprehension, organiz-
gies in a multiple regression SEM model. A similar re-
ing information, and drawing connections between ed-
sult was found by Ranellucci et al. (2013) in a small
ucational materials. These strategies are thought to be
sample(N=73)ofundergraduatestudents,wherethe
beneficialforlong-termlearning,asopposedtoshallow
useofdeepandshallowprocessingstrategieswascoded
strategies, such as rehearsal/repetition, underlining, or
by experimenters from participants’ think-aloud com-
highlighting (Dunlosky et al., 2013). Several previous
===== PAGE 3/16 =====
3
ments. In another sample of undergraduate students ating the relationships between goal orientations and
(N = 256) using the MSLQ, Senko et al. (2013) found learningstrategiesastheyarealreadyimplicatedinmo-
somewhat contradicting results to Senko and Miles tivation theories with regard to their main effects on
(2008), with mastery-approach goals predicting deep, focal variables. Per Broekkamp and Van Hout-Wolters
but not surface learning. Conversely, performance- (2006), students’ learning strategies vary depending
approachgoalspredictedonlysurfacelearning. on academic discipline, type of assignment, and even
The present study grew out of a pre-registered repli- across individual courses. Even the mere expectation
cation of Muis and Franco (2009) for the Center for oftestformatshapesthemnemonicencodingstrategies
Open Science’s contribution to DARPA’s Systematizing that students engage while studying (Rivers and Dun-
Confidence in Open Research and Evidence (SCORE) losky,2020).
project (Alipourfard et al., 2021). Similar to the stud- Culturaldifferencesinlearningstrategyusehavealso
ies discussed above, Muis and Franco’s study concerns been found, in terms of both institutional culture and
associations between motivational variables (goal ori- studentdemographiccharacteristics. Forexample,both
entations as measured by the Achievement Goal Ques- school-wideinstitutionalandclassroomspecificculture
tionnaire; ElliotandMcGregor,2001)andstudystrate- shape the perception and adoption of mastery goals at
gies representing varying depth of processing (elabora- the student level (Deemer, 2004). Student gender and
tion, critical thinking, and rehearsal; measured by the ethnicity is also associated with different patterns of
MSLQ).Inparticular,MuisandFranco2009)foundthat motivation variables and self-regulated learning strate-
mastery approach goals were predictive of elaboration gies(e.g.,Li,2019;Psaltou-Joycey,2008). D’Limaetal.
(a deep strategy), critical thinking (deep), metacog- (2014) found that female students were more mastery
nitive self-regulation (deep) and rehearsal (shallow) orientated than male students, who conversely tended
strategies. to be more performance oriented. In terms of learning
As shown in Figure 1, they found that performance- strategy use, Purdie et al.’s (Purdie et al., 1996) study
approach goals predicted increased critical thinking ofAustralianstudents,JapanesestudentsinJapan,and
(deep) and decreased metacognitive self-regulation JapanesestudentsinAustraliashowsthatculturalback-
(deep). Performance-avoidance goals were linked with ground influences the types of learning strategies stu-
increasedrehearsal(shallow). Mastery-avoidancegoals dents adopt, with Japanese students endorsing higher
werelinkedwithdecreasedelaboration(deep). levels of memorization strategies and lower levels of
goalsettingstrategies. Furthermore,Japanesestudents
Open Questions Regarding Goal Orientations and studying in Australia were found to be influenced by
LearningStrategies boththeirexperienceinJapaneseandAustralianschool
systems,fallingbetweentheAustralianandJapanesein
Altogether, it appears goal orientations and learning
Japanstudentsintermsofstudystrategies.
strategiesareassociated,theuniversalityanddegreeof
Extant research shows that both motivational and
these associations is unclear. There are several possi-
self-regulatedlearningprocessesaredrivenbyavariety
ble reasons for the seemingly contradictory results in
ofvariablesrelatedtothetaskathand,goalsbeingpur-
this literature area. One area of limitation with regard
sued, and student backgrounds. Although main effects
to pre-existing studies of these associations is that they
on motivational variables and the use of study strate-
have been primarily conducted in the context of single
gieshavebeenfound,lessisknownregardingthelinks
institutionsorsingleclassrooms(e.g.,MuisandFranco,
between goal orientations and study strategies. In par-
2009), with an over-representation of students in psy-
ticular we were interested in whether these previously
chologycourses. AlthoughLiemetal.’s(2008)national
reported associations are replicable, and whether they
study of Singapore presents a notable exception to this
are moderated by any of these educationally relevant
generalization, we cannot be assured that their results
variables.
wouldtransferone-to-onetoaNorthAmericancontext.
LackofReplications
HeterogeneityandHiddenModerators
Another sourceof the difficultyin evaluating thisre-
As a result of the limited contextual variability in-
searchareaisthelackofpublishedpre-registeredrepli-
herent in these studies, it is impossible to disentangle
cationattempts. Althoughopenscienceisnotnecessar-
the impacts of potential (hidden) moderators, such as
ilyanewideainotherresearchdomains(e.g., physics;
coursetype,assignmentcharacteristics(e.g.,test-based
Hecker, 2017), within education research open scien-
versus essay-based assignments), and individual level
tific practices, such as pre-registration of hypotheses,
variables, such as race and gender. All of these vari-
open data, and open analysis scripts are not yet the
ables have theoretically plausible reasons for moder-
===== PAGE 4/16 =====
4
norm (van der Zee and Reich, 2018). Indeed, of the identifiedpreviouslyinboththeAmerican(Hurtadoand
studies we surveyed in our literature review, none of RuizAlvarado, 2012)andCanadiancontexts(Henryet
these studies were pre-registered, nor did we find any al.,2017). Together,thequalitiesofthissampleandthe
openly accessible datasets. Given the high researcher pre-registered analysis and data collection plan allows
degreesoffreedominherentinstructuralequationmod- us to build on previous work concerning the associa-
elling (Seaman and Weber, 2015) and survey research tions between study strategies and goal orientations in
generally, different patterns of results could stem from anincremental,yetrigorousmanner.
a variety of measurement, analytic, and reporting de- Therefore, in the present study, our two main re-
cisions that are essentially unverifiable in the absence search questions are: (1) How is each type of achieve-
of open scientific practices (see also Crede and Harms, ment goal uniquely related to study strategies? (2)
2019). Although not a panacea in and of themselves, Do the relationships vary across course types and
pre-registeredreplicationstudiesattempttoameliorate student sub-groups (underrepresented minority status,
someoftheseissuesbylayingoutthehypotheses,anal- gender)? For the first RQ, we drew upon the results
ysis plan, and participant sampling decisions ahead of of Muis and Franco (2009; see Figure 1) and predicted
time(PluckerandMakel,2021). thateachofthefourstudystrategiesofinterest(Elabo-
ration,CriticalThinking,MetacognitiveSelf-Regulation,
ThePresentStudy and Rehearsal) would be predicted by a unique set of
goal orientations. For the second RQ, we did not have
Although, given the study design used by Muis and
specific pre-registered predictions. We present these
Franco(and,thus,thepresentstudy),nocausalconclu-
analyses as exploratory and include them because the-
sions can be made, these associations have key mech-
oretically one might expect the associations uncovered
anistic implications for the way in which motivational
byourmodeltodifferbystudentbackground.
variables may operate—particularly in terms of how
achievement motivation may work to increase class-
Methods
roomperformance. Whilemaintainingasmuchfidelity
to the original study as possible, the present research The materials for this study, including the pre-
effort builds on Muis and Franco’s work in several key registration, power analysis, and deidentified data set
ways. Whereas Muis and Franco’s study was limited to are available on the Open Science Framework’s data
201 students recruited from a single educational psy- repository(https://osf.io/e7tw2/). Thepre-registration
chology course, the present study recruited 978 under- is located here: https://osf.io/x9kda; the claims tested
graduatestudentsacrossnumerouscoursesanduniver- in this paper are located in the exploratory section of
sitiesintheUnitedStatesandCanada. thisdocument,becausetheywereregisteredinaddition
Whilemostofthepreviousworkinthisresearcharea tothefocalclaimselectedbytheSCOREprogram.
has drawn student participants from single universities
(and often single classes within these universities), the Participants
relative breadth of our sample allows for the compari-
ParticipantswererecruitedfromProlific(prolific.co),
sonoftheseassociationsacrossgeneraltypesofclasses
an online survey recruitment platform during October
(i.e., STEM, Social Sciences, and Humanities) outside
2020. Participants were required to be currently en-
of the context of a single university. Should associa-
rolled in an undergraduate, community, or technical
tions hold up under such relatively wide heterogeneity
college and a resident of the United States or Canada
ofuniversityexperience, wecanberelativelyconfident
as determined by the Prolific eligibility screener. We
thattheassociationsshouldgeneralizetoothercontexts
notethatthepre-registrationlistedonlyundergraduate
withintheUnitedStatesandCanada.
and community college students, but technical college
Given the differences in the type of learning materi-
students were allowed to register for the study due to
als taught across these broad divisions of the academy,
concerns about sample-size limitations. This decision
wewereinterestedinwhethertheassociationsbetween
wasmadepriortoanydatabeingcollected.
motivational beliefs and learning strategies were in-
The United States and Canada were chosen for this
variant across many different types of classes. Fur-
survey, becausetheysharethesamelanguageandgen-
thermore, our relatively large sample allows us to test
eral school calendar. Altogether, 1,018 students were
measurement invariance across other theoretically in-
recruited to the survey. Forty students failed at least
teresting sub-groups, including underrepresented mi-
one attention check. Per our pre-registered exclusion
noritypopulationsandgender,whereissuesconcerning
criteria, these students were removed from the survey
achievement disparities (Museus and Liverman, 2010)
for the purpose of our analyses, for a final sample size
andstructuralracism/sexism(McGee,2020)havebeen
ofN=978. Thissamplesizewaschoseninaccordance
===== PAGE 5/16 =====
5
Figure1
StructuralEquationModelDiagramShowingResultsofMuisandFranco(2009)
Note. Solidlinesindicatesignificantpositiveassociations. Dashedlinesrepresentsignificantnegativeassociations. The
following latent variables are depicted: Mastery Approach (MAp), Mastery Avoidance (MAv), Performance Approach
(PAp), Performance Avoidance (PAv), Elaboration (ELAB), Critical Thinking (CRIT), Metacognitive Self-Regulation
(MSR)andRehearsal(REH).Significancerepresentedasfollows: *p<.05(nofurthercutoffswerereportedinoriginal
paper).
withapoweranalysisconductedbytheCenterforOpen (28%) answered “Asian or Pacific Islander;” 69 (7%)
Science in order to successfully detect a standardized “Black or African American/Canadian;” 88 (9%) “His-
structural equation modeling coefficient of 0.41, with panic or Latino;” 4 (<1%) “Native American, First Na-
90percentpower. tions, or Alaskan Native;” 474 (48%) “White or Cau-
Thedemographicsofthisfinalsampleareasfollows. casian;”61(6%)“MultiracialorBiracial;”and8(<1%)
The mean age was 22.22 years (Median = 21.00, 2 “a race/ethnicity not described here.” Thus, 230 stu-
Missing). 576 (59%) participants identified as female, dentswerepartofhistoricallyunderrepresentedgroups
398 (40%) identified as male, and 4 (<1%) answered inhighereducation.
“Prefer Not to Say” or had missing data. 863 (88%) Each participant chose a single course at the begin-
participantswerecurrentresidentsoftheUnitedStates, ning of the survey to answer the questions in response
while 108 (11%) were residents of Canada (7 or <1% to,theywereaskedtocategorizethiscourseintermsof
Missing). Note that the gender and nationality demo- thegeneralareaofstudy. 509(52%)studentsanswered
graphicquestionswerepre-administeredbytheProlific thesurveyregardinga“STEM:NaturalSciences,Math-
screener, and thus the research team was not able to ematics, Computer Science, Engineering” course, while
ask finer-grained questions concerning these identities. 243 (25%) answered with regard to a “Social Sciences
In terms of race or ethnicity, participants were asked (e.g., Economics, Business, Psychology, Anthropology)”
“Which of the following best describes you?” and 274 course, and 226 (23%) chose a “Humanities or Lan-
===== PAGE 6/16 =====
6
guage Arts (e.g., English, Comparative Literature, Phi- The rehearsal scale measures the use of rote (shal-
losophy)” course. In terms of assignments mentioned, low) learning strategies (e.g., “When I study for this
673participantsmentionedcompletingquizzes,exams, class, I practice saying the material to myself over and
or tests. The remaining 305 participants mentioned a over”). Elaboration measures deeper processing study
mixofgroupprojects,essays,oralternativeassessment strategies (e.g., “When I study for this course, I write
types. briefsummariesofthemainideasfromthereadingsand
Participants were paid $1.50 each, or approximately the concepts from the lectures”). The critical thinking
$9.55 per hour, given that the survey took participants subscale is indicative of a student’s self-reported use of
a little under nine-and-a-half minutes to complete on analyticthinkinganddrawingconnectionsbetweendis-
average. This research was conducted in accordance paratesetsofknowledge(e.g.,“WheneverIreadorhear
withtheoversightoftheUniversityofTexasatAustin’s an assertion or conclusion in this class, I think about
InstitutionalReviewBoardandalsotheNavalInforma- possible alternatives.”). Metacognitive self-regulation
tionWarfareCenterPacific,HumanResearchProtection measures the extent to which students engage in self-
Office. monitoring, planning, and metacognitive control (e.g.,
“WhenIbecomeconfusedaboutsomethingI’mreading
Materials forthisclass,Igobackandtrytofigureitout.”). These
questions were answered on a seven-point Likert scale
Fourscaleswereadministeredforthepurposeofthis
rangingfrom“StronglyDisagree"to“StronglyAgree."
survey. Onescalewasad-hocinconstruction(Memora-
bility), while three others were drawn without modifi-
Memorability
cationfromtheresearchliterature.
This scale was composed of three questions aimed
GoalOrientations at determining the extent to which students felt they
could accurately recall their course and studying ac-
The 12-item Achievement Goal Questionnaire pub-
tivities. They were asked two Likert questions: “How
lished by Elliot and McGregor (2001) was used to
well can you remember what you did in order to pre-
measure goal orientations. Four subscales, mastery
parefortheserecentassignments/quizzes/exams?”and
approach, mastery avoidance, performance approach,
also “If a friend asked you to recount to them how you
andperformanceavoidance,wereeachmeasuredusing
studiedfortheseassignments/quizzes/exams,howcon-
threeitems. Anexampleperformanceapproachitemis
fident are you in your ability to give them an accu-
“Itisimportantformetodobetterthanotherstudents,"
rate description of what you did?”, both on a scale of
indicativeofbeingperformance-oriented(motivatedby
one-to-seven. Additionally,theyansweredthequestion:
grades)andalsoapproach-oriented(seekingtooutper-
“How long ago were the assignments you were think-
form). An example mastery avoidance item is “Some-
ing about?” To this question, participants could answer
times I’m afraid that I may not understand the content
either: “Last week," “Two weeks ago," “Within the last
of this class as thoroughly as I’d like." It is mastery-
month(3-4weeksago),"and“Morethanamonthago."
oriented because it involves wanting to learn the con-
Giventhatmemoryisknowntodegradeovertime,this
tent(asopposedtobeinggrade/performanceoriented),
last question was asked to indirectly measure memory
anditisavoidance-orientedbecauseitreflectsafearof
strength or recallability of the course assignments and
doing poorly. Items were measured using Likert ques-
student study strategies. This scale was not pivotal to
tions ranging from “Not at all true of me” to “Very true
thehypothesesofourstudynorwasitusedbyMuisand
ofme."
Franco (2009), rather these questions were included
Self-RegulatedLearningandMetacognitiveStrategies in order to make sure that there were no systematic
differences in memorability across different groups of
A subset of the items from the Motivated Strate-
respondents (see pre-registration for further discussion
gies for Learning Questionnaire (MSLQ; Pintrich et al.,
forwhythisscalewasincludedinthestudy).
1991). These subscales were chosen to measure the
various learning strategies students used and to map Disciplined-FocusedEpistemicBeliefs
onto the previous work of Muis and Franco (2009).
Although these were not a focal part of the replica-
The items used in this survey were drawn from four
tion, we also administered the 18-question, four-factor
subscales, Elaboration (6 items), Critical Thinking (5
Disciplined-Focused Epistemological Beliefs Question-
items), Rehearsal (4 items) and Metacognitive Self-
naire as developed by Hofer (2000). The four pre-
Regulation (12 items) drawn from the larger MSLQ in-
viously established factors are Certainty, Justification
ventory.
===== PAGE 7/16 =====
7
(Personal), Source of Knowledge (Authority), and At- would have answered the MSLQ first, then AGQ, and
tainment of Truth. Muis and Franco (2009) used a DFEBQ.Withineach scale, theitemswerepresentedin
longer27-itemscalethataddsanadditionalnineitems arandomorderperparticipant.
to measure the same four constructs; we used only the Two attention checks were placed randomly within
validated18items. these surveyquestions. One attentioncheck askedpar-
ticipants to answer “Strongly Agree,” while the other
Procedure asked students to respond “Strongly Disagree." After
completing the four scales of interest, each participant
Students were recruited to the survey via the Pro-
categorizedthechosencourseasSTEM,SocialSciences,
lific.co online recruitment platform. They read a con-
or Humanities in nature. Then they reported whether
sent form and if they consented to proceed were ad-
theyhadreceivedgradesforthecourseassignmentsal-
vanced further into the Qualtrics survey platform. Stu-
ready (either “Yes, I have received grades for at least
dents were then asked which course they would like to
some of these assignment(s)" or “No, no grades have
answerthesurveywithregardto:
beenreceived"). Andreportedtheirraceorethnicityas
Please think of one single ongoing course described above. Upon completing the survey, students
that you are currently enrolled in. You will werethankedfortheirtimeandreturnedtotheProlific
need to answer all of the following survey platform.
questions with regard to this course. Please
writethenameofthecoursebelow(e.g.,In- Results
tro Psych, Calculus 1, Geographic Informa-
The primary goal of the replication attempt was
tionSystems)
to analyze the associations between the four scales
drawn from the Achievement Goal Questionnaire and
They were then asked to think about the course and
thefoursubscalesdrawnfromtheMotivatedStrategies
describeitsassignmentsinasmuchdetailaspossiblein
forLearningQuestionnaire.
anopen-endedtextbox:
Youhavechosenanongoingcoursethatyou Confirmatory: Associations between Goal Orienta-
arecurrentlyenrolledin,[CourseName]. tionsandStudyStrategies
Please think of the major assignments, such In this pre-registered analysis, a structural equation
as essays, quizzes, or exams, that you have model was built using seven latent variables, one for
completedinthisclass. Describetheassign- threeofthesubscalesoftheMSLQ(Rehearsal,Elabora-
ments in the text box below, and any other tion, Metacognitive Self-Regulation, Critical Thinking)
details that come to your mind while writ- andfoursubscalesoftheAGQ(MasteryApproach,Mas-
ing. Themoredetail,thebetter. tery Avoidance, Performance Approach, Performance
You may spend as long as you choose an- Avoidance). The Likert data was entered in as or-
sweringthisquestion,butthenextpagebut- dered items, and the model was fit using the weighted
ton will appear only after two minutes of least squares with robust standard errors (WLSMV) us-
writing. ing the R version 4.0.0 (R Core Team, 2020) package
Lavaan version 0.6-9 (Rosseel, 2012). The model fit
Students were allowed to proceed after two min- moderately well, RMSEA = 0.073, CFI = 0.962, TLI
utes of contemplation and writing. Although clearly = 0.958, though given the sample size it was not sur-
not a one-to-one substitute, this activity was inspired prising that the scaled chi-squared test was significant
byMuisandFranco’s(2009)reflectionactivity,wherein χ2(674) = 4189.275, p < .001 (see Shi et al., 2019; Xia
studentsreviewedtheirpreviousassignmentsinanedu- and Yang, 2019). As shown in Figure 2, we found that
cational psychology course before answering questions thefourstudystrategieslatentvariableswerepredicted
regardingtheirgoalorientations,epistemicbeliefs,and byendorsementofdifferentgoalorientations.
self-regulatedlearningstrategies. Theywerethenasked
three questions regarding how memorable the course Assessment of Stability of Associations Across Vary-
was as described in the materials section above. Af- ingContexts
ter answering these memorability questions, they were
InTable1,wepresenttheaveragescalescoreofeach
presented with the goal orientation (AGQ), epistemic
dependent variable, by moderator sub-group. This ta-
beliefs (DFEBQ), and self-regulated learning (MSLQ)
bleshowsthatmeanstrategyendorsementisverysimi-
scales in a random order. For example, some students
laracrossthedifferentgroupsandthereareonlyafew
answered AQG, then DFEBQ, and MSLQ, while others
===== PAGE 8/16 =====
8
Figure2
StructuralEquationModelDiagramShowingReplicationResults.
Note. Thickblacklinesindicateassociationsthatreplicatedsuccessfully. Thinredlinesindicatesignificantassociations
inthepresentsamplethatwerenotsignificantinMuisandFranco(2009)ordidnotreplicatetheirfindingsintermsof
sign. Solidlinesindicatesignificantpositiveassociations. Dashedlinesrepresentsignificant. *p<.05,**p<.01,***
p<.001. Standardizedcoefficientsshown.
moderate-to-largedifferencesinmeanstrategyendorse- lowedtovarybygroup. Then,ascaledchi-squareddif-
ment(e.g.,STEMstudentsreportedlesscriticalthinking ferencetestisusedtocomparethetwomodels. Ifthere
than Humanities students and students in exam-based is a significantly better fit of the more complex model
classesreportedlesscriticalthinkingthanthosedescrib- (allowingregressioncoefficientstodifferbygroup),this
ing non-exam-based classes). In light of the context- indicatesasignificantomnibustestofthemoderationof
dependentnatureofmotivationandlearningstrategies, theassociations(Cortinaetal.,2021).
we sought to determine if the strength of the associa- In a departure from earlier models reported in
tions between goal orientations and learning strategies this paper, we did not enter the metacognitive self-
were moderated by the characteristics of the students regulation factor as a dependent variable and thus did
and the courses they were taking. That is, regardless not estimate any regression coefficients between the
ofmeanendorsement,dotheassociationsbetweengoal fourgoalorientationvariablesandtheMSRfactor. This
orientations and learning strategies vary across moder- analytic decision was made due to issues with model
atorsubgroups. identifiability (certain subgroup models could not be
Throughoutourmoderationtests,weusedamultiple estimated). It was found that the MSR factor caused
groupsanalysisapproach. Inthisapproach,twomodels issues with estimation ostensibly due to its poor factor
are estimated. In the simpler model, regression coeffi- structure (see exploratory factor analysis output in the
cients are held constant across groups. In the second, onlinematerials). Wepre-registeredtheanalysisofdif-
more complex model, regression coefficients are al- ferencesbycoursetype. Theothermoderationanalyses
===== PAGE 9/16 =====
9
Table1
Meanandstandarddeviationstrategyendorsementbysubgroup.
Critical Metacognitive
Moderator Subgroup N Elaboration Rehearsal
Thinking Self-Regulation
CourseType STEM 509 4.86(1.10) 3.89(1.34) 4.61(0.84) 4.37(1.36)
SocialSciences 243 4.96(1.17) 4.17(1.25) 4.50(0.95) 4.26(1.47)
Humanities 226 5.01(1.09) 4.57(1.25) 4.50(0.96) 4.16(1.68)
Assignment Exams 706 4.89(1.10) 3.97(1.34) 4.55(0.87) 4.36(1.44)
Type Non-Exams 272 4.99(1.16) 4.50(1.21) 4.57(0.96) 4.13(1.53)
Raceand AAPI 274 4.70(1.02) 3.91(1.24) 4.49(0.83) 4.23(1.37)
Ethnicity URM 230 4.92(1.23) 4.27(1.33) 4.56(0.95) 4.39(1.55)
White 474 5.05(1.10) 4.16(1.36) 4.59(0.90) 4.28(1.49)
Gender Men 398 4.82(1.09) 4.22(1.27) 4.55(0.87) 4.30(1.37)
Women 576 4.98(1.14) 4.05(1.36) 4.56(0.91) 4.29(1.53)
Note. STEM = Science, technology, engineering, and mathematics; AAPI = Asian American and Pacific Islander;
URM=underrepresentedminority(Black,Indigenous,Hispanic/Latinostudents). SubgroupNsmaynotaddupto
thetotalsamplesizeofN=978duetomissingness.
wereexploratory. thusindicatingthattheyshouldbeestimatedseparately.
The coefficient of Mastery Approach predicting Criti-
Confirmatory: ModerationbyCourseType
cal Thinking was significantly higher in the non-exam
group (β = 0.60) than the exam group (β = .44),
Differencesinregressioncoefficients(i.e.,theassoci-
χ2(1) = 4.83, p = .03. Similar results were found
ations between goal orientations and study strategies)
with regard to Mastery Avoidance predicting Elabora-
were tested across the three different types of course
tion with a stronger association in the non-exam (β =
classifications, STEM, Social Science, and Humanities.
0.70) than exam group (β = 0.56), χ2(1) = 5.04, p =
Wedidnotfindevidenceinsupportofdifferingregres-
sioncoefficientsacrossthecoursetypes,χ2(24)=32.75, .02. TherewasalsoastrongerrelationshipbetweenPer-
formance Avoidance and Elaboration in the non-exam
p = .109. This result indicates that the associations of
group (β = 0.20) than the exam group (β = −.01),
interestbetweenthelatentvariableswererelativelysta-
χ2(1)=5.85,p=.02.
bleacrossthedifferentcoursetypes.
Exploratory: ModerationbyRaceandEthnicity
Exploratory: ModerationbyAssignmentType
HistoricallyintheUnitedStatesandCanadianhigher
Participant’s written text description of the assign-
education systems, Hispanic/Latinx, Black and Indige-
ments they completed as part of their focal course
nous students have been underrepresented (Henry et
were analyzed for whether they included mentions to
al., 2017; Hurtado and Ruiz Alvarado, 2012). Numer-
quizzes, exams, or tests. Of the 978 participants, 706
ousstudieshavealsoshowndifferentialeducationalbe-
reportedhavingquizzes,tests,orexamsaspartoftheir
liefsamongthesestudentpopulations(e.g.,Fongetal.,
course assignments, while 272 made no mention of
2019). Thus, we were interested in determining if the
these assignment types. This variable was coded as a
associationsbetweengoalorientationsandstudystrate-
binaryvariable(eitherincludedmentiontoquizzes/ex-
giesweremoderatedbyunderrepresentedminoritysta-
ams/testsordidnot). Thesameapproachasdescribed
tus(AsianandPacificIslanders,URM,White). Here,un-
above was used to test whether the regression coeffi-
derrepresented minority denotes students coming from
cients differed between the two groups. Here, signifi-
cantevidenceofmoderationwasfound,χ2(12)=27.45, Black, Indigenous, Hispanic/Latino backgrounds. Al-
though it would be preferable to split our analysis into
p=.007.
smaller groups (i.e., Asian, Black, Hispanic/Latinx, Na-
Post-hoc comparison revealed that constraining the
tiveAmericanandIndigenous,andWhite),thiswasnot
following coefficients significantly worsened model fit,
===== PAGE 10/16 =====
10
tenablewiththepresentsamplesize. 2018) only recommended ten factors, and when the
Similar to the moderation by course type analysis analysis of these ten factors was explored, this analy-
presented above, we created one model where the re- sis found that a majority of items (16 out of 18) from
gressioncoefficientswereheldconstantacrossthethree theDFEBQloadedonasinglefactor. Evenwhenanex-
groups (AAPI, URM, White) and one model where the ploratoryfactoranalysiswith12factorswascomputed,
regression coefficients were freely estimated across the itdidnotleadtoitemsloadingwheretheorywouldpre-
three groups. We then compared the relative increase dict,asitemsfromtheDFEBQscalestilltendedtoclus-
inmodelfitwiththefreelyestimatedmodelincompari- ter together with one another rather than splitting into
sontotheheld-constantmodel,anddidnotfindstatisti- fourseparatefactors.
callysignificantevidenceofmoderationbyURMstatus, It would be plausible to suggest that the slightly ab-
χ2(24)=23.90,p=.467. breviatedversionoftheDFEBQscaleusedinthisstudy
mayhavecontributedtoissueswithmodelfit,however,
Exploratory: ModerationbyGender
wedonotbelievethistobethecase. AsshowninTable
2,theCronbach’salphasfortheJustification(Personal)
A similar approach was used to test whether the re-
andSource(Authority)werelowerthan.70,indicating
gression coefficients were moderated by gender as the
less than ideal reliability (Tavakol and Dennick, 2011).
course type and URM analyses. We did not find evi-
ThoughanabbreviatedversionoftheDFEBQwasused
dence that model fit was significantly better when al-
incomparisontothatusedbyMuisandFranco(2009),
lowingregressioncoefficientstodifferbygender(Male
or Female), χ2(12) = 9.83, p = .631. This analysis was the Cronbach’s alphas in the present sample were not
substantially worse than reported by Muis and Franco.
conductedusingasamplesizeofN=974,asfourpar-
In fact, in three out of four scales the reliability coeffi-
ticipantsdidnotreporttheirgender.
cients in our sample were higher, with the sole excep-
Exploratory: Replication Attempt of Expanded tion being Justification (Personal). Although generally
Model Cronbach’salphaincreaseswithscalelength,thecoun-
terintuitive finding here might be explained by the fact
Inadditiontoourspecificinterestintherelationship
that the shorter version used in this present study only
between motivational beliefs and study strategies, we
consisted of the 18 items previously validated by Hofer
also attempted to replicate Muis and Franco’s (2009)
(2000), while the nine additional items were not rec-
larger structural equation model (a subset of which is
ommendedforusebyHofer.
showninFigure1ofthispaper;seeFigure1inMuis&
Additionally, our sample was recruited across many
Franco for the entire model), however, despite recruit-
differentclassesand(ostensibly)universities. Muisand
ing 777 more participants in our sample, we did not
FrancorecruitedparticipantsfromasingleEducational
find that the model outlined in their paper was iden-
Psychology class, which may have aided in identifying
tifiable. Even after making changes to improve model
the factor structure given the self-ascribed “discipline-
fit (such as removing the metacognitive self-regulation
focused”natureoftheDFEBQ.Thishypothesisissome-
factor),wedidnotfindsuccessinfindingamodelwith
whatsupportedbythedistributionsofsumscoresacross
adequatefitmetricsintermsofCFIandRMSEA.
the three disciplines (STEM, Social Sciences, Humani-
Issues with model identifiability seem to stem from
ties), which shows quite distinct patterns in epistemic
the fact that the latent variables derived from the
beliefs, with several pairwise comparisons indicating
DFEBQ (Certainty, Personal Justification, Source Au-
differencesinsumscoresequivalenttoCohen’sdsof0.8
thority, and Attainability of Truth) were highly corre-
or greater between STEM and Humanities/Social Sci-
latedwithone-another(absolutevaluesofrrangingbe-
ences. Thus, it seems that epistemic beliefs are at least
tween .63 and .91; see Table 2). A confirmatory fac-
partially dependent on the specific discipline a student
tor analysis of the three measures (DFEBQ, MSLQ, and
isengagingwith.
AGQ; 12 total subscales) showed moderately accept-
able fit, CFI = 0.944, TLI = 0.939, RMSEA = 0.077, Discussion
χ2(1473)=10111.05,p<.001.
This paper adds to the growing body of research
Although the CFA fit metrics were passable, issues
on the associations between self-reported goal orienta-
withtheDFEBQscalewerefurtherconfirmedbyanex-
tions and learning strategies, adding further evidence
ploratory factor analysis of items from the three scales
to the theory that the relationship between increased
(AGQ, DFEBQ, and MSLQ). Although a priori theory
self-reportmotivationandachievementmaybepartially
suggeststhereshouldbetwelvesub-factorsacrossthese
mediated by the use of better learning strategies. Alto-
threemeasures,parallelanalysis(Horn,1965)usingthe
gether, eleven of the sixteen (69%) associations tested
command“fa.parallel”inthepsychRpackage(Revelle,
===== PAGE 11/16 =====
11
Table2
Correlationsbetweenlatentvariables,reliabilities,andsumscores.
JUST ATTAIN CERT AUTH MAv MAp PAp PAv REH ELAB CRIT Alpha Mean(SD)
JUST 1.00 .63 3.9(1.3)
ATTAIN −0.52∗ 1.00 .74 4.9(1.4)
CERT 0.65∗ −0.77∗ 1.00 .88 3.8(1.4)
AUTH −0.55∗ 0.83∗ −0.83∗ 1.00 .69 4.7(1.2)
MAv −0.07 0.20∗ −0.16∗ 0.26∗ 1.00 .81 4.7(1.6)
MAp −0.03 0.21∗ −0.02 0.10 0.39∗ 1.00 .86 5.4(1.4)
PAp −0.03 0.15∗ −0.18∗ 0.21∗ 0.11∗ 0.32∗ 1.00 .90 4.5(1.7)
PAv −0.11∗ 0.24∗ −0.18∗ 0.35∗ 0.32∗ 0.01 0.31∗ 1.00 .78 5.5(1.4)
REH −0.05 0.34∗ −0.18∗ 0.27∗ 0.25∗ 0.43∗ 0.23∗ 0.30∗ 1.00 .75 4.3(1.5)
ELAB 0.14∗ 0.11 0.17∗ 0.01 0.16∗ 0.57∗ 0.20∗ 0.03 0.52∗ 1.00 .75 4.9(1.1)
CRIT 0.51∗ −0.12∗ 0.34∗ −0.29∗ 0.09 0.47∗ 0.15∗ −0.12∗ 0.28∗ 0.70∗ 1.00 .80 4.1(1.3)
MSR 0.05 −0.32∗ 0.12∗ −0.25∗ −0.29∗ −0.60∗ −0.31∗ −0.14∗ −0.71∗ −0.79∗ −0.62∗ .77 4.5(0.9)
Note. Latent variable correlations derived from a confirmatory factor analysis performed in Lavaan using item
groupings derived from previously published scales. Asterisk indicates significant correlation at p < .001. Mean
sumscorescalculatedafterreversescoringappropriateitems.
in both the present paper and Muis and Franco (2009) tion. Giventhereplicationofearlierresultsandrelative
replicated in terms of statistical significance and di- lack of heterogeneity within our sample, this suggests
rection of association.1 Though not a perfect replica- thattherearerelativelyconsistentassociationsbetween
tion rate, all associations larger than .20 in Muis and these measures, even when assessed in different popu-
Franco’s original study successfully replicated. If we lationsanddifferenttimeperiods. However,wedonote
limitouranalysistoonlysignificantassociationsshown that on average the coefficients in our model were ap-
byMuisandFranco,75%replicated(sixoutofeight). proximately half as large as their counterparts in Muis
LikeMuisandFranco(2009),wefoundthatthelinks and Franco, which suggests the original estimates may
betweenmastery-approachorientationandthreestrate- havebeeninflatedbythedesignormorehomogeneous
gies of interest (elaboration, rehearsal, metacognitive contextoftheoriginalstudy.
self-regulation and critical thinking) were all strong,
statistically significant, and positive in nature. The Limitations
linkbetweenmastery-approachandelaborationwasthe
One of the critical differences in methodology be-
strongest, followed by metacognitive self-regulation,
tween the present paper and that of Muis and Franco
critical-thinking, and lastly rehearsal, suggesting that
(2009) is that our survey was conducted during the
mastery-approach slightly favors deeper study strate-
midst of the COVID-19 pandemic (October 2020) in
gies. This suggests that mastery-approach goals are re-
countries where the virus was prevalent. This project
lated to increased overall effort. In other words, stu-
timeline was a stipulation of the funding agency and
dents who report mastery-approach goals engage in
outsideoftheresearchteam’scontrol. Asaresult,many
more shallow strategies and more deep strategies than
ofthecollegesanduniversitiesinthesampledcountries
thosenotendorsingsuchagoalorientation.
werepartiallyorevenentirelyonline(Anderson,2020).
Althoughwetestedforheterogeneitywithinoursam-
Online or hybrid coursework presents interesting moti-
ple, we found only one significant moderator of these
vationalsituationsthatmaynotbeentirelyapplicableto
associations: assignment type. Taken together, it ap-
in-personschoolwork(ChenandJang,2010). Although
pears that the associations between goal orientations
this aspect of the study seems like a limitation on its
and learning strategies may be stronger when courses
face,itmayactuallybeastrongertestofthereplicabil-
use more open-ended evaluation (e.g., essays, lab re-
ityoftheassociation. Consideringthatmostoftheasso-
ports,projects,presentations)thanexam-basedevalua-
ciations (75%) found by Muis and Franco (2009) were
===== PAGE 12/16 =====
12
replicatedinthepresentstudy,itseemsthattheseasso- FutureDirections
ciations may be robust to changes in educational (i.e.,
As shown in Table 2 and as discussed earlier in this
acrossdifferentcoursesandinstitutions)andsocialcon-
paper, many of the subscales we drew from the pub-
texts(i.e.,pre-pandemicversusduringpandemic).
lished literature were not as reliable and distinct from
There were however small differences between our
one-another as one might expect (this is a known issue
findings and that of prior studies: We did not
with measuring epistemic beliefs in particular; see De-
find any significant associations between performance-
Backer et al., 2008; see also generally Flake and Fried,
approach goals and critical thinking. In contrast, oth-
2020). Whilethegoalorientationmeasuresshowedrel-
ers have shown small significant correlation between
atively high reliability and the expected structure, the
performance-approach and critical thinking (Muis and
items/subscales from the disciplined-focused epistemic
Franco, 2009; Vrugt and Oort, 2008). That being
belief questionnaire and motivated strategies for learn-
said, given the array of disparate findings concerning
ing questionnaire overlapped with one-another, raising
theassociationsbetweengoalorientationsandlearning
questions of discriminant validity and ultimately caus-
strategies reviewed earlier in this paper, it is likely that
ingissueswithmodelfit.
theseassociationsaresomewhatscale/measurespecific.
Futureresearchersmightconsidermovingawayfrom
For this reason, more research needs to be done to un-
the Motivated Strategies for Learning Questionnaire as
derstand where existing scales do and do not overlap
the primary measure of strategy use, as this question-
and whether they are truly measuring the same con-
naire does not measure the use of several effective
structs.
study strategies now widely regarded as highly effec-
One limitation of the present study is that we could
tive. SpecificallytheMSLQ,doesnotaskstudentsabout
notcollectachievementmeasures(i.e.,grades)fromthe
retrievalpracticeorspacing,theuseofwhichisknown
students in this survey. Because these students were
to be associated with student achievement (Carvalho
recruited from an online participant pool from a vari-
et al., 2020; Dunlosky et al., 2013). Additionally, the
ety of educational institutions during the middle of the
present study showed relatively poor discriminant va-
semester, final grades would not have been available
lidity(particularlywithregardtothemetacognitiveself-
to the students. Thus, due to the single-session nature
regulationfactor). Thus,itseemsthatanupdatedmea-
of our survey, we would have had to use anticipated
sureoflearningstrategyusewouldbeaproductivenext
grades. Self-reported grades (i.e., students reporting
step. An improved scale could help facilitate the de-
the actual grades or grade point averages they receive)
velopment of more valid, reliable studies and help to
areknowntohaverelativelypoorvalidity(Kunceletal.,
integrate research on student beliefs concerning learn-
2005),andself-reportedanticipatedgradeswouldlikely
ing strategies with research on the broader cognitive
be subject to similar, if not worse, issues. Additionally,
science of learning and memory (see also the growing
not all Canadian institutions use the same grade-point
“desirabledifficulties”researchintheveinofBjorkand
scale as universities in the United States, which would
Bjork,1992). Researchshouldalsocontinuetobuildon
have further complicated issues of measurement. For
the present correlational study through the continued
thisreason,wechosenottocollectachievement-related
useofexperimentalinterventionstudiestovalidatethe
measures. Paststudies,suchasMuisandFranco(2009)
hypothesizedcausalpathwaysstemmingfromthisstudy
havefoundcorrelationsbetweenlearningstrategiesand
andotherslikeit.
truefinalgrades,butfutureworkshouldworktodeter-
In order to better the measurement of key educa-
mine the extent to which these correlations are gener-
tional constructs, we have attempted to follow many
alizable across institutions and individuals. Moreover,
of the best practices prescribed by recent work in open
it would be important to understand what final grades
science. Transparencywasmaintainedthroughthepre-
trulyrepresent. Forexample,theextenttowhichgrades
registration of analytic choices and the demarcation of
are based on participation and group work may affect
which analyses were exploratory in nature. The data
the relationship between individual learning strategies
from this study has also been made available on the
and grades. It is also important to consider efficiency:
Open Science Framework in order to aid future re-
two students may attain an A-grade in very different
searchers in the study of motivation science and learn-
ways—one could achieve a high grade by studying 80
ingstrategies. Wealsoencourageresearchersinterested
hours a week using relatively shallow strategies or one
inconductingreplicationofstudiesusingSEMmethods
couldachieveahighgradebystudyingfarfewerhours
tobeespeciallycarefulintermsofchoosingstudiesthat
butusingrelativelydeeperstrategies.
useproperlyvalidatedscalesandtobeawareofthepos-
sibility that their models may not properly converge in
anewsample(thoughpotentiallyadvancesinBayesian
===== PAGE 13/16 =====
13
SEM will make issues of convergence moot in the near Miller, Tina Sundelin, and Zorana Zupan for their
future,onceordinalmodelsarefullysupportedbythese thoughtful comments on our study design. We also ac-
softwarepackages;seeMerkleandRosseel,2015). knowledgetheCoSstaffforconductingthepoweranal-
ysisandtheirhelpwithadministeringthisproject.
ConcludingComments
ConflictofInterestandFunding
In general, our data revealed a relative stability of
theassociationsbetweenachievementgoalorientations Theauthor(s)declarednopotentialconflictsofinter-
and study strategies. Not only did we replicate three estswithrespecttotheauthorshipand/orpublicationof
fourthsoftheassociationsreportedbyMuisandFranco, this article. This study was supported by SCORE Repli-
but the larger sample size and diversity of students in cationfundingtotheresearchteamfromtheCenterfor
our study also allowed us to test whether the associa- Open Science through a grant from the United States
tions were invariant across various sub-groups. We did DepartmentofDefense,DARPA.Theopinionsandviews
not find these associations differed significantly across expressed in this paper are those of the authors alone
course discipline (STEM, Social Sciences, or Humani- and do not necessarily represent the official policy or
ties), underrepresented minority status, or gender. We positionofanyfundingbody.
did find evidence that these associations were moder-
atedbyassignmenttype,withessaybasedclassesshow- AuthorContributions
ingstrongerassociationsbetweengoalorientationsand
Both authors applied for funding from the CoS for
learning strategies. Given that the associations found
this project. B.A.S wrote the pre-registration, an-
in this study were largely congruent with the findings
alyzed the data, and wrote the first draft of the
of Muis and Franco, and are not significantly differ-
manuscript. V.X.Y. edited the pre-registration, edited
ent across the subgroups analyzed in the present sam-
the manuscript, and provided guidance throughout the
ple(exceptforassignmenttype),theevidencesuggests
project.
these associations are relatively stable across heteroge-
neouscontexts.
OpenSciencePractices
EndNote
1. Thisfiguremaybeanunderestimateofreplicabil-
ityasMuisandFrancodidnotreportnon-significantco-
efficients,andgiventhelargersamplesizewewereable This article earned the Preregistration+, Open Data
to detect smaller associations than the original study. and the Open Materials badge for preregistering the
Thus, theoretically there may be cases where we esti- hypothesis and analysis before data collection, and for
matedexactlythesamemagnitudeofassociation,butit making the data and materials openly available. It has
was not significant in the original study and significant been verified that the analysis reproduced the results
in the present study resulting in the somewhat coun- presented in the article. The entire editorial process,
terintuitive findingof non-replication. There wereonly including the open reviews, is published in the online
twosignificantassociationsfromtheoriginalstudythat supplement.
were not significant and in the same direction in the
present sample (these were PAp predicting MSR and References
PAppredictingCRIT).
Alipourfard, N., Arendt, B., Benjamin, D. M., Benkler,
N., Bishop, M. M., Burstein, M., Bush, M.,
AuthorContact
Caverlee, J., Chen, Y., Clark, C., Dreber, A.,
Correspondence should be addressed to Brendan A. Errington, T. M., Fidler, F., Fox, N. W., Frank,
Schuetze, ORCID ID: 0000-0002-5210-6785. B.A.S is A., Fraser, H., Friedman, S., Gelman, B., Gen-
now at the University of Potsdam, Campus Golm, Pro- tile, J., & Wu, J. (2021). Systematizing confi-
fessur Digitale Bildung, Karl-Liebknecht-Str. 24-25, dence in open research and evidence (SCORE)
14476Potsdam. Email: brendan.schuetze@gmail.com. [preprint]. SocArXiv. https://doi.org/10.
VeronicaX.Yan,ORCIDID:000-0002-3988-3184. 31235/osf.io/46mnb
Acknowledgements
Theauthorsthankpre-registrationeditorJohnLloyd,
and three pre-registration peer reviewers, Jeremy K.
===== PAGE 14/16 =====
14
Anderson,N.(2020).ExaminingwaysCOVID-19adap- D’Lima, G. M., Winsler, A., & Kitsantas, A. (2014). Eth-
tation derailed our assumptions about online nic and gender differences in first-year college
learning. 2020 IEEE Conference on e-Learning, students’ goal orientation, self-efficacy, and ex-
e-Management and e-Services (IC3e), 67–70. trinsic and intrinsic motivation. The Journal of
https://doi.org/10.1109/IC3e50159.2020. Educational Research, 107(5), 341–356. https:
9288463 //doi.org/10.1080/00220671.2013.823366
Bjork,R.A.,&Bjork,E.L.(1992).Anewtheoryofdis- Dunlosky, J., Rawson, K. A., Marsh, E. J., Nathan,
use and an old theory of stimulus fluctuation. M. J., & Willingham, D. T. (2013). Improving
InFromlearningprocessestocognitiveprocesses: students’ learning with effective learning tech-
EssaysinhonorofWilliamK.Estes(pp.35–67). niques:Promisingdirectionsfromcognitiveand
Broekkamp,H.,&VanHout-Wolters,B.H.A.M.(2006). educationalpsychology.PsychologicalSciencein
Students’ adaptation of study strategies when the Public Interest, 14(1), 4–58. https://doi.
preparing for classroom tests. Educational Psy- org/10.1177/1529100612453266
chologyReview,19(4),401.https://doi.org/10. Elliot,A.J.,&McGregor,H.A.(2001).A2x2achieve-
1007/s10648-006-9025-0 ment goal framework. Journal of Personality
Carroll,J.B.(1963).Amodelofschoollearning.Teach- and Social Psychology, 80(3), 501–519. https:
ersCollegeRecord,64(8),1–9. //doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.80.3.501
Carroll, J. B. (1989). The Carroll model: A 25-year Engelschalk, T., Steuer, G., & Dresel, M. (2017).
retrospectiveandprospectiveview.Educational Quantityandqualityofmotivationalregulation
Researcher, 18(1), 26–31. https://doi.org/10. amonguniversitystudents.EducationalPsychol-
2307/1176007 ogy, 37(9), 1154–1170. https://doi.org/10.
Carvalho, P. F., Sana, F., & Yan, V. X. (2020). Self- 1080/01443410.2017.1322177
regulated spacing in a massive open online Flake,J.K.,&Fried,E.I.(2020).Measurementschmea-
courseisrelatedtobetterlearning.NPJScience surement:Questionablemeasurementpractices
of Learning, 5(1), 1–7. https://doi.org/10. and how to avoid them. Advances in Meth-
1038/s41539-020-0061-1 ods and Practices in Psychological Science, 3(4),
Chen, K.-C., & Jang, S.-J. (2010). Motivation in online 456–465. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 /
learning:Testingamodelofself-determination 2515245920952393
theory. Computers in Human Behavior, 26(4), Fong, C. J., Alejandro, A. J., Krou, M. R., Segovia, J.,
741–752.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2010. & Johnston-Ashton, K. (2019). Ya’at’eeh: Race-
01.011 reimaged belongingness factors, academic out-
Cortina,J.M.,Markell-Goldstein,H.M.,Green,J.P.,& comes, and goal pursuits among indigenous
Chang, Y. (2021). How are we testing interac- community college students. Contemporary Ed-
tionsinlatentvariablemodels?surgingforward ucational Psychology, 59, 101805. https://doi.
or fighting shy? Organizational Research Meth- org/10.1016/j.cedpsych.2019.101805
ods, 24(1), 26–54. https://doi.org/10.1177/ Fuchs, L. S., Fuchs, D., Karns, K., Hamlett, C. L.,
1094428119872531 Katzaroff, M., & Dutka, S. (1997). Effects
Crede, M., & Harms, P. (2019). Questionable research of task-focused goals on low-achieving stu-
practices when using confirmatory factor anal- dents with and without learning disabilities.
ysis. Journal of Managerial Psychology, 34(1), American Educational Research Journal, 34(3),
18–30. https://doi.org/10.1108/JMP-06- 513–543. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3102 /
2018-0272 00028312034003513
DeBacker,T.K.,Crowson,H.M.,Beesley,A.D.,Thoma, Harackiewicz,J.M.,Barron,K.E.,Carter,S.M.,Lehto,
S. J., & Hestevold, N. L. (2008). The challenge A.T.,&Elliot,A.J.(1997).Predictorsandcon-
of measuring epistemic beliefs: An analysis of sequences of achievement goals in the college
threeself-reportinstruments.TheJournalofEx- classroom:Maintaininginterestandmakingthe
perimentalEducation,76(3),281–312.https:// grade.JournalofPersonalityandSocialPsychol-
doi.org/10.3200/JEXE.76.3.281-314 ogy, 73(6), 1284–1295. https://doi.org/10.
Deemer, S. (2004). Classroom goal orientation in high 1037/0022-3514.73.6.1284
school classrooms: Revealing links between Harackiewicz, J. M., Barron, K. E., Pintrich, P. R., El-
teacher beliefs and classroom environments. liot, A. J., & Thrash, T. M. (2002). Revision
Educational Research, 46(1), 73–90. https:// of achievement goal theory: Necessary and il-
doi.org/10.1080/0013188042000178836 luminating. Journal of Educational Psychology,
===== PAGE 15/16 =====
15
94(3), 638–645. https://doi.org/10.1037/ searcher, 49(9), 633–644. https://doi.org/10.
0022-0663.94.3.638 3102/0013189X20972718
Hecker,B.L.(2017).Fourdecadesofopenscience.Na- Meece, J. L., Anderman, E. M., & Anderman, L. H.
ture Physics, 13(6), 523–525. https://doi.org/ (2006).Classroomgoalstructure,studentmoti-
10.1038/nphys4160 vation, and academic achievement. Annual Re-
Henry, F., Dua, E., Kobayashi, A., James, C., Li, P., view of Psychology, 57(1), 487–503. https://
Ramos,H.,&Smith,M.S.(2017).Race,racial- doi.org/10.1146/annurev.psych.56.091103.
ization and Indigeneity in Canadian universi- 070258
ties. Race Ethnicity and Education, 20(3), 300– Merkle, E. C., & Rosseel, Y. (2015). Blavaan: Bayesian
314.https://doi.org/10.1080/13613324.2016. structural equation models via parameter ex-
1260226 pansion.ArXivPreprintArXiv:1511.05604.
Hofer, B. K. (2000). Dimensionality and disciplinary Mouratidis,A.,Michou,A.,Demirciog˘lu,A.N.,&Sayil,
differences in personal epistemology. Contem- M. (2018). Different goals, different pathways
poraryEducationalPsychology,25(4),378–405. to success: Performance-approach goals as di-
https://doi.org/10.1006/ceps.1999.1026 rect and mastery-approach goals as indirect
Horn, J. L. (1965). A rationale and test for the num- predictors of grades in mathematics. Learning
ber of factors in factor analysis. Psychometrika, and Individual Differences, 61, 127–135. https:
30(2), 179–185. https://doi.org/10.1007/ //doi.org/10.1016/j.lindif.2017.11.017
BF02289447 Muis, K. R., & Franco, G. M. (2009). Epistemic be-
Hurtado,S.,&RuizAlvarado,A.(2012).Theclimatefor liefs: Setting the standards for self-regulated
underrepresentedgroupsanddiversityoncampus learning.ContemporaryEducationalPsychology,
(tech.rep.).HERIResearchBrief. 34(4), 306–318. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
Kaplan, A., & Maehr, M. L. (2007). The contributions cedpsych.2009.06.005
and prospects of goal orientation theory. Ed- Museus,S.D.,&Liverman,D.(2010).High-performing
ucational Psychology Review, 19(2), 141–184. institutions and their implications for study-
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10648-006-9012-5 ing underrepresented minority students in
Kuncel, N. R., Credé, M., & Thomas, L. L. (2005). The STEM.NewDirectionsforInstitutionalResearch,
validity of self-reported grade point averages, 2010(148),17–27.https://doi.org/10.1002/ir.
classranks,andtestscores:Ameta-analysisand 358
review of the literature. Review of Educational Pintrich, P. R., Smith, D. A. F., Garcia, T., & McK-
Research, 75(1), 63–82. https://doi.org/10. eachie,W.J.(1991).Amanualfortheuseofthe
3102/00346543075001063 motivated strategies for learning questionnaire
Li, K. (2019). MOOC learners’ demographics, self- (MSLQ)(tech.rep.).ERIC.https://eric.ed.gov/
regulated learning strategy, perceived learning ?id=ED338122
and satisfaction: A structural equation model- Plucker,J.A.,&Makel,M.C.(2021).Replicationisim-
ingapproach.Computers&Education,132,16– portant for educational psychology: Recent de-
30.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2019. velopmentsandkeyissues.EducationalPsychol-
01.003 ogist,56(2),90–100.https://doi.org/10.1080/
Liem, A. D., Lau, S., & Nie, Y. (2008). The role of 00461520.2021.1895796
self-efficacy, task value, and achievement goals Psaltou-Joycey, A. P. A. (2008). Cross-cultural differ-
in predicting learning strategies, task disen- ences in the use of learning strategies by stu-
gagement, peer relationship, and achievement dents of greek as a second language. Journal
outcome.ContemporaryEducationalPsychology, of Multilingual and Multicultural Development,
33(4), 486–512. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 29(4), 310–324. https://doi.org/10.1080/
cedpsych.2007.08.001 01434630802147817
Macnamara, B. N., Hambrick, D. Z., & Oswald, F. L. Purdie, N., Hattie, J., & Douglas, G. (1996). Student
(2014). Deliberate practice and performance conceptions of learning and their use of self-
in music, games, sports, education, and pro- regulated learning strategies: A cross-cultural
fessions:Ameta-analysis.PsychologicalScience, comparison. Journal of Educational Psychology,
25(8), 1608–1618. https://doi.org/10.1177/ 88(1),87–100.https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-
0956797614535810 0663.88.1.87
McGee, E. O. (2020). Interrogating structural racism Ranellucci,J.,Muis,K.R.,Duffy,M.,Wang,X.,Sampa-
in STEM higher education. Educational Re- sivam,L.,&Franco,G.M.(2013).Tomasteror
===== PAGE 16/16 =====
16
perform? exploring relations between achieve- dices. Educational and Psychological Measure-
ment goals and conceptual change learning. ment, 79(2), 310–334. https://doi.org/10.
BritishJournalofEducationalPsychology,83(3), 1177/0013164418783530
431–451. Tabak,F.,Nguyen,N.,Basuray,T.,&Darrow,W.(2009).
Revelle, W. (2018). psych: Procedures for psychologi- Exploring the impact of personality on perfor-
cal, psychometric, and personality research. R mance:Howtime-on-taskmoderatesthemedi-
PackageVersion,1(10). ationbyself-efficacy.PersonalityandIndividual
Rivers,M.L.,&Dunlosky,J.(2020).Aretest-expectancy Differences, 47(8), 823–828. https://doi.org/
effectsbetterexplainedbychangesinencoding 10.1016/j.paid.2009.06.027
strategies or differential test experience. Jour- Tavakol, M., & Dennick, R. (2011). Making sense of
nal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Mem- Cronbach’salpha.InternationalJournalofMed-
ory,andCognition,10. ical Education, 2, 53–55. https://doi.org/10.
Seaman,C.S.,&Weber,R.(2015).Undisclosedflexibil- 5116/ijme.4dfb.8dfd
ityincomputingandreportingstructuralequa- van der Zee, T., & Reich, J. (2018). Open education
tionmodelsincommunicationscience.Commu- science.AERAOpen,4(3),2332858418787466.
nicationMethodsandMeasures,9(4),208–232. https://doi.org/10.1177/2332858418787466
https://doi.org/10.1080/19312458.2015. Vrugt, A., & Oort, F. J. (2008). Metacognition,
1096329 achievement goals, study strategies and aca-
Senko, C., Hama, H., & Belmonte, K. (2013). Achieve- demic achievement: Pathways to achievement.
ment goals, study strategies, and achievement: Metacognition and Learning, 3(2), 123–146.
A test of the “learning agenda” framework. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11409-008-9022-4
Learning and Individual Differences, 24, 1–10. Xia,Y.,&Yang,Y.(2019).RMSEA,CFI,andTLIinstruc-
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lindif.2012.11.003 turalequationmodelingwithorderedcategori-
Senko, C., Hulleman, C. S., & Harackiewicz, J. M. caldata:Thestorytheytelldependsonthees-
(2011). Achievement goal theory at the cross- timation methods. Behavior Research Methods,
roads: Old controversies, current challenges, 51(1), 409–428. https://doi.org/10.3758/
and new directions. Educational Psychologist, s13428-018-1055-2
46(1), 26–47. https://doi.org/10.1080/ Yan, V. X., & Schuetze, B. A. (2023). What is meant
00461520.2011.538646 by “growth mindset”? Current theory, mea-
Senko, C., & Miles, K. M. (2008). Pursuing their own surement practices, and empirical results leave
learning agenda: How mastery-oriented stu- much open to interpretation: Commentary on
dents jeopardize their class performance. Con- MacnamaraandBurgoyne(2023)andBurnette
temporary Educational Psychology, 33(4), 561– etal.(2023).PsychologicalBulletin,(3-4),206–
583. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cedpsych. 219.https://doi.org/10.1037/bul0000370
2007.12.001
Shi, D., Lee, T., & Maydeu-Olivares, A. (2019). Under-
standing the model size effect on SEM fit in-