
===== PAGE 1/12 =====
Editedby:RickardCarlsson
Opendata:NotApplicable Reviewedby:Aberson,C.,BuchananE.M.,
Meta-Psychology,2024,vol8,MP.2021.2957 Openmaterials:NotApplicable Dienes,Z.,Lakens,D.
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2021.2957 Openandreproducibleanalysis:NotApplicable Analysisreproducedby:NotApplicable
Articletype:OriginalArticle Openreviewsandeditorialprocess:Yes AllsupplementaryfilescanbeaccessedatOSF:
PublishedundertheCC-BY4.0license Preregistration:No https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/UF86Z
Distinguishing Between Models and Hypotheses: Implications for
Significance Testing
David Trafimow1
1NewMexicoStateUniversity
In the debate about the merits or demerits of null hypothesis significance testing
(NHST),authoritiesonbothsidesassumethatthepvaluethataresearchercomputes
isbasedonthenullhypothesisortesthypothesis. Iftheassumptionistrue,itsuggests
thatthereareproperusesforNHST,suchasdistinguishingbetweencompetingdirec-
tionalhypotheses.AndonceitisadmittedthatthereareproperusesforNHST,itmakes
sense to educate substantive researchers about how to use NHST properly and avoid
using it improperly. From this perspective, the conclusion would be that researchers
in the business and social sciences could benefit from better education pertaining to
NHST.Incontrast, mygoalistodemonstratethatthepvaluethataresearchercom-
putes is not based on a hypothesis, but on a model in which the hypothesis is em-
bedded. Inturn,thedistinctionbetweenhypothesesandmodelsindicatesthatNHST
cannot soundly be used to distinguish between competing directional hypotheses or
todrawanyconclusionsaboutdirectionalhypotheseswhatsoever. Therefore,itisnot
clearthatbettereducationislikelytoprovesatisfactory. Itisthetemptationissue,not
theeducationissue,thatdeservestobeintheforefrontofNHSTdiscussions.
Keywords: nullhypothesissignificancetesting;nullhypothesis;testhypothesis;model;
statisticalmodel;education;temptation
TheProperUseofNHST—OrNot
It is a cliché that the problem with null hypothe- To my knowledge, the most convincing example of
sis significance testing (NHST) is not the procedure it- theproperuseofNHSTwasprovidedbyMaxwelletal.
self, but rather that it is misused (Vidgen & Yasseri, (2008),whoexploitedtheclassicworkbyFestingerand
2016). If statistics education were to be improved, Carlsmith (1959) to illustrate their position1. Maxwell
therebyreducingmisuse,statisticalinferencewouldim- et al. asserted that although sometimes researchers
prove markedly. As better education is generally desir- wishtoestimatepopulationparameters,theyoftenwish
able, one reasonably could believe it the best solution totestdirectionalhypotheses. WithrespecttoFestinger
to NHST misuse. However, as researchers continue to and Carlsmith, Maxwell et al., asserted their goal was
focus on NHST misuse, and better statistics education not to estimate effect sizes, or any population parame-
astheremedy, thereisanimplicationthatbegsinvesti- ters whatsoever, but rather to test opposing directional
gation. Toassertthataprocedureismisusedistoimply hypotheses. According to the Festinger and Carlsmith
that it has a proper use. But what if NHST does not cognitive dissonance theory, participants who had re-
have a proper use? Were that so, to claim that NHST ceived low payment to evaluate the study favorably
ismisusedwouldbehighlymisleading. Itispossibleto shouldprovidebetterevaluationsthanparticipantswho
assert that there is no sound use for NHST, where (a) had received high payment to do so, a prediction at
the logic is valid and (b) the premises are true. If this odds with the commonsensical prediction that higher
assertioncanbeupheld,itfollowsthatanyuseofNHST paymentshouldresultinbetterevaluations. Maxwellet
is misuse. And returning to the education issue, under al. emphasized the following (p. 539): “Whether the
the assertion that any use of NHST is misuse, a good mean difference was small, medium, or large was basi-
way to educate substantive researchers in psychology callyirrelevant.”Rather,whatmatteredwasobtaininga
against misusing NHST is to carefully explain to them statistically significant effect in the predicted direction
whatiswrongwithitandwhytheyshouldnotperform
theprocedure.
1Maxwelletal.(2008)articlewaspublishedinthepresti-
giousvenue,AnnualReviewofPsychology,andhasbeencited
477timesasofthiswriting.
===== PAGE 2/12 =====
2
tosupportonetheoryattheexpenseofcompetingthe- There are many assumptions, in addition to the null
ories. Andthisseemssensible. FestingerandCarlsmith hypothesis, that enter into statistical models. There
made a directional prediction, the statistically signifi- are so many such assumptions that Bradley and Brand
cant p value provided a convincing argument against (2016) and Trafimow (2019b) proposed assumption
no effect or an effect in the opposite direction, thereby taxonomies. For instance, a typical assumption is that
leaving the Festinger and Carlsmith hypothesis as the the researcher has sampled randomly and indepen-
only one left plausible. If we thought no further, we dently from the population (Berk & Freedman, 2003;
might consider this a classic case of the benefits of us- Hirschauer et al., 2020). This assumption is practically
ing significance testing to falsify one hypothesis, and nevertrueinresearchthatdoesnotemployrandomas-
therebystronglysupportthecompetinghypothesis. signment of participants to conditions. And even when
there is a true experiment, the random selection is not
TheIssueofHypothesesVersusModels from a population of people, but rather from a popu-
lation of potential randomizations. Hence, there is no
NHST depends on p values, as researchers typically
soundwaytouseNHSTtotesthypothesesaboutpopu-
use the procedure. Researchers often mistake p values
lationsofpeople.
as indicating the probabilities of findings (or more ex-
Perhaps an argument could be made that if there is
treme ones) conditioned on null hypotheses. Hence, if
randomselectionfromasubpopulation, itisnotneces-
a wee p value is obtained, that constitutes important
sary to have random selection from the whole popula-
evidence against the null hypothesis. In turn, if the re-
tion. However, there are at difficulties with this argu-
searcher has formulated null and alternative hypothe-
ment. One difficulty is that the researcher would need
sesthataremutuallyexclusiveandexhaustive,thewee
todefinethesubpopulationofinterest. Secondly,there-
p value provides a good reason for rejecting the null
searcher would need to justify a focus on that subpop-
hypothesis and accepting the alternative hypothesis, as
ulation (e.g., explain why that subpopulation and not
in the Maxwell et al. (2008) rendition of the classic
some other subpopulation) and explain why that sub-
work by Festinger and Carlsmith (1959). If one sets
population is sufficient for drawing conclusions about
a p value threshold level for rejecting null hypotheses,
the theory. Thirdly, the researcher would still have to
the researcher will be unlikely to commit the error of
sample randomly from the subpopulation, a require-
wrongly rejecting the null hypothesis more often than
mentthatIhaveneverseenmetinanyofthethousands
thethresholdlevelspecifies.
ofpsychologyarticlesIhaveread.
Forexample,ifthethresholdlevelissetat0.05,then
Worse yet, the issue of random selection is only one
the researcher has a maximum 5% long-run chance of
assumption. There are countless additional assump-
wrongly rejecting the null hypothesis. Thus, in those
tionsreviewedbyotherscitedabove.
cases where researchers wish to make a dichotomous
Keeping in mind that NHST depends on both the
decision, such as acting in favor of one directional hy-
testhypothesisandadditionalassumptions(e.g.,Green-
pothesis at the expense of another directional hypothe-
land,2019),letH denotethetest(null)hypothesisand
sis,NHSTprovidesausefulprocedure,orsoitseems.
letAdenotethelargesetofadditionalassumptionsthat
But the foregoing is misleading because p values
go into a statistical model M: thus, M = H + A. As A
are not based on null hypotheses alone, but on larger
is wrong in every psychology study, it follows that M
statistical models (e.g., Armhein et al., 2019; Bradley
is wrong too in every psychology study (Box & Draper,
and Brand, 2016; Greenland, 2019; Trafimow, 2019b;
1987). In turn, the guaranteed falsity of M forces that
WassersteinandLazar,2016;Wassersteinetal.,2019).
thereisnologicallyvalidwaytotestH.EvenifLaplace’s
And this is easy to get wrong. For example, Lakens
omniscientdemonweretoappearanddeclareMwrong
(2021, p.639) stated: “In a Fisherian framework a p
with certainty (which is scarcely necessary as we know
valueisinterpretedasacontinuousmeasureofcompat-
A is false anyhow), that falsity could be due to A being
ibilitybetweentheobserveddataandthenullhypothe-
wrongorHbeingwrongtoo. Thereisnoescaping,then,
sis(Greenlandetal.,2016).”Butthisisproblematicbe-
that no matter how much evidence is obtained against
causetherelationshipisnotbetweenobserveddataand
the model, that evidence provides an insufficient basis
thenullhypothesis,butbetweenobserveddataandthe
fordrawingconclusionsaboutthetesthypothesis2.
wholemodelinwhichthenullhypothesisisembedded
(e.g., Armhein et al., 2019; Bradley and Brand, 2016; 2To foreshadow, the present argument is not that re-
Greenland,2019;Trafimow,2019a,2019b;Wasserstein searcherscanneverbenefitfromfalseassumptions,onlythat
andLazar,2016;Wassersteinetal.,2019). Thepresent thefalseassumptionsarefatalforNHST.
argumentdependsondistinguishingthenullhypothesis
fromthewholemodelinwhichitisembedded.
===== PAGE 3/12 =====
3
TheBallparkArgument unenviable position of making an inverse inference er-
ror. Thatis,researchersareinvalidlyusingtheprobabil-
Itistemptingtocountertheforegoingbypointingout
ityofoneentity,givenanother,tomakeaninverseinfer-
thatalthoughM isfalse,throughAbeingfalse,perhaps
encetotheprobabilityoftheotherentity,giventheone.
A is close enough to being true that it is “good enough
Although this argument provides a thorny problem for
forgovernmentwork.”Ortoputitanotherway,perhaps
using p values to draw inferences about hypotheses, as
A is “in the ballpark,” though not precisely true. And
evenFisher(1973)admitted,itdoesnotquitedothejob
if A is in the ballpark, though not precisely true, then
fromthepresentperspective. Foronething,theinverse
perhaps a wee p value does provide an impressive case
inference argument by p value critics makes the same
againstH.Buttheballparkargumentdoesnotwork.
errorthatpvalueaficionadosmake,whichistoassume
One problem with the ballpark argument is that al-
thatpvaluesareconditionedsolelyontesthypotheses4.
though a p value can index evidence against M in the
A second problem is that even if this argument were to
form of a probability, it cannot index how wrong M is.
be made at the model level, instead of at the hypothe-
The population parameter of interest might differ only
sis level, it would merely show that there is an inverse
slightly from the hypothesized value in M, and never-
inference error if a researcher made an inferential leap
theless result in a statistically significant p value. Or,
fromtheprobabilityofthedata,giventhemodel,tothe
theremightbealargedifferencethatneverthelessfails
probabilityofthemodel,giventhedata.
toresultinastatisticallysignificantpvalue. Thereisno
To see my dissatisfaction with the inverse inference
soundwaytointerpretevidenceagainstMasindicating
argument from a model perspective, I wish to assume
the closeness of M to truth. Therefore, there is no way
thatthemodelisfalse,becauseatleastoneoftheadded
toknowwhetherevidencethatisunlikelyinlightofthe
assumptionsisfalse,andsothereisnoissuewithproba-
modelisbecausethemodelisslightlywrong,extremely
bilities. Giventhatthemodelisguaranteedwrong,can
wrong,orsomewherein-between3.
we conclude anything about the hypothesis? The an-
Asecondproblemwiththeballparkargumentisthat
swer,asaforementioned,isthatnosuchconclusioncan
it does not solve the basic logical issue that M being
bedrawnsoundlybecausealthoughthemodeliswrong,
false can be attributed to a problem with A or a prob-
there is no way to know if the problem is in the added
lem with H too, and there is no way to know which.
assumptions(alwaysaproblem!) orthehypothesistoo.
Even if Laplace’s demon were to assure us that A is in
the ballpark, there is still no logical road to move from
WhyWeAreNotThereYet
M isfalsetoH isfalse,whichisthedesiredconclusion.
Forthistowork,Laplace’sdemonwouldhavetoassure The foregoing subsections cleared out some under-
usthatAistrue, inwhichcaseifM isfalse, thatwould brush but did not completely address the basic point
constitute a better reason to reject H. But if A is not that Maxwell et al. (2008) made. Specifically, Maxwell
true,butmerelyreasonablyclosetobeingtrue,thereis et al. did not make any arguments about the use of
nowaytoknowwhethertoattributetheweepvalueto a p value to index evidence against the null hypothe-
A being wrong (though perhaps not by much) or to H sis; but argued that one can use a p value for decision-
beingwrongtoo. making. Lakens (2021) can be interpreted as having
backedthisupbymentioningaNeyman-Pearsonframe-
The Distinction Between Hypotheses and Models is work (p. 639): “In a Neyman-Pearson framework, the
NotanInverseInferenceArgument goal of statistical tests is to guide the behavior of re-
searchers with respect to a hypothesis.” According to
Beforecontinuing,itisimportanttohighlightanim-
Lakens,withouteverknowingwhetherthehypothesisis
portant difference between the present argument and
trueorfalse,theresearcherdecidesandactsonthatde-
anargumentsuggestedbyCohen(1994; alsoseeTrafi-
cision. TheallegedgloryoftheNeyman-Pearsonframe-
mow, 2003) and discussed at length by no less an au-
thoritythanFisher(1973). AccordingtoCohen,theba- 3Yetanotherpossibilityisaninverseinferenceerror,aswill
sic problem pertains to inverse inference. Researchers beexplainedinalatersection.
want to know the probability of the test hypothesis, 4To be fair, the failure to distinguish between hypotheses
given the data (or data more extreme). If the condi- and models is less important from an inverse inference er-
tionalprobabilityofthetesthypothesisislow,itcanbe ror perspective than if one wishes to support NHST. This is
reasonably rejected in favor of the desired hypothesis. because, from an inverse inference error perspective, even if
However,becausetheprobabilityofthetesthypothesis, onegenerouslyassumedtheaddedassumptionsinmodelsare
true,usingpvaluestomakeinferencesabouthypothesesstill
given the data, need not be like the probability of the
fails. However, it could be argued that the inverse inference
data, given the test hypothesis, researchers are in the
errorargumentdoesnotaddresstheissueoferrorthresholds.
===== PAGE 4/12 =====
4
workisthattheresearcherhasaknownmaximumlong- selected randomly from a population of potential
runprobabilityofwronglyrejectingthetesthypothesis. randomizations,butnotapopulationofpeople.
Returning to Festinger and Carlsmith (1959), because
• Festinger and Carlsmith (1959) sampled from a
thepvaluetheyobtainedisbelowthestandardthresh-
normallydistributedpopulation. Theseresearchers
old (0.05), it is justified to reject the null hypothesis of
providedinsufficientinformationforadetermina-
noeffectandenjoythesupporttherejectionimpliedfor
tion,butasmostdistributionsareskewed(Blanca
thetoutedtheoreticalperspective. Butwait!
et al., 2013; Ho & Yu, 2015; Micceri, 1989), it
ReturningtoModelsandHypotheses is unlikely that this assumption is correct. Unfor-
tunately, even in modern times, few authors in-
There is a major flaw in the previous subsection. clude much in the way of distributional informa-
Specifically, we accepted the error that Maxwell et al. tion(Valentineetal.,2015).
(2008) and Lakens (2021) committed that a p value is
basedonahypothesisratherthanonamodel. Applying • Festinger and Carlsmith (1959) had equal vari-
theNeyman-Pearsonframeworktoamodel,ratherthan ances. FestingerandCarlsmithdidnotprovidethis
to a hypothesis, forces a very different ending. Let us information. Ingeneral,theassumptionisfalseat
repeataforegoingsentence,anditalicizethekeyword: thesamplelevelandthereoftenisnowaytoknow
“Because the probability of wrongly rejecting the test atthepopulationlevel,butitisfalseinmostcases.
hypothesis was below a threshold value, it made sense Inmoderntimes,researchersarebetteraboutpro-
to go ahead and reject it, and enjoy the support the re- vidingdescriptivestatisticspertainingtovariance,
jection implied for the touted theoretical perspective.” however, theyroutinelymakethemistakeofcon-
Replacingtheitalicizedwordwiththecorrectword(still cludingfromalackofastatisticallysignificantdif-
italicized),providesaverydifferentsentence: “Because ferencebetweenvariancesthatthereforethevari-
the probability of wrongly rejecting the test model was ancesdonotdiffer. NHSTorthodoxyandmyown
belowathresholdvalue,itmadesensetogoaheadand pointofviewagreeonthismatter;alackofasta-
reject it, and enjoy the support the rejection implied tistically significant effect is insufficient reason to
forthetoutedtheoreticalperspective.”Butusingmodel concludethatthevariancesdonotdiffer.
instead of hypothesis constitutes not just a fly-in-the-
• Festinger and Carlsmith (1959) had interval or ra-
ointment, but an elephant-in-the-ointment. Consider
tioleveldata. Thisisblatantlyfalse,ascanbeseen
againthatM=H+A,sothatrejectingMfailstotellus
fromthedescriptionprovidedintheirmethodsec-
whethertorejectAorH too. Thereisnosoundbasisto
tion. And it is blatantly false in modern research
decideaboutH.Andifnodecisionaboutthehypothesis
too that employs various kinds of scales, though
ismade,thereisnowaytoactuponit.
reactiontimeexperimentsmaybeanexception.
RevisitingFestingerandCarlsmith(1959)
• Festinger and Carlsmith (1959) had no systematic
Festinger and Carlsmith (1959) interpreted the bet- error, so there was only random error. There is no
terevaluationsoftheirstudyinthelowpaymentgroup waytoknowwhetherthisiscorrect. Festingerand
thaninthehighpaymentgroupassupportingcognitive Carlsmithdidnotprovideinformationrelevantto
dissonance theory and disconfirming competing ones. making this determination. Modern researchers
But let us now consider some of the specific assump- tend to provide more information, but generally
tions,thoughtacit,underlyingtheirsignificancetesting stillnotenoughtomakethedetermination.
toseehowstrongthatsupportreallyis.
• Festinger and Carlsmith (1959)used a manipula-
tion that worked the same way for all participants.
• Festinger and Carlsmith (1959) sampled randomly
There is no way to know this. For example, Bem
and independently from the population. This as-
(1967)arguedthatratherthanintroducingadis-
sumption is blatantly false as they used a conve-
sonance arousing process, the low payment con-
nience sample. The best that can be said is that
dition may have instigated a self-perception pro-
theyquasi-randomlyassignedparticipantstocon-
cess. It could be that Festinger and Carlsmith
ditions,andrandomassignmentofparticipantsto
(1959) were correct for all participants; but it
conditionsisveryfarawayfromrandomselection
couldbethatBemwascorrectforallparticipants,
from a defined population. Thus, at best, and as-
thateachwascorrectforsomeoftheparticipants,
suming that there truly was random assignment,
orthatbothprocessesoccurredtovaryingdegrees
Festinger and Carlsmith could be argued to have
fordifferentparticipants. Theproblemisnotthat
===== PAGE 5/12 =====
5
dissonance processes might occur to varying ex- sionthatthesizeoftheeffectisirrelevantfordirectional
tents in different people, but rather that quali- predictionsisnonsensical.
tatively different processes may occur in differ- And to dramatize this point, consider the famous
ent people; this might be considered an example MichelsonandMorley(1887)experimentperformedto
of the qualitative homogeneity assumption that test the existence of the theorized luminiferous ether
(Richters, 2021) felt continues to be problematic that ostensibly provided the medium for light to reach
inpsychology. Earth from the stars5. As this was prior to significance
testing, Michelson and Morley’s miniscule effect size
Nor are these all, but they are sufficient to make the wasinterpretedasevidenceagainsttheexistenceofthe
pointthatitistantamounttoguaranteedthatnotallthe luminiferous ether. Researchers had no trouble recog-
addedassumptionsaretrue,sothereisnowaytodraw nizing that small imperfections in the featured inter-
anunambiguousconclusionaboutH,basedonM being ferometer could have been responsible for the effect.
falsebydintofAbeingfalse. For example, a slight change in temperature in the de-
That the significance test Festinger and Carlsmith vice could have been responsible. The upshot was that
(1959)performedfailstoprovidemuchsupportforcog- researchers eventually interpreted the near-zero effect
nitive dissonance theory need not indicate that cogni- size as contradicting the theorized luminiferous ether
tivedissonancetheoryisapoortheory. Mypersonalbe- rather than as supporting it. It is worth emphasizing
liefisthatthetheoryisuseful,butnotbecauseofasig- thatthephysicsinterpretationisindirectoppositionto
nificancetest. Thereareotherfactorssuchasthedetails theclaimthattheeffectsizedoesnotmatterifaneffect
of the theory itself, nonintuitive predictions, and the is there, in the right direction, for directional predic-
wealth of literature that has followed the theory, that tions. Subsequently, Lorenz proposed his famous con-
suggestsitsutility. Butabsenttheseconsiderations, the traction equation, and paved the way for Einstein’s rel-
unsound significance test is unconvincing on a stand- ativity theory that subsumed the contraction equation
alonebasis. (Einstein,1961)6.
But there is more drama. Carver (1993) reanalyzed
Are Effect Sizes Irrelevant for Decision-Making Un-
theMichelsonandMorley(1887)datausingNHSTand
derStatisticalSignificance?
reported a statistically significant effect. Had late 19th
century researchers employed NHST, they would have
Consider again the quotation from Maxwell et al.
come to the wrong conclusion, with potentially disas-
(2008)inconnectionwiththetheory-testingperformed
trousconsequencesfortheLorenzcontractionequation
by Festinger and Carlsmith (1959, p. 539): “Whether
and all that followed it (Trafimow & Rice, 2009). The
the mean difference was small, medium, or large was
received view that the effect size does not matter for
basically irrelevant.” The basis for this conclusion was
directional predictions when there is statistical signifi-
that the significance test was definitive, but we have
cance in the right direction, is one of the subtle, but
seenthatitwasnot.
immensely deleterious, consequences that follow from
To see the issue clearly, consider the received posi-
researchersbelievingthatNHSTsoundlytestshypothe-
tionthatfortestingdirectionalpredictionsagainsteach
sesasopposedtomodelsinwhichtheyareembedded.
other,allthatisnecessaryistoknowthedirection—the
size of the effect seems irrelevant. And this would be
TheWrongRejectionIssue
so—just as Maxwell et al. (2008) asserted—if signifi-
cance tests provided definitive evidence pertaining to ManystatisticiansworrythatwithoutNHST,thereis
hypotheses. But they do not, which leaves open the no way to know which null hypotheses to reject and
consideration of alternative explanations. Now, sup- which null hypotheses not to reject. Without a bar to
pose that Festinger and Carlsmith (1959) had obtained pass, researchers will accept many chance findings as
a whoppingly large sample effect size. In that case, it real.
wouldbesomewhatdifficult(thoughnotimpossible)to However, the present emphasis on distinguishing
advance alternative explanations. A person might rea- modelsfromhypothesessuggeststhatthisworryshould
sonablydisbelievethatsmallfalsitiesinthemodel, say, be much more nuanced. Consider that researchers can
with respect to the foregoing bullet-pointed assump- be wrong with respect to hypotheses, models, or theo-
tions, could account for a whoppingly large sample ef- ries. Thetypicalworryisthatresearcherscouldwrongly
fect size. In contrast, suppose a miniscule effect size,
in which case it would be easy to account for it based
5AlbertMichelson(1852-1931)becamethefirstAmerican
towinaNobelPrizein1907.
onthosefalsities. Oncewedispensewithmindlesslyad-
6Einstein(1859-1955)citedtheLorenzequationinabook
heringtoNHST,weseeplainlythatthestandardconclu-
publishedwellafterhisdeath(1961).
===== PAGE 6/12 =====
6
reject the null hypothesis of no effect, in favor of the equateatthetheorylevel,astheMichelsonandMorley
alternative hypothesis of the desired effect. But as we (1887) instance illustrates. Hence, although the worry
have seen, because null hypotheses are embedded in about wrongly accepting chance findings is legitimate,
falsemodels,thereisnowaytohaveasoundtestofthe there is no sound way to address that worry through
nullhypothesis. Itwouldbenefitthesocialandbusiness NHST.Therefore,theworrydoesnotjustifyresearchers
sciences if researchers would find the courage to face performingNHST.
thissquarely. There is a final point worth making. If one insists
Secondly, instead of focusing on hypotheses being on performing NHST to unsoundly address the issue of
correct or incorrect, which NHST cannot distinguish chance findings, there is a dilemma caused by the em-
soundly, researchers could instead focus on models be- beddedness of null hypotheses in known wrong mod-
ingcorrectorincorrect. Theadvantageofmovinginthis els. Because the model is wrong, it should be obvi-
directionisthatpvaluescanmoreplausibly,thoughnot ous that provided a sufficiently large sample size is ob-
necessarily correctly (Lavine, 2022), be argued to in- tained, the null hypothesis will be rejected. This is
dicate the degree of incompatibility between data and a simple, and well-known, probabilistic fact. But it
models, thereby suggesting that if the incompatibility implies that if one wishes to avoid rejecting true null
becomes too great, researchers could justifiably reject hypotheses, it would be necessary to employ limited
the model. However, the disadvantage is that because sample sizes so as decrease the probability of obtain-
themodelisalreadyknowntobewrong,littleisgained ing statistical significance! Consistent with this impli-
by rejecting a known wrong model. Worse yet, if a sig- cation,McQuitty(2004,2018)famouslyrecommended
nificant p value is not obtained, the researcher would against large sample sizes, in the context of structural
failtorejectaknownwrongmodel. Thus,thebest-case equation modeling, to avoid rejecting tenable models7.
scenarioisnogain,theworse-casescenarioisproblem- However, if one employs limited sample sizes to de-
atic, andtheexpectedvalueoftheexerciseisnegative. crease the probability of rejecting true null hypothe-
To reiterate, as all models are false, researchers cannot ses, then sample statistics will provide poor estimates
wronglyrejectthem. of corresponding population parameters (Trafimow et
Thirdly, insteadoffocusingonhypothesesormodels al., 2021). Clearly, then, the researcher who insists on
beingcorrectorincorrect,researcherscouldinsteadfo- performing NHST to avoid wrongly rejecting true null
cus on theories being correct or incorrect. There is no hypotheses is in a dilemma. Decreasing sample sizes
way to address this in a single paragraph, or even in decreases probabilities of wrongly rejecting true null
a single paper. We have seen from the Michelson and hypotheses,whichisgood; butdecreasingsamplesizes
Morley(1887)instancethatNHSTcanbehorriblymis- alsodecreasesthetrustworthinessofsamplestatisticsin
leading from the perspective of testing theories. In ad- estimatingcorrespondingpopulationparameters,which
dition,thereismuchdebateamongphilosophersabout is bad. The way out of the dilemma, of course, is to
whetherscientistsshouldtrytoprovetheoriestrue(ver- abandonNHST.
ification), prove theories false (falsification), use theo-
ries as inferences to best explanations (abduction), use EducationtoPreventMisuseofNHST
theories as prediction-making devices without expect-
As inevitable as death and taxes, there is the clar-
ing them to be true (pragmatism), or others. Happily,
ioncallforbettereducationtopreventresearchersfrom
this complex issue need not be solved here. But the
misusingNHST.Andthecallmakessenseunderthetyp-
philosophical debate shows that evaluating theories is
ical assumption that researchers are insufficiently edu-
an endeavor of considerable complexity that demands
catedtounderstandthatforwhichNHSTiswell-suited
consideration of multiple factors and multiple perspec-
or not. Moreover, who could argue against better ed-
tives. It is inevitable that NHST is inadequate for ad-
ucation? Nevertheless, as will become clear, there are
dressing theories. And if the argument is that NHST is
complications.
usefulforevaluatingempiricalhypothesesthatareused
Most important, if one believes in widespread NHST
totesttheories, wehavealreadyseenthatNHSTisun-
misuse, and that better education can mitigate that
soundforevaluatingempiricalhypotheses.
problem,thereisanunderlyingassumptionofaproper
Insummary,wehaveseenthatNHSTfailsatthehy-
use for NHST that, if employed, would aid substantive
pothesis level because it cannot soundly be performed
researchers in achieving their goals. But as we have
on hypotheses due to their embeddedness in models.
AndNHSTfailsatthemodellevelbecausethemodelis 7Thenow-classicMcQuitty(2004)articlewaspublishedin
alreadyknownwrong,regardlessofthestatusofthehy- theJournalofBusinessResearch,andthearticlewasrankedin
pothesisembeddedinit. Finally,NHSTisblatantlyinad- thetop100forcitationsfromthatprestigiousjournal.
===== PAGE 7/12 =====
7
seen, once one clearly distinguishes hypotheses from 1. It is wrong to use wrong models even if they are
the wrong models in which they are embedded, the close to being right. This statement differs in a
touted use of NHST to provide a sound basis for re- subtle, but crucial, way from what I am actually
searchers to act as if the null hypothesis is false, and saying. Myargumentisnotthatitiswrongtouse
the alternative hypothesis is true, fails. And with this wrong models, but that concluding that a model
failure, we are left with no proper NHST use that, if is wrong, as a whole model, fails to justify con-
employed,wouldaidsubstantiveresearchersinachiev- cluding that any particular item—such as a test
ing their goals. Or to put this in the form of a rhetor- hypothesis—containedinthatmodeliswrong. As
ical question, “What, then, is the proper use of NHST a hopefully illustrative analogy, consider a house
in which we should educate substantive researchers to that contains a painting. That the painting is em-
helpthemachievetheirgoals?” beddedinthehousefailstojustifyconcludingthat
The lack of an answer to the rhetorical question because the house is ugly, the painting must be
pointstoanunpleasantconclusion. Thelackofaproper uglytoo.
NHST use for research implies that any use of it in re-
Furthermore,therearemanygoodusesformod-
search constitutes misuse! And if any NHST use in re-
els that are wrong but close to being right. For
search constitutes misuse, then education is unlikely to
example, a researcher might use a model to help
preventmisuseunlessresearchersareeducatedagainst
analyzeasampleofraindropstomakeinferences
NHST.
about the amount of rainfall in a specified geo-
Althoughthepreviousparagraphisthemainconclu-
graphical area. The model will be wrong, but it
sion to the present section, there is an additional point
might be close enough to right to supply the re-
that goes well with it. Whether it is to further their
searcher with a reasonably good estimate of the
careers, out of genuine scientific curiosity, or both, re-
amount of rainfall in the specified geographical
searchers often wish to reject null hypotheses in favor
area. The rainfall example points to an impor-
of desired alternative hypotheses. And absent the fore-
tant difference between using the wrongness of a
going, NHST seems to provide the necessary ritual for
modeltomakeinferencesaboutthewrongnessof
doing so. Therefore, the temptation to use NHST for
ahypothesisembeddedinit,versususingamodel
that purpose is almost irresistible. To exemplify that
for other purposes, such as estimation. Drawing
irresistibility, consider a blog by Morey that documents
dichotomousconclusionsabouthypothesisiscon-
how no less an authority than Neyman misused NHST
traindicated whereas estimation is not. However,
inhisweatherresearchinthe1960s(BayesFactor: Soft-
evenwhenusedforestimation,itisworthwhileto
wareforBayesianinference: Neymandoesscience,part
checkassumptions,includingdistributionalones.
1). ThedocumentedmisusewasnotduetoNeymanbe-
inguneducatedaboutstatisticalmatters,ashewasone 2. Because NHST is contraindicated, so are p values.
ofthegreateststatisticalstarsofalltime. Rather,itwas This statement tacitly assumes that NHST is the
due to Neyman wanting to achieve particular goals to only use to which p values can be put. But this
whichNHSTwasunsuited,therebyactivatingthetemp- is not so. One can use p values to index incom-
tationtoengageinmisuse. Thisexampleillustratesthat patibilitybetweendataandastatisticalmodel,as
the problem of misuse is less a lack of education, and explainedearlier,withoutengaginginNHST.This
more the irresistibility of temptation. A way to elimi- is not to say that I approve of p values, because
nate the temptation is for journal editors not to accept I do not, but my disapproval stems from a be-
manuscripts for publication that use NHST (e.g., Trafi- lief that it is pointless to index evidence against
mowandMarks,2015). a known wrong model. Nor is it uncontroversial
thatpvaluesevendothissoundly(Lavine,2022).
WhatIamNotSaying My disapproval of p values is not contingent on
mydisapprovalofNHST.
That test hypotheses are embedded in wrong mod-
els destroys NHST, unless there is a way to obscure 3. ThatNHSTisunsoundimplicatesBayestheoremas
by reinterpreting the foregoing to say something other the way to go. If this were so, it would be possi-
than it says. In an attempt to forestall that device, the ble to use anti-Bayesian arguments to undermine
presentsectionfocusesonwhatIamnotsaying. More- my position. But a demonstration that one pro-
over, the following comes, not from my own mind, but cedureisunsounddoesnotforcecredenceinany
frommisinterpretations—whetheraccidentaloronpur- particularalternativeprocedure. Itispossiblethat
pose—fromothers. Citationsareomittedtoprotectthe bothNHSTandBayestheoremareproblematical.
guilty. A fair assessment of Bayesian procedures would
===== PAGE 8/12 =====
8
requireitsownpaperorbook. Thisisbecause(a) is with A. Once it is admitted that A is false, it
there are many philosophical disagreements even does not matter if H is an assumption, presump-
amongBayesiansand(b)therearemanyBayesian tion, or whatever other word one prefers. The
complexities tobe consideredthat donot arisein falsity of A guarantees the falsity of M, thereby
NHST contexts (Gillies, 2000). For present pur- renderingimpossiblederivingasoundconclusion
poses, it is not necessary to support or criticize aboutH.Letnotthewordgamedistractfromthe
Bayesian procedures; it is merely necessary to in- basic problem that the test hypothesis is embed-
sist that the unsoundness of one procedure need ded in a known wrong model—the real issue—as
notimplythesoundnessofanyparticularalterna- opposedtothedistractionhighlighting‘assuming’
tiveprocedure. versus‘presuming’thetesthypothesis.
4. It is possible for null hypotheses to be true, thereby 6. Researchers should not test hypotheses. We have
negating the foregoing argument. There are two seen that NHST cannot be used soundly to test
problems with this riposte. The lesser problem is hypotheses. However,thatdoesnotmeanthatre-
that point null hypotheses are extremely unlikely searchers should avoid testing hypotheses. The
to be true. Even in cases where there is no effect 2019 special issue of The American Statistician
at the theoretical level, some sort of imperfection contains many proposals for alternative statisti-
inthemeasuringdeviceorstudyparadigmwould cal procedures. Then, too, I have suggested the
all but guarantee an effect size not exactly equal a priori procedure (Trafimow, 2019a) and gain-
tozero. WesawthisintheMichelsonandMorley probabilityanalyses(Trafimowetal.,2022;Trafi-
(1887) instance where the effect size did not ex- mow et al., in press). The a priori procedure
actly equal zero despite agreement among physi- provides researchers with the opportunity to esti-
ciststhatthereisnoluminiferousether. Moreim- matetheminimumsamplesizenecessarytomeet
portant,thatisnotmypremise. Mypremiseisnot researcher criteria for precision (how close the
that hypotheses are not true but that models are researcher wishes the sample statistics to be to
not true. Recall again that M = H + A. Because their corresponding population parameters) and
Aisalwaysfalse,Misfalsetoo,therebyrendering confidence (the probability of meeting the preci-
impossible drawing a sound conclusion about H sion specification). In turn, once minimum sam-
thatisembeddedinM. ple sizes to meet specifications have been deter-
mined, there is no need for significance tests be-
Relatedly, Iwasonceaccusedofinsistingthatall
causetheresearchercanbeassuredthatthesam-
null hypotheses are false. But that accusation is
ple statistics are good estimates of correspond-
misleadingontwocounts. Oflesserimportance,it
ing population parameters, of course within the
isplainwrong. Forexample,whateverone’sposi-
limits of the precision and confidence specifica-
tiononpointnullhypotheses,rangenullhypothe-
tions. Thus,theresearchercaninterpretthesam-
sescanbetrue. Ofgreaterimportance,thatagain
ple statistics directly. A priori statistics have been
missesmypoint,whichisthatmodelsarewrong,
developedforavarietyofpurposesandassuming
and so they cannot be used soundly to draw con-
avarietyofdistributions. Ofcourse,distributional
clusionsabouthypotheses.
assumptions are unlikely to be perfect, but they
5. The word game: the foregoing argument depends likelyaregoodenoughifcheckedagainstdata. If
on using the word ‘assume’ when it should have slightwrongnessleadstoanoverestimationofthe
used the word ‘presume.’ According to this argu- necessary minimum sample sizes to meet specifi-
ment,Ihaveconfusedassumingthetesthypothe- cations, then the researcher merely has an even
siswithpresumingthetesthypothesis, wherethe better estimate than was intended. And if slight
implication of assuming is that the test hypothe- wrongnessleadstoanunderestimationofthenec-
sis is something the researcher actually believes essary minimum sample sizes to meet specifica-
whereas the implication of presuming is that the tions, then the researcher will have a slightly less
researcher does not believe the test hypothesis. good estimate than was intended. Either way,
Thus, I am being unfair to researchers who wish slightwrongnessisnotfatalwhereasitisfatalfor
touseNHSTtodisconfirmtesthypothesesinfavor NHST.
ofdesiredhypotheses. Butthisisnotmypoint,as Gain-probability analyses are even newer than
becomes clear upon again considering M = H + theaprioriprocedure. Theidea,here,istomake
A. I do not care if one is assuming, presuming, or adistributionalassumptionandthenestimatethe
any other word that pertains to H, as my concern probabilityofbeingbetterofforworseoffbyvary-
===== PAGE 9/12 =====
9
ing amounts. It is possible to express these con- experiment with a statistically significant finding,
cisely using gain-probability diagrams. For exam- so readers act as if the null hypothesis is false.
ple, suppose a treatment for blood pressure and Then, someone performs a more highly powered
adoctorwishestodecidewhethertorecommend experiment that is not statistically significant and
it to patients. If provided with a gain-probability isslightlyintheoppositedirection,soreadersnow
diagram, the doctor can quickly assess the prob- act as if the null hypothesis is true. Then, a third
ability that patients will have, say, a 10 mm Hg experiment, more highly powered than either of
decreaseinbloodpressure,a20mmHgdecrease the former ones, is statistically significant again,
inbloodpressure,andsoon. Orperhapsthereare and in the original direction, so readers act as if
some cases where the medicine increases blood the null hypothesis is false again. This process of
pressureby10mmHg,20mmHg,andsoonand constantlychangingdecisionsisnotreasonable. A
these have associated probabilities too. Thus, if reasonable process would involve forming a non-
a decision needs to be made, the usual justifica- dichotomous impression, and continually updat-
tion for NHST, gain-probability analyses and di- ing that impression as new experiments are per-
agrams provide a far better foundation for deci- formed. It is not reasonable to constantly alter-
sionmakingthandoesNHST.Furthermore,Trafi- nate between options that dichotomous thinking
mow et al. (2022) used a published blood pres- forcetobeextreme.
surearticletoshowhowNHSTrendersextremely
Finally, consider wide agreement by statisticians
misleading conclusions that are clarified by using
that NHST does not justify accepting the null hy-
gain-probabilitydiagrams.
pothesisifpdoesnotcomeinunderthreshold. In
And speaking practically, recent a priori proce- this case, one merely fails to reject the null hy-
dure and gain-probability papers contain links to pothesis, but one does not accept it. However, a
free and user-friendly programs that anyone can researcher who behaves according to the forego-
learn to use in minutes. Thus, it is not necessary ing Lakens (2021) quotation is acting as if it is
to depend on NHST. There are good alternatives justifiabletoacceptthenullhypothesis. Thus,the
thatareeasytoperformtoo. adviceispoorevenaccordingtoconventionalsta-
tisticalthinking.
7. NHST forces researchers into a dichotomous deci-
sion to act as if the test hypothesis is wrong or not InflatedEffectSizes
wrong. Unlike 1-6, I believe this, but with the
proviso that this did not originate from me but ConsideragaintheworrythatNHSTaficionadoshave
directly from NHST aficionados and continues to that without NHST, researchers will wrongly reject test
do so. For example, Lakens (2021, pp. 639-640) hypotheses in favor of desired hypotheses. It is ironic
stated: “On the basis of the results of a statistical that although many have pointed out that using NHST
test, and without ever knowing whether the hy-
guaranteesdramaticallyinflatedeffectsizes8,Ihaveyet
pothesis is true or not, researchers choose to ten- to encounter any willingness on the part of NHST afi-
tativelyactasifthenullhypothesisorthealterna- cionadostoevenconsidertheissue. Thebasicproblem
tivehypothesisistrue.”Philosophyofsciencesug- can be described simply. Because p values depend im-
gests that whether to act as if the null hypothesis portantlyonsampleeffectsizes,aswellassamplesizes,
oralternativehypothesisistrueshoulddependon attypicalsamplesizes,obtainingstatisticalsignificance
manyissues,suchasdetailsofthetheoryforbasic also depends importantly on sample effect sizes. But
research, details of the application forapplied re- sample effect sizes are just that—sample effect sizes—
search (including loss functions), generalizability andthesevaryacrosssamplesevenkeepingthepopula-
issues, quality of the research paradigm, idiosyn- tioneffectsizeconstant.
cratic but relevant characteristics about the peo- Therefore, whether a particular finding passes the
ple who are to be influenced by the decision, and significance threshold is influenced by whether the re-
manyotherfactors. searcher had been sufficiently lucky to have sampled
oneofthelargersampleeffectsizesasopposedtohav-
Moreover, it is best not to be fooled by the word
ingsampledoneofthesmallerones. Althoughluckcan
“tentatively”asin“...tentativelyactasifthenull
hypothesisoralternativehypothesisistrue.”What 8Forexample,therewasadiscussioninBasicandApplied
doesitmeantotentativelydecide? Presumablyit SocialPsychologyseveralyearsagoontheissue(Grice,2017;
meansthatone’sdecisioncanchangeifnewdata Hyman, 2017; Kline, 2017; Locascio, 2017a, 2017b; Marks,
are presented. Well, then, suppose a published 2017).
===== PAGE 10/12 =====
10
replicate, it is unlikely, and so effect sizes in a cohort could mitigate the temptation problem, and these are
of replication studies can be expected to be decreased worthyofinvestigation.
relative to effect sizes in a cohort of original studies That NHST aficionados consistently harp about mis-
thathavepassedthesignificancethresholdthatallowed use should imply something to the wary reader. The
them to be published. This is a special case of the gen- implication is that even aficionados admit that NHST
eral and well-known phenomenon of regression to the does immense harm to science. We have seen some
mean. Notonlyiseffectsizeinflationindicatedbypure of the harms here in terms of unsound reasoning, bad
mathematics, itisempiricallysupportedtoo. OpenSci- arguments that effect sizes do not matter for testing
enceCollaboration(2015)foundthattheaverageeffect directional predictions, poor suggestions to avoid too-
sizeinareplicationcohortofstudieswaslessthanhalf large sample sizes, and effect size inflation. But there
that in the original cohort. It seems strange that many aremanyothers, notreviewedhere, thathavebeenre-
whosupportNHSTexpressconsternationoverthepos- viewed by those who continue to propagate the misuse
sibility of false positives but seem uninterested in dra- argument (e.g., Vidgen and Yasseri, 2016). The dif-
matic effect size inflation that is both mathematically ference between these people and myself is not about
inevitableandempiricallyverified. whether NHST harms science, as we all agree on that,
though we might disagree on specific categories of
Conclusion harm. Rather, the main difference is disagreement
aboutthereasonfortheharm. Iftheharmisduetomis-
We commenced with the popular ‘misuse’ argument,
use, then eliminating misuse through education leaves
that the problem with NHST is not with the procedure
onlyproperuse,tothepotentialbenefitofbusinessand
itself, but that researchers are insufficiently well edu-
social sciences. Whereas if there is no proper use, then
catedtouseitcorrectlyandtherebyavoidmisuse. Con-
all use is misuse, and NHST will continue to harm sci-
tinuing with the popular saw, it would be a mistake to
ence,regardlessofeducation,aslongasthetemptation
“throw out the baby with the bathwater.” But the un-
toengagetheritualremains.
derlying assumption, of course, is that there really is
Based on a simple premise, that the test hypothesis
a proper NHST use; there really is a baby that should
isembeddedinamodelthatincludeswrongadditional
notbethrownoutwiththebathwater. Andthatproper
assumptions (M = H + A), the present conclusions are
use, as Maxwell et al. (2008) asserted, is to test direc-
inescapable unless the simplicity somehow can be ob-
tional hypotheses, with the classic Festinger and Carl-
fuscated. Lestthereaderdeemmyconcernwithpoten-
smith(1959)experiment anexemplar. However, aswe
tial red herrings inappropriate, consider that NHST afi-
haveseen,onceitisappreciatedthatthenullhypothesis
cionados, most of whom are statistically sophisticated,
isembeddedinaknownwrongmodel(M=H+Aand
continue to assert that the p values they use in per-
A is false), it becomes immediately obvious that NHST
forming NHST are a function of the relation between
isanunsoundprocedureforactingonhypotheses,even
hypotheses and data, when the truth is that they are a
forFestingerandCarlsmith. Thereisnobaby! Toham-
function of the relation between models and data. The
mer this point home, I have a challenge for those who
distinction between hypotheses and models, and the
would continue to support that there is a proper NHST
failure of NHST aficionados to address the distinction,
use. The challenge is to cite a single study in the his-
leads to a question that countenances further ponder-
tory of management, marketing, or psychology where
ing. TowhatextenthaveNHSTaficionadosmissedthis
NHST was used properly (i.e., where all assumptions
distinction for innocent reasons, such as that the dis-
weredemonstratedtrue).
tinctionissubtle,philosophical,orhiddenunderathick
If the challenge is not met, and it will not be met,
layerofmathematicalcomplications? Ortowhatextent
the failed challenge clarifies that any use of NHST con-
has the distinction been missed for a less innocent rea-
stitutes misuse. Consequently, education is unlikely to
son, such as that a focus on the distinction sounds the
prevent misuse unless researchers are educated not to
deathknellforNHST?
use NHST in the first place. The problem is not educa-
tion, it is that NHST is incapable of providing a sound
AuthorContact
way to act on hypotheses. Because researchers desire
a statistical ritual justifying their acting on hypotheses DavidTrafimow,NewMexicoStateUniversity.
(and furthering their careers), and NHST provides that dtrafimo@nmsu.edu
ritual, the underlying problem is more temptation than
education. An obvious way to remove that temptation ConflictofInterestandFunding
is for journal editors to refuse to publish articles that
Thereisnoconflictofinterest.
dependonNHST.Theremaybeothermethodstoothat
===== PAGE 11/12 =====
11
AuthorContributions Festinger, L., & Carlsmith, J. M. (1959). Cognitive con-
sequences of forced compliance. Journal of Ab-
DavidTrafimowwrotethisarticle.
normal and Social Psychology, 58(2), 203–210.
https://doi.org/10.1037/h0041593
OpenSciencePractices
Fisher,R.A.(1973).Statisticalmethodsandscientificin-
This is a theoretical paper and is not eligible for any ference(3rd).CollierMacmillan.
Open Science badges. The entire editorial process, in- Gillies, D. (2000). Philosophical theories of probability.
cludingtheopenreviews,ispublishedintheonlinesup- Taylor&Francis.
plement. Greenland, S. (2019). Valid p-values behave exactly
as they should: Some misleading criticisms of
References p-values and their resolution with s-values.
The American Statistician, 73(sup1), 106–114.
Armhein, V., Trafimow, D., & Greenland, S. (2019).
https://doi.org/10.1080/00031305.2018.
Inferential statistics as descriptive statistics:
1529625
There is no replication crisis if we don’t
Greenland,S.,Senn,S.J.,Rothman,K.J.,Carlin,J.B.,
expect replication. The American Statistician,
Poole, C., Goodman, S. N., & Altman, D. G.
73(sup1), 262–270. https://doi.org/10.1080/
(2016). Statistical tests, p values, confidence
00031305.2018.1543137
intervals, and power: A guide to misinterpre-
Bem, D. J. (1967). Self-perception: An alternative in-
tations. European Journal of Epidemiology, 31,
terpretation of cognitive dissonance phenom-
337–350. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10654-
ena. Psychology Review, 74(3), 183–200. https:
016-0149-3
//doi.org/10.1037/h0024835
Grice,J.W.(2017).Commentonlocascio’sresultsblind
Berk, R. A., & Freedman, D. A. (2003). Statistical as-
manuscript evaluation proposal. Basic and Ap-
sumptions as empirical commitments. In T. G.
pliedSocialPsychology,39(5),254–255.
Blomberg & S. Cohen (Eds.), Law, punishment,
Hirschauer, N., Grüner, S., Muhoff, O., Becker, C.,
and social control: Essays in honor of shel-
& Jantsch, A. (2020). Can p-values be mean-
don messinger (2nd, pp. 235–254). Aldine de
ingfullyinterpretedwithoutrandomsampling?
Gruyter.
Statistics Surveys, 14, 71–91. https://doi.org/
Blanca,M.J.,Arnau,J.,López-Montiel,D.,Bono,R.,&
10.1214/20-SS129
Bendayan,R.(2013).Skewnessandkurtosisin
Ho, A. D., & Yu, C. C. (2015). Descriptive statistics
realdatasamples.Methodology:EuropeanJour-
for modern test score distributions: Skewness,
nal of Research Methods for the Behavioral and
kurtosis, discreteness, and ceiling effects. Edu-
Social Sciences, 9(2), 78–84. https://doi.org/
cational and Psychological Measurement, 75(3),
10.1027/1614-2241/a000057
365–388. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 /
Box, G. E. P., & Draper, N. R. (1987). Empirical
0013164414548576
model-building and response surfaces. John Wi-
Hyman,M.(2017).Can‘resultsblindmanuscriptevalu-
ley Sons.
ation’ assuage ‘publication bias’? Basic and Ap-
Bradley,M.T.,&Brand,A.(2016).Significancetesting
pliedSocialPsychology,39(5),247–251.
needs a taxonomy: Or how the fisher, neyman-
Kline,R.(2017).Commentonlocascio,resultsblindsci-
pearson controversy resulted in the inferential
ence publishing. Basic and Applied Social Psy-
tail wagging the measurement dog. Psychologi-
chology,39(5),256–257.
calReports,119(2),487–504.
Lakens, D. (2021). The practical alternative to the p
Carver,R.P.(1993).Thecaseagainststatisticalsignifi-
value is the properly used p value. Perspectives
cancetesting,revisited.JournalofExperimental
onPsychologicalScience,16(3),639–648.https:
Education,61(4),287–292.https://doi.org/10.
//doi.org/10.1177/1745691620958012
1080/00220973.1993.10806591
Lavine, M. (2022). P-values don’t measure evidence.
Cohen,J.(1994).Theearthisround(p<.05).Amer-
CommunicationsinStatistics-TheoryandMeth-
ican Psychologist, 49(12), 997–1003. https://
ods,53(2),718–726.https://doi.org/10.1080/
www. sjsu . edu / faculty / gerstman / misc /
03610926.2022.2091783
Cohen1994.pdf
Locascio, J. (2017a). Rejoinder to responses to “results
Einstein, A. (1961). Relativity: The special and the gen-
blind publishing”. Basic and Applied Social Psy-
eraltheory(R.W.Lawson,Trans.).CrownPub-
chology,39(5),258–261.
lishers.
===== PAGE 12/12 =====
12
Locascio,J.(2017b).Resultsblindpublishing.Basicand for added benefit in the sciences. International
AppliedSocialPsychology,39(5),239–246. Journal of Social Research Methodology, 22(6),
Marks,M.J.(2017).Commentaryonlocascio2017.Ba- 571–583.https://doi.org/10.1080/13645579.
sic and Applied Social Psychology, 39(5), 252– 2019.1610592
253. Trafimow, D., Hyman, M. R., Kostyk, A., Wang, C., &
Maxwell,S.E.,Kelley,K.,&Rausch,J.R.(2008).Sam- Wang,T.(2021).Theharmfuleffectofnullhy-
plesizeplanningforstatisticalpowerandaccu- pothesis significance testing on marketing re-
racyinparameterestimation.AnnualReviewof search: An example. Journal of Business Re-
Psychology, 59, 537–563. https://doi.org/10. search,125,39–44.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
1146/annurev.psych.59.103006.093735 jbusres.2020.11.069
McQuitty, S. (2004). Statistical power and structural Trafimow, D., Hyman, M. R., Kostyk, A., Wang, Z.,
equation models in business research. Journal Tong, T., Wang, T., & Wang, C. (2022). Gain-
of Business Research, 57(2), 175–183. https:// probability diagrams in consumer research. In-
doi.org/10.1016/S0148-2963(01)00301-0 ternational Journal of Market Research, 64(4),
McQuitty, S. (2018). Reflections on “statistical power 470–483. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 /
and structural equation models in business re- 14707853221085509
search”.JournalofGlobalScholarsofMarketing Trafimow, D., & Marks, M. (2015). Editorial. Basic and
Science, 28(3), 272–277. https://doi.org/10. AppliedSocialPsychology,37(1),1–2.
1080/21639159.2018.1434806 Trafimow, D., & Rice, S. (2009). What if social scien-
Micceri, T. (1989). The unicorn, the normal curve, and tists had reviewed great scientific works of the
other improbable creatures. Psychological Bul- past?PerspectivesonPsychologicalScience,4(1),
letin, 105(1), 156–166. https://doi.org/10. 65–78. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1745-6924.
1037/0033-2909.105.1.156 2009.01107.x
Michelson,A.A.,&Morley,E.W.(1887).Ontherelative Trafimow,D.,Tong,T.,Wang,T.,Choy,S.T.B.,Hu,L.,
motion of earth and luminiferous ether. Amer- Chen, X., Wang, C., & Wang, Z. (in press). Im-
ican Journal of Science, Third Series, 34, 203, proving inferential analyses pre-data and post-
233–245. data.PsychologicalMethods.
OpenScienceCollaboration.(2015).Estimatingthere- Valentine,J.C.,Aloe,A.M.,&Lau,T.S.(2015).Lifeaf-
producibility of psychological science. Science, ternhst:Howtodescribeyourdatawithout“p-
349(6251),aac4716. ing” everywhere. Basic and Applied Social Psy-
Richters,J.E.(2021).Incredibleutility:Thelostcauses chology, 37(5), 260–273. https://doi.org/10.
andcausaldebrisofpsychologicalscience.Basic 1080/01973533.2015.1060240
and Applied Social Psychology, 43(6), 366–405. Vidgen, B., & Yasseri, T. (2016). P-values: Misunder-
https://doi.org/10.1080/01973533.2021. stood and misused. Frontiers in Physics, 4(6).
1979003 https://doi.org/10.3389/fphy.2016.00006
Trafimow, D. (2003). Hypothesis testing and theory Wasserstein,R.L.,&Lazar,N.A.(2016).Theasa’sstate-
evaluation at the boundaries: Surprising in- ment on p-values: Context, process, and pur-
sights from bayes’s theorem. Psychological Re- pose. The American Statistician. https://doi.
view, 110(3), 526–535. https://doi.org/10. org/10.1080/00031305.2016.1154108
1037/0033-295X.110.3.526 Wasserstein,R.L.,Schirm,A.L.,&Lazar,N.A.(2019).
Trafimow, D. (2019a). A frequentist alternative to sig- Editorial:Movingtoaworldbeyond“p<0.05.”
nificance testing, p-values, and confidence in- The American Statistician, 73(Supplemental),
tervals.Econometrics,7(2),1–14.https://www. 1–19.
mdpi.com/2225-1146/7/2/26
Trafimow, D. (2019b). A taxonomy of model assump-
tions on which p is based and implications