
===== PAGE 1/15 =====
Meta-Psychology,2024,vol8,MP.2022.3308 Opendata:Yes Editedby:MalteElson
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2022.3308 Openmaterials:Yes Reviewedby:HansIjzerman,IanHussey,IvanRopovik
Articletype:OriginalArticle Openandreproducibleanalysis:Yes Analysisreproducedby:FedericoD’Atri
PublishedundertheCC-BY4.0license Openreviewsandeditorialprocess:Yes AllsupplementaryfilescanbeaccessedatOSF:
Preregistration:Yes https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/ZYNG2
Evaluating the Replicability of Social Priming Studies
Erik Mac Giolla12, Simon Karlsson23, David Neequaye24, and Magnus Bergquist2
1DepartmentofNursing,HealthSciencesandIntegratedCare,AtlanticTechnologicalUniversity,Ireland
2DepartmentofPsychology,UniversityofGothenburg,Gothenburg,Sweden
3InstituteforFuturesStudies,Stockholm,Sweden
4DepartmentofPsychology,LancasterUniversity,Lancaster,UnitedKingdom
Toassessthereplicabilityofsocialprimingfindingswereviewedtheextantcloserepli-
cationattemptsinthefield. Intotal,wefound70closereplications,thatreplicated49
unique findings. Ninety-four percent of the replications had effect sizes smaller than
theeffecttheyreplicatedandonly17%ofthereplicationsreportedasignificantp-value
intheoriginaldirection. Thestrongestpredictorofreplicationsuccesswaswhetheror
not the replication team included at least one of the authors of the original paper.
Twelve of the 18 replications with at least one original author produced a significant
effectintheoriginaldirectionandthemeta-analyticaverageofthesestudiessuggest
asignificantprimingeffect(d=0.40,95%CI[0.23;0.58]). Instarkcontrast,noneof
the52replicationsbyindependentresearchteamsproducedasignificanteffectinthe
original direction and the meta-analytic average was virtually zero (d = 0.002, 95%
CI[-0.03; 0.03]). We argue that these results have shifted the burden of proof back
onto advocates of social priming. Successful replications from independent research
teamswilllikelyberequiredtoconvincescepticsthatsocialprimingexistsatall.
Keywords: Priming,Replication,Preregistration,Meta-analysis
Introduction trasted with semantic priming (Molden, 2014). Seman-
tic priming builds on cognitive models of spreading
Theorists have proposed that incidental expo-
activation, which hold that closely related words and
sure to environmental cues can influence subse-
concepts are wired more strongly than unrelated ones
quent cognitions, attitudes, and behavior. This phe-
(Collins & Loftus, 1975; Doyen et al., 2014). Semantic
nomenon—dubbedsocialpriming—hasproducedstrik-
primingthusconcernsconstructactivationandaccessi-
ing findings in contemporary social psychology. As an
bility. Accordingly,apersonprimedwiththewordnurse
example, consider the finding that participants primed
will generally be faster at recognizing the subsequent
withthewordprofessorperformed13percentbetteron
word doctor compared to a person primed with the un-
a subsequent trivia test compared to participants who
related word cat (Neely, 1977). The activation of the
were primed with the words soccer hooligans (Dijkster-
mentalrepresentationnursewillspreadandthuslower
huisandvanKnippenberg,1998;forreviewsseeBargh,
the amount of stimulation necessary for reaching the
2006; Molden, 2014). One can see why social priming
threshold to recognize and process the related concept
findings have attracted so much attention: If mere ex-
doctor,moresothanthewordcat.
posure to subtle primes can have vast behavioral con-
Socialprimingalsoholdsthatprimesincreasetheac-
sequences, social priming could provide an unprece-
cessibility of related constructs (Molden, 2014). For
dented tool to influence human behavior. However, re-
example, a person primed with words related to old
cently, researchers have found it difficult to replicate
age should show an increased activation and accessi-
several key social priming findings, despite using large
bility of mental concepts related to old age. How-
samples and highly similar experimental setups (e.g.,
ever, social priming goes a step further and contends
Cheung et al., 2016; Pecher et al., 2015 ; Rohrer et al.,
that this increased accessibility can spill over into be-
2019). These failed replications have sparked exten-
havioral outcomes through a mechanism called the
sive debate on the credibility of the field (Newell and
perception-behavior link (Dijksterhuis & Bargh, 2001).
Shanks, 2014; Shanks, 2017). Weexaminethescaleof
The perception-behavior link led researchers to predict
thiscredibilityissuebyreviewingtheextantcloserepli-
that priming people with concepts related to old age
cationattemptsofsocialprimingfindings.
wouldnotonlyincreasetheaccessibilityofrelatedcon-
Socialprimingisperhapsbestunderstoodwhencon-
===== PAGE 2/15 =====
2
cepts,butwouldleadthemtowalkmoreslowly(Bargh tions.
et al., 1996). Our review focuses on this type of so- Just as there is no single correct way to replicate a
cialprimingthatgoesbeyondmereconstructactivation, study, neither is there a single measure to assess if a
andclaimsthatsubtleprimescanelicitcognitions,atti- replicationattemptissuccessful. TheOpenScienceCol-
tudes,andbehaviors. 1 laboration(2015)—whoreplicated100findingsinpsy-
Replication studies also have their nomenclature. chology—used several measures of replication success.
One important distinction is between close (sometimes They focused on the statistical significance, direction,
called direct) and conceptual replications. While close and size of the effect observed in the replication study
replications stay as close as possible to the original compared to the effect observed in the original study.
study’s methodology, conceptual replications depart Specifically,theyexaminedwhethertheeffectobserved
fromtheoriginalmethodologyinsomemeaningfulway inthereplicationstudywasinthesamedirectionasthe
(Brandtetal.,2014). Closeandconceptualreplications original effect, and, if so, whether the p-value of the
performdifferentfunctions. Conceptualreplicationsare replicationeffectwassignificant(p<.05). Inaddition,
central to advancing theory by examining whether a they examined whether the effect size in the replica-
phenomenon will hold in analogous contexts. In con- tion study was smaller than the original effect size and
trast, close replications help assess the credibility of a whether the 50% confidence interval of the replication
single finding. If researchers cannot closely replicate a effectsizeincludedtheoriginaleffect. Weadoptasim-
single finding, other explanations for the effect, such ilaranalysisplan(seebelowfordetails).
as measurement error, cannot be ruled out (Simons, In addition to this primary analysis plan, we also
2014). Here, we review close replication attempts of quantified the evidence for priming effects in replica-
social priming findings, reasoning that if a single close tion studies using a meta-analytic approach. Replica-
replication assesses the credibility of a single finding, tion studies can fail for many reasons other than the
then close replications of many findings assess the ro- original study being a false positive (e.g., if the repli-
bustnessofaphenomenon. cation study has insufficient power to detect the effect
Amoretypicalwaytoassesstherobustnessofaphe- inquestion). Ameta-analyticapproachallowsustoes-
nomenonistosynthesizeallresearchonatopicthrough timate the average size of priming effects reported in
a traditional meta-analysis. Indeed, a recent and com- replicationstudiesandtoexamineifanymoderatorsin-
prehensive meta-analysis on social priming concluded fluence these effects. Analysts note that preregistered
that “the priming effect is a real psychological phe- replication studies may present less biased estimates of
nomenon that remains robust when using the most ad- effectsizes(Kvarvenetal., 2019; vanElketal., 2015).
vancedbiasdetectionmethods”(Daietal., 2023, p.86, Thus, a meta-analysis of preregistered replication stud-
emphasis in original). However, if the studies included ies should provide more accurate estimates of priming
in the meta-analysis are severely biased—for instance, effects and ultimately address whether social priming
becauseofpublicationbiasorawidespreaduseofques- existsatall.
tionableresearchpractices—thenthemeta-analysiswill We were also interested in potential moderators of
be severely biased too. This limitation will lead to in- replication success and priming effects. These mod-
flated estimates of effect size (Bakker et al., 2012). erators can be categorized into attributes of the origi-
Meta-analytic statistical approaches to correct for sus- nal study and attributes of the replication study (for a
pectedbiascanleadtomoreaccuratemeasuresofeffect similarstrategyseeOpenScienceCollaboration,2015).
size,andDaietal.,didincludeseveralsuchbiascorrec- For attributes relating to the original study, we focused
tiontechniques. However,nobiascorrectionmethodis on the effect size, the sample size, and the p-value
perfect,andtheirperformancewilldependonunknown of the original study. All things being equal, larger
contextual factors such as the prevalence of question- sample sizes and larger effect sizes increase the preci-
ableresearchpracticesinthefield(Carteretal.,2019). sion of effect size estimates, reducing the risk of false-
To rectify the issue of a biased literature, others have positives (Lakens & Evers, 2014). Assuming the repli-
called for a greater focus on large-scale replications, cation study is appropriately conducted, more precise
at the expense of traditional meta-analyses (e.g., Kvar- estimates of effect size in the original study should in-
ven et al., 2019; van Elk et al., 2015). The argument creasethechancesofasuccessfulreplication. Similarly,
being that large-scale replication attempts are the best smaller p-values in the original study should increase
source of unbiased estimates of effect size (Kvarven et
al., 2019). By synthesizing the extant close replication 1Theorists have proposed other mechanisms of priming
besides the perception-behavior link (see Molden, 2014).
attemptsofsocialprimingstudies,wehopetoutilizethe
Nonetheless, all those theories essentially claim that priming
respective strengths of both meta-analyses and replica-
caninfluencebehaviorviaconstructaccessibility.
===== PAGE 3/15 =====
3
the chances of successful replication, since smaller p- erators—that cannot be specified and tested empiri-
values reduce the risk of the original finding being a cally—it is questionable what value the finding brings
false-positive(Benjaminetal.,2018). toourcurrentstateofknowledge. Instead,Simonssug-
Forattributesrelatingtothereplicationstudy,wefo- gests that self-replication is a suitable method for pro-
cused on the sample size of the replication, whether vidinginitialevidenceforaneffect, buttheverification
thereplicationattemptwaspreregistered,andwhether of an effect can only come from independent replica-
the replication team was independent from the re- tions. FollowingSimons’argument,wemaintainthatif
searchers of the original study. The replication stud- independent replications are substantially less likely to
ies’ sample size follows a similar logic to the previ- replicatethansame-labreplications, thecredibilityand
ously mentioned moderators. Namely, that all things generalizabilityoftheoriginaleffectremainsindoubt.
being equal, larger sample sizes increase the chances We contribute to the ongoing discussion about the
of reliably detecting a real effect. The two remain- credibilityofsocialprimingbyreviewingthereplicabil-
ing moderators—preregistration and researcher inde- ityofsocialprimingfindings. Ourmainobjectivewasto
pendence—concernmeta-scientificdiscussionsonrepli- evaluate the success of close replications by examining
cability. their statistical significance and effect size. We hoped
One suggested explanation for the replication crisis to overcome the limitations with evidence provided by
relatestotheincentivestructureofacademia(Bakkeret isolatedreplicationattemptsbyreviewingclosereplica-
al.,2012;Grimesetal.,2018). Theargumentgoesthat tions of many social priming findings. Additionally, to
in academia publications are hard currency, integral to uncoverwhysomestudiesmaybemorereplicablethan
careeradvancement,resultinginmanyresearchersfac- others, we investigated the moderating role of study
ing considerable pressure to publish. Furthermore, sci- characteristics related to both the original and replica-
entific journals have a tendency to favor the publica- tionstudies.
tion of significant (p <.05) findings (e.g., Grimes et al.,
2018; Francis, 2012; Kühberger et al., 2014). Hence, Method
researchers may engage in questionable research prac-
TransparencyandOpenness
tices (QRPs) to meet the implicit criteria for publica-
tion. SurveysontheprevalenceofQRPslendscredence The research question, search strategy, inclusion cri-
to the argument just described (John et al., 2012; but teria, and original analysis plan were preregistered
see Fiedler and Schwarz, 2016). Preregistering a study https://osf.io/dc94y. Additionally, we preregistered an
should reduce the prevalence of QRPs by constraining extended version of this original analysis plan, and the
researchers’degreesoffreedom,therebyinhibitingtheir exact code for the statistical tests https://osf.io/3btse.
abilitytoengageinQRPs. Insofarasresearchersmaybe The extended analysis plan and the code were writ-
incentivized to obtain successful replications, preregis- ten and preregistered during data extraction, but be-
teredreplicationsmayprovidelessbiasedratesofrepli- fore any statistical analyses of the full data set were
cationsuccessandlessbiasedestimatesofeffectsize. conducted. In addition to this original analysis plan,
Our final moderator—the independence of the repli- weconductedanalogousmixed-effectsanalyses,aswell
cation team—is arguably of most theoretical interest. as a meta-analysis. The mixed-effects analyses and the
Oneexplanationputforwardtoaccountforrecentrepli- meta-analysis were not pre-registered. Data were an-
cation failures within social priming is that priming ef- alyzed using R, version 4.0.0 (Team, 2019), the pack-
fects are highly sensitive to contextual variations (Ce- ageggplot2(Wickham,2016),andthepackagemetafor
sario, 2014). Since the current state of knowledge (Viechtbauer, 2010). All data and code to perform all
doesnotencompassacompleteunderstandingofthese analysesareavailableathttps://osf.io/ndxf4/.
conditions, some analysts claim that failures to directly
replicate other researchers’ findings will be uninforma- InclusionCriteria
tive in regard to what inferences one can make (e.g.,
Thestudiesincludedintheanalysishadtofitfourcri-
Cesario, 2014; Stroebe & Strack, 2014). That is, we
teria. First, the study should be what we refer to as an
cannotknowwhetherafailedreplicationisbecausethe
“explicit replication”, meaning that the authors of the
original finding was a false positive or whether it was
replication attempt should explicitly state the original
due to some unknown moderator present during the
experiment they are trying to replicate (e.g., “Bargh et
replicationattempt.
al., 1996, Experiment1”). Second, thestudyshouldbe
Contrasting that view, Simons (2014) argues that if
a ‘close’ or ‘exact’ replication (Brandt et al., 2014). Put
an effect can only be replicated by the same research
differently,theauthorsofthereplicationattemptshould
team operating under some special but unknown mod-
have the goal of following—as exactly as possible—the
===== PAGE 4/15 =====
4
methods of the original study in terms of stimuli, mea- studies that did not provide sufficient information to
sures, and procedures. Third, the original experiment calculate the statistics necessary for the analyses and
(andbyextensionthereplication)shouldexaminewhat studies using within-subject designs. As noted by Pash-
we have defined as social priming. That is, the stud- ler et al. (2012), most within-subject priming studies
ies should examine priming effects on cognitions, atti- donotprovideinformationaboutthevariabilityofout-
tudes, or behaviors, not merely increased construct ac- comemeasuresacrossparticipants,whichisanecessary
cessibility. Finally,theoriginalstudy,butnotnecessarily component for calculating a within-subject’s variant of
the replication attempt, should be published in a peer- Cohen’s d. A further 29 studies were excluded during
reviewed journal. We included this final condition so dataextraction,yieldingafinalsampleof36studies(+
that we could ensure that the original study was acces- 2fromgreyliteraturesearch),containing65replication
sible. attempts. After posting the paper as a pre-print (as re-
quired by Meta-Psychology), we were contacted by four
SearchStrategy researcherssuggesting,intotal,anadditional4studies.
Two of these met the inclusion criteria and contained
Tofindrelevantliterature,duringthespring2020we
a further 5 replication attempts. This brought our final
searchedforempiricalstudiesinthedatabasePsycINFO
sampleto38studiescontaining70replicationattempts
(defaultsetting)usingthefollowingsearchstring: repli-
(seetheDataandAnalysisfolderonOSFforadditional
cat* AND (prime OR priming OR primed OR automatic
informationhttps://osf.io/ndxf4/).
OR automatically OR nonconscious* OR incidental* OR
"embodied cognition"). The search terms designating
Analysisplan
social priming were inspired by those used by Wein-
garten et al. (2016). Additionally, when scanning the MeasuresofReplicationSuccess
articlesidentifiedinouroriginaldatabasesearch,there
Our analyses of replicability were broadly similar to
were instances where researchers referred to previous
the approach taken by the Open Science Collaboration
replication attempts within the field of social priming.
(2015). To assess replicability, we followed a prereg-
These articles were noted and later exposed to the
istered analysis plan that focused on: (i) an analysis
same scrutiny as the articles identified in the original
of p-values; (ii) an analysis of effect sizes; and (iii) an
database search. To search for grey literature, we as-
analysisofmoderatingvariables. Thesearediscussedin
sessed oral- and poster presentations accepted for the
turn.
conference Association of Personality and Social Psy-
To examine the consistency between p-values ob-
chology from 2003 to 2021. Specifically, we searched
tained in the original studies and replication studies,
the term “replicat*” in the event scheme. For records
three primary analyses were conducted. First, we per-
lacking sufficient statistical information for inclusion,
formedaMcNemar’stesttodeterminewhetherthepro-
wecontactedthefirstauthorsaskingfora)means,stan-
portion of significant effects in the replication study
dard deviations, and n / cell for both the control and
(replicationstudieswithp<.05/totalnumberofrepli-
priming conditions, or b) raw data. The grey literature
cation studies) significantly differed from the propor-
search generated thirty replications of social priming
tion of significant effects in the original studies (orig-
studies,ofwhichtwofulfilledthecriteriaforinclusion.
inal studies with p < .05) / total number of original
An overview of the study selection process is pro-
studies). For this test, studies were categorized as suc-
vided in Figure 1. The original search yielded 2,342
cessful if the effect was in the hypothesized direction
hits after duplicates were removed. In addition, we
and p (two-tailed) ≤ .05. The analysis was identical
added 14 records from the reference lists of included
to that of the Open Science Collaboration (2015), with
studies and 14 from searching in grey. The exclusion
one exception. On occasion, our recalculated p-values
criteria were then applied in a consecutive manner by
oftheoriginalstudyweregreaterthan.05,butwerein-
four independent coders. First, based on title and ab-
terpreted by the original authors as statistically signifi-
stractscreening,articleswereremovedthatdidnotsat-
cant. Wetreatedtheseasnon-significantoriginaleffects
isfy our definition of social priming. Second, based on
in our analyses. However, when this occurred in the
full-text screenings, articles were removed that did not
OpenScienceCollaborationstudy, theyweretreatedas
fulfillourcriteriaofbeingareplication. Afterremoving
significanteffects.
articles that did not satisfy the preregistered require-
Second, we performed a Wilcoxon signed-rank test
ments for inclusion, 67 studies were deemed eligible
andapairedt-testtoexaminewhetherthemedianand
for data extraction. However, during data extraction
average p-value, respectively, differed between original
additional articles had to be removed due to issues not
studies and replication studies. Regarding the tests in-
foreseen before preregistration. Such issues included
===== PAGE 5/15 =====
5
Figure1
Studyselectionflowchart.
volving raw p-values, we had not anticipated that so tion studies. We then conducted a binomial test to ex-
manyofthereplicationeffectswouldbeintheopposite plorewhethertheproportionofpairsinwhichtheeffect
direction to the original effect. Since p-values do not size (Cohen’s d) was stronger in original studies com-
takeaneffect’sdirectionintoaccount,theplannedcom- pared to replication studies was larger than would be
parison between p-values of original studies and repli- expectedbychance(i.e.,50%probability). Wealsoex-
cation studies became problematic. To deal with this aminedtheproportionofstudypairsinwhichtheorig-
issue, we recoded replication p-values with an effect in inal effect was within the 95% CI of the replication ef-
theoppositedirectionas1. fect size. Though it should be noted that this measure
We conducted four analyses to examine the consis- of replication success is not without criticism (Morey
tency between effect sizes obtained in original studies & Lakens, 2016; Patil et al., 2016). Specifically, we
and replication studies. Specifically, we conducted a used a χ2 goodness of fit test to examine whether the
Wilcoxon signed-rank test and a paired t-test to exam- proportion of original studies within the 95% CI of the
ine whether the median and average effect size (Co- replication effect size differed from the expected pro-
hen’s d) differed between original studies and replica- portion. The expected proportion was calculated using
===== PAGE 6/15 =====
6
the R function developed by Open Science Collabora- theRpackagelmerTest(Kuznetsovaetal.,2017)tocal-
tion (2015). In this analysis, the expected proportion culateassociatedp-values.
is the sum of expected probabilities across study-pairs.
Thetestassumesthattheoriginalstudyanditsreplica- Meta-analyticApproach
tion attempt have the same population effect size. For
We meta-analyzed the effect sizes of the replication
detailsseetheanalysiscodeonhttps://osf.io/ndxf4/.
studies using the Metafor package (Viechtbauer, 2010)
Finally,weanalyzedtheinfluenceofmoderatingvari-
for R (Team, 2019). We opted for a random effects
ablesbyincludingthemasindependentvariablesincor-
model as we expected substantial between-study vari-
relationspredictingreplicationsuccess(forasimilarap-
anceduetodifferencesinpopulationsandexperimental
proachseeOpenScienceCollaboration,2015). Inthese
procedures (Cooper, 2010). To analyze potential mod-
analyses, replication success was defined by two differ-
erating effects, we used the same six moderators dis-
ent measures: (i) p ≤ .05 in the original direction; and
cussed above. Furthermore, to account for the depen-
(ii) the difference in effect size between the original
dencyinthedataset(replicationstudiesnestedinorig-
study and the replication attempt. The following six
inalstudies),weinitiallyranamulti-levelmeta-analysis
moderatorswereexamined: (1)theeffectsizeobtained
withtwolevels,whereweincludedtheoriginalstudyas
intheoriginalstudy(Cohen’sd);(2)thesamplesizein
the higher order level, and the replication study as the
theoriginalstudy;(3)thep-valueintheoriginalstudy;
lower order level. However, the sigma squared for the
(4)thesamplesizeinthereplicationstudy;(5)whether
higher order level was zero; hence, it did not account
or not the replication study was preregistered; and (6)
for any additional variance over the lower order level.
whether or not the replicating lab was independent to
Forthisreason,wereportresultsfromthesimplersingle
the originating lab. Regarding moderator number 6,
levelmeta-analysisatthelevelofreplicationstudy. This
replication attempts with at least one author included
analysis was proposed by an anonymous reviewer, and
in the original study were coded as same-lab replica-
hencewasnotpreregistered.
tions,whereasstudieswithnoauthorshipoverlapwere
coded as independent replications. We deviated from
Results
our pre-registered analysis plan in one aspect. In the
pre-registration we only specified Spearman’s rank or- CharacteristicsoftheLiterature
dered correlation (ρ) for these analyses. However, this
Intotal,70replicationattemptswereincludedinthe
analysis is not appropriate when we have one dichoto-
analyses, replicating 49 unique original studies. For an
mous variable and one continuous variable (e.g., when
overviewofallreplicationattemptsandoriginalstudies
predicting if p ≤ .05 was in the original direction from
see supplemental materials S1. Sixty-eight of the repli-
theoriginalstudysamplesize)ortwodichotomousvari-
cation studies came from articles, published between
ables(e.g.,whenpredictingifp≤.05wasintheoriginal
1996 and 2019. The remaining two studies came from
direction based on whether the replication was prereg-
unpublished conference presentations. In total, 30 372
istered or not). In these situations we used Glass’ rank
participantswereincludedintheanalysesofthereplica-
biserialcorrelation(r orthePhiCoefficent(ϕ),respec-
rb tionattempts,comparedto3087intheoriginalstudies.
tively.
The average sample size of the replication studies was
Tofacilitateinterpretation,alloriginalsocialpriming
434(Mdn=126,SD=1098),comparedto63(Mdn=
effects were coded as positive. Consequently, if a repli-
57,SD=33)intheoriginalstudies.
cationattemptfoundaneffectintheoppositedirection
totheoriginalfinding,theeffectwascodedasnegative. Analysesofp-values
Mixed-Effectsmodel All49originalsocialprimingeffectswereinterpreted
as statistically significant (i.e., p ≤ .05) by the orig-
When preregistering our analysis plan, we did not
inal authors. However, the recalculated (two-tailed)
anticipate that some original studies would be repli-
p-values indicated that only 41, 85.71%, of the origi-
catedmorethanonce. Thiscreatedadependencyinthe
nal findings showed significant priming effects. Worth
data that violated the assumption of independence rel-
notingisthateveryrecalculatednon-significantp-value
evant for our planned analyses. To account for this de-
among original studies balanced on the .05 thresh-
pendence,weran,whenpossible,mixed-effectsmodels
old, ranging from .052 to .079. For replication stud-
analogous to our planned analyses, where we included
ies, 12 experiments, 17.14%, showed statistically sig-
theoriginalstudyasarandomeffect(specificallyaran-
nificant effects in the same direction, a significant re-
dom intercept). We used the R package lme4 (Bates
duction compared to original studies (McNemar’s test,
et al., 2015) to calculate all mixed effects models and
χ2(1)=46.08,p=<.001).
===== PAGE 7/15 =====
7
For the analogous mixed-effect analysis, we used AnalysesofEffectSizes
a mixed-effects logistic regression. Specifically, the
Effectsizes weremeasured inCohen’s d. Overall, ef-
dichotomous variable p-value (significant vs. non-
fectsizesoforiginalstudies(M=0.72;Mdn=0.70;SD
significant) was predicted by the dichotomous variable
= 0.19) were substantially larger than those of repli-
studytype(originalvs. replication),withoriginalstudy
cation studies (M = 0.14; Mdn = 0.06; SD = 0.32),
asarandomeffect. Theresultswerecomparabletothe
t(69) = 15.33, p < .001 and W = 4489, p < .001. For
planned analysis: study type was a significant predic-
theanalogousmixed-effectsanalysis,weusedamixed-
tor of p-value, b = 14.15, OR < .001, p < .001, sug-
effects linear regression where effect sizes were pre-
gestingthatreplicationattemptsproducedsignificantly
dictedbythedichotomousvariablestudytype(original
fewersignificantp-valuescomparedtotheoriginalstud-
vs. replication) with original study as a random effect.
ies(fullmodelsareavailableinthesupplementalmate-
The results were comparable to the planned analysis:
rialS2).
study type was a significant predictor, b = -0.556, p <
One possibility is that replication attempts tended to
.001,suggestingthatreplicationattemptsproducedsig-
enduponthe“wrong”sideofthesignificancethreshold
nificantly smaller effect sizes compared to the original
byaclosemargin. Toaccountforthelimitationsassoci-
studies (full models are available in the supplemental
ated with classifying data based on an arbitrary cut-off
material S2). Out of the 70 study pairs included in the
point,additionalanalyseswereconductedusingrawp-
analysis, 66 study pairs showed an original effect size
values. Boththepairedt-testandWilcoxonsigned-rank
largerthan thatofthe replication. Thisproportionwas
test indicated that original studies (M = .023; Mdn =
significantly different from what would be expected by
.017; SD = .018) obtained significantly lower p-values
chance (94.29%, p < .001, binomial test). We had no
than their associated direct replication attempts (M =
analogousmixed-effectsanalysisforthebinomialtest.
.593; Mdn = .630; SD = .400), t(69) = –11.90, p <
The95%CIofthereplicationeffectsizesoverlapped
.001andW =625,p<.001.
with the original study in only 17 of 70 study pairs, or
For the analogous mixed-effects analysis, we used
24.29%. This finding was significantly lower than the
a mixed-effects linear regression where the continuous
expected proportion of 65.32%, p < .001. Due to the
variablep-valuewaspredictedbythedichotomousvari-
calculationsthatwererequiredtoestimatetheexpected
able study type (original vs. replication), with original
proportion, we had no analogous mixed-effects version
study as a random effect. The results were comparable
ofthisanalysis.
to the planned analyses: study type was a significant
Finally, the original effect sizes were moderately re-
predictor of p-value, b = .567, p < .001, suggesting
lated to their corresponding replication effect sizes,
that replication attempts produced significantly larger
Pearson’s r = 0.31, p = .009, but only weakly so,
p-values compared to the original studies (full models
when using a non-parametric equivalent, Spearman’s ρ
areavailableinthesupplementalmaterialS2).
=0.10,p=.426.
There are limitations in what can be said about the
evidence for social priming effects based on compar-
ModerationAnalyses
isonsbetweenoriginalstudiesandreplicationattempts.
Perhaps, true social priming effects are substantially Moderatorsrelatingtothecharacteristicsoftheorig-
smaller than indicated by original studies, resulting in inalstudies
powerissuestodetectthetrueeffectamongreplication
Anoverviewofourmoderationanalysesispresented
attempts. One method for estimating the evidence for
in Table 1. Considering the characteristics of orig-
theeffectwithoutusingtheoriginalfindingsasabench-
inal studies, larger original effect sizes were related
mark is to examine the distribution of non-significant
to greater effect size differences between original and
p-values among replication attempts. If the null hy-
replication studies (ρ = .42). Since the effect esti-
pothesis is false, and there is a true social priming ef-
mates among replications were generally low, this re-
fecttodetect,wewouldexpectthedistributionofnon-
sult could simply be a consequence of high original ef-
significant p-values to deviate from uniformity and be
fect estimates increasing the distance to the replication
weightedtowardszero. Contrarytothisprediction,the
effect. Moreover, larger original sample sizes were as-
distribution of non-significant p-values among replica-
sociated with smaller effect size differences between
tionattemptsdidnotshowsignsofdeviatingfromuni-
original and replication studies (ρ = –.35). This re-
formity,χ2(100)=109.90,p=.538. SeeFigure2Afor
lationship could result from effect estimates generally
agraphdepictingthedistributionofp-values.
being higher among original studies with small sample
sizes. Last, studies with lower original p-values were
===== PAGE 8/15 =====
8
Table1
Relationshipbetweenstudycharacteristicsandreplicationsuccess. Forthecorrelations,weusedSpearman’srankorder
correlation(ρ),Glass’rankbiserialcorrelation(r ),orthePhicoefficient(ϕ).
rb
Replicationp-value Effectsizedifference
≤.05 >.05 Correlation Correlation
Mdn Mdn
Originalstudycharacteristics
Effectsize 0.70 0.66 .01 .42***
Samplesize 60 45.5 .34 –.35**
p-value .012 .021 -.33 –.14
Replicationstudycharacteristics
Samplesize 60 132 -.48** .15
Same: k=12 Same: k=6 Mdnsame=0.24
Independenceofreplicationteam
Indep.: k=0 Indep.: k=52 −.76∗∗∗a Mdnindep. =0.68 .64***
Yes: k=1 Yes: k=26 MdnYes=0.57
Preregistration
No: k=11 No: k=32 -.26*† MdnNo=0.66 .18
Note. P ≤ .05 *, P ≤ .01 **, P ≤ .001 ***. aThe analogous mixed effects model for this analysis would not converge
becausetherewasazerointhecontingencytable,astherewasnoindependentreplicationwithasignificantp-valuein
thecorrectdirection. †Thiseffectwasnotsignificantintheanalogousmixedeffectsmodel.
somewhat more likely to be significant in the replica- cating lab, Figure 2 provides an overview of p-values
tion study (r = –.33), though this result was not sta- and effect sizes highlighting researcher independence,
rb
tistically significant. This suggests that lower original preregistration,andsamplesize. AsillustratedinFigure
p-valuesweresomewhatmorelikelytoreplicate. 2A,forsame-labreplicationsthedistributionofp-values
is weighted towards zero, and 12 out of 18 replication
Moderatorsrelatingtothecharacteristicsoftherepli-
attempts show a significant effect in the original direc-
cationstudies
tion. In stark contrast, of the 52 replication attempts
conductedbyindependentlabs,notasinglereplication
Weturnnowtothecharacteristicsofreplicationstud-
attempt yielded a statistically significant effect in the
ies. Replications with larger sample sizes were less
originaldirection. Furthermore,thep-valuesamongin-
likely to produce a significant p-value (r = –.48),
rb
dependentreplicationswerewidelydistributedanddid
suggesting that increased power and precision in the
not show any clear signs of deviating from a uniform
replication attempt did not favor replication success.
distribution.
Thesinglestrongestpredictorofreplicationsuccesswas
Figure 2B shows how the effect size patterns are
whether there was an authorship overlap between the
markedly different between original studies, same-lab
replication study and the original study. Replication
replications, and independent replications. Original
attempts conducted by researchers unaffiliated to the
studies and same-lab replications showed moderate to
original finding were substantially less likely to obtain
significant p-values in the original direction (ϕ = -.76) substantial social priming effects. This pattern was not
reflectedamongreplicationsconductedbyindependent
and deviated more from original studies in their effect
labs, where the distribution of effect sizes is approxi-
sizes(r =.64). Finally,replicationattemptsthatwere
rb
matelynormallydistributedaroundzero.
preregistered were less likely to obtain significant ef-
fects(ϕ=-.26),indicatingthatpreregistrationlowered
Analogousmixed-effectsanalysisofmoderators
thechanceofsuccessfullyreplicatingtheoriginalstudy.
For the analogous mixed-effects analyses, we used
Summaryofmoderationanalyses
the moderators as predictor variables in mixed-effects
logistic regressions (when predicting whether p was
Takentogether, theseanalyses suggestthat theinde-
significant or not) and mixed-effects linear regressions
pendence of the replicating lab is the single most im-
(when predicting the difference in effect size between
portant factor to consider when predicting replication
originalandreplicationstudies). Foralloftheseanaly-
successofsocialprimingfindings. Toillustratethemod-
ses,originalstudywasincludedasarandomeffect.
eratingroleofstudycharacteristicsrelatedtotherepli-
===== PAGE 9/15 =====
9
Figure2
Beeswarm boxplots illustrating the distribution of p-values (A) and effect sizes (B). The horizontal dotted line in (A)
equals0.05. Thehorizontaldottedlinein(B)equalszero. Diamondsequalunweightedmeansandthehorizontalline
intheboxplotsequalunweightedmedians.
The results were broadly comparable to the planned smallereffectsizes(b=0.43,p<.001).
analyses. Again,largeroriginaleffectsizeswererelated There was only one substantive difference between
to greater effect size difference between original and the planned analyses and their mixed-effects equiva-
replication studies (b = 0.45, p = .039); larger sample lents. Intheplannedanalyses,asignificantrelationship
sizeswereassociatedwithsmallereffectsizedifferences between preregistration and the p-value of the replica-
betweenoriginal andreplication studies(b =-0.003, p tion study was found, showing that preregistered stud-
= .023); replication studies with larger samples were ieswerelesslikelytoproduceasignificanteffectinthe
less likely to produce significant effects in the original originaldirection. Thiseffect,thoughinthesamedirec-
direction (b = -83.41, OR < 0.001, p < .001); and tion, wasnot significant inthe analogous mixedeffects
replicationsfromindependentlabsshowedsignificantly analysis(b=-2.13,OR=0.119,p=.662.
===== PAGE 10/15 =====
10
Furthermore, the mixed-effects logistic regression, and independent labs using separate τ2 for each sub-
where lab-independence was used to predict whether group, rather than a pooled τ2. This approach is pre-
the replication p-value was significant, did not con- ferred when heteroscedasticity between subgroups is
verge. Thereasonthemodeldidnotconvergewasthat large (Rubio-Aparicio et al., 2019). In essence, this
there was a zero in the contingency table: none of the analysis equates to calculating separate meta-analytic
independentreplicationshadasignificantp-valueinthe models for each subgroup. The results are in line with
correct direction (full models are available in the sup- those reported above: replication studies conducted by
plementalmaterialS2). the same lab found small to moderate priming effects,
whereas those conducted by independent labs showed
MetaAnalyticApproach
noindicationofprimingeffects. Ofnote,arethenarrow
predictionintervalsfortheindependentlabanalysisand
Results for the random effects meta-analysis showed
theextremelylowτandI2 (seeTable2). Thesefindings
a small but statistically significant priming effect in the
indicate that virtually all of the variance in effect size
replication studies (see Table 2). However, there was
estimates from replications by independent labs can be
considerable heterogeneity in effect sizes, as indicated
by the large I2 and wide prediction intervals. For this accountedforbysamplingvariationalone.
reason, we conducted a series of moderation analyses,
Discussion
using the same six moderators discussed above. For a
forestplotdepictingtheeffectsizesoftheoriginalstud- Ouraimwastoassessthereplicability,andbyexten-
ies and their respective replications see Supplemental sion the credibility, of social priming findings. We con-
MaterialsS3andforfunnelplots,centeredonzero,de- ducted this assessment by reviewing extant close repli-
picting the original studies and the replication studies cation attempts of social priming studies. The results
seeSupplementalMaterialsS4. couldhardlybeclearer: althoughsomeresearcherssuc-
Theeffectsize, samplesize, andp-valueoftheorigi- cessfullyreplicatedtheirownfindings,wedidnotfinda
nal study had no notable moderating effects: the mod- singlesuccessfulreplicationbyanindependentteamof
eratorswerenotsignificantandaccountedforlessthan researchers. None of the independent replications pro-
1% of the heterogeneity in priming effects. Nor was ducedasignificanteffectinthepredicteddirection,de-
the sample size of the replication study a significant spite having considerably larger samples sizes than the
moderator, accounting for only 2.5% of heterogene- original studies. The p-values of the independent repli-
ity in priming effects. The two remaining modera- cations were uniformly distributed, consistent with a
tors—preregistration and lab independence—were sig- worldinwhichtheeffectsreplicatedwerenull. Further-
nificant(seeTable2). more, all independent replication attempts produced
Whether a replication was pre-registered or not ac- effect sizes smaller than their corresponding original
counted for approximately 26% of heterogeneity in study,and,moreimportantly,theaverageeffectwasap-
effect sizes. Replication studies that were not pre- proximatelyzeroandvirtuallyallofthevariationinef-
registered displayed a small meta-analytic priming ef- fect sizes could be accounted for by sampling variation
fect,d=0.12,95%CI[0.06;0.19]. Pre-registeredrepli- alone. Our results paint a sorry picture of the state of
cation studies produced a notably smaller effect, with social priming for anyone who believes that indepen-
the 95% CI including zero, d = 0.02, 95% CI[-0.13; dentreplicationsarecentralinestablishingtheauthen-
0.17]. Thestrongestmoderatorbyfarwaswhetherthe ticity of a finding (Simons, 2014). Below we discuss
replication team contained an author from the original previous criticisms that have been levied against failed
study(samelab)ornot(independentlab). Thismoder- replications in social psychology and their relevance to
atoraccountedforover98%ofheterogeneityinpriming thecurrentfindings.
effects. Resultsshowthatreplicationstudiesconducted Criticsmaysuggestthattheindependentlabslacked
bythesamelabproducedsmalltomoderateprimingef- the flair, intuition, and skill, of the original researchers
fects,d=0.28,95%CI[0.20;0.37]. Incontrast,replica- (cf. Baumeister, 2016). Considering the sheer number
tion studies conducted by independent labs showed no ofresearcherswhowereinvolvedintheseindependent
indicationofprimingeffects,d=0.003,95%CI[-0.17; replications—over160researchers—wefindsuchapo-
0.17]. sition unconvincing. If true, then the ability to find an
Figure 2 shows signs of heteroscedasticity between effectofsocialprimingmustbeaveryrareskillindeed.2
effect sizes from same labs and independent labs, with
the variance of effect sizes being notably smaller for 2We would also like to draw the reader’s attention to
replications conducted by independent labs. For this the recent correspondence between Dijksterhuis and Schim-
reason, we computed meta-analytic estimates for same macksuggestinganalternativetotheskillandflairargument.
===== PAGE 11/15 =====
11
Table2
Meta-analyticestimatesofreplicationstudies
k d 95%CI 95%PI τ I2
BasicModel 70 0.07 0.03;0.12 -0.17;0.32 0.12 59.46%
ModerationAnalyses Qm(df=1) p Heterogeneity
accountedfor
OriginalStudycharacteristics
Effectsize 2.68 .102 <1%
Samplesize 0.38 .540 <1%
p-value .02 .895 <1%
ReplicationStudycharacteristics
Samplesize 2.17 .141 <2.54%
Lab(samevs. independent) 40.59 <0.001 98.54%
Preregistered(novs. yes) 5.26 .022 26.31%
Subgroups analysis using
separateτ2
k d 95%CI 95%PI τ I2
SameLab 18 0.40 0.23;0.58 -0.24;1.05 0.32 75.39%
IndependentLab 52 0.002 -0.02;0.03 -0.02;0.03 <0.01 <0.01
Note. k=numberofstudiesincluded,d=effectsizeCohen’sd,95%CI=the95%confidenceintervalofthemeaneffect
size, 95% PI = dispersion of effect size in 95% of all comparable populations, τ = estimated of the standard deviation
ofthedistributionofthetrueeffectsizes, I2 =ratiooftrueheterogeneitytototalobservedvariation, Q =teststatistic
m
fortheomnibustestofmoderators.
A related criticism is that priming effects are sub- Again, we sympathize with these points. Neverthe-
tle and context dependent (Cesario, 2014; Stroebe & less, for these criticisms to explain the current results,
Strack, 2014). As such, failed replications do not cast itwouldonceagainmeanthatall52independentrepli-
doubtontheoriginalfinding,butratheruncoverbound- cation attempts failed to induce social priming to the
ary conditions of the effect (Asendorpf et al., 2013). extentthatanoriginallystrongeffectwasnullified.
We sympathize with this perspective. However, in the A broader criticism is that a failed replication of an
current context, it would mean that all 52 indepen- auxiliary hypothesis does not say anything about the
dentreplicationattemptshappenedtostrikeuponahid- theory (Stroebe, 2019). This is a valid critique of iso-
den moderator that negates the original effect. If the lated replication attempts where only one auxiliary hy-
research community is to be convinced by that argu- pothesis is tested. However, our review assess replica-
ment, original researchers must better specify the cir- tion attempts of at least 49 auxiliary hypotheses, 35 of
cumstances under which a finding can reasonably be whichweretestedbyresearchteamsindependentfrom
expected to replicate. Otherwise, the infinite number the original authors. Considering that none of these
of potential hidden moderators will render it virtually independent replications were successful, this finding
impossible to identify genuine false positive findings in wouldappeartoprovidesomeofthestrongestevidence
the literature. In its extreme, ascribing all failed repli- todateagainstsocialprimingtheory.
cationattemptstoreasonsbeyondtherobustnessofthe One could still argue that the body of evidence sup-
effectitselfwillresultinunfalsifiablescientificclaims. porting social priming theory is much more than the
Stroebe (2019) proposed yet another set of criti-
cisms: 1) experimental procedures in original studies Namely, that many social priming effects may not replicate
becauseoftheoriginalresearchers’liberaluseofquestionable
are typically not complete and 2) following the exact
researchpractices,suchasfailingtoreportresultswhenpre-
same experimental procedures can become a weakness
dictedeffectsdidnotemerge(seeDijksterhuis’replytoSchim-
if manipulations are sensitive to culture and context.
mackavailableat,Schimmack,2021).
===== PAGE 12/15 =====
12
35 auxiliary hypotheses addressed by the independent plicitly claim to examine the effect of incidental stim-
replications we reviewed (Dai et al., 2023). These 35 uliexposureoncognitions,attitudes,orbehavior. Even
findings were not randomly sampled from the universe withsuchabroadsamplingstrategy,asinglesuccessful
of social priming studies and may have been chosen by replicationbyanindependentteamfailedtoemerge.
thereplicationteamsbecausetheywereskepticalofthe Limitations can also be raised regarding our search
original results. Such a claim suggests that the failed strategy. Examples include using one database (Psych-
replicationsareunrepresentativeofsocialprimingstud- Info), not issuing public calls in relevant channels for
iesand,infact,mayhaverepresentedparticularlyfrag- grey literature, and limited search terms (e.g., not
ile priming effects. Hence, the replications by inde- searching for synonyms of replicability, such as ‘repro-
pendent research teams may only say something about ducibility’). Theselimitationsmeanthatourreviewmay
these 35 findings, and little about the grand theory of have missed some applicable studies. While such limi-
social priming. We maintain that our results say more tationsareworthmentioning,itseemsunlikelythatwe
than this. If nothing else, the results have shifted the missedasufficientnumberofstudiestochangetheclear
burden of proof back onto advocates of social priming. patternobservedinourdata.
To convince skeptics that social priming exists at all, A final concern of note is our classification for a suc-
at least some successful independent replications will cessful replication. How to define a successful repli-
surelyberequired. cation remains an area of debate (Armbruster, 2021;
Nosek&Errington,2020; Peels&Bouter,2023). How-
Limitations ever,giventhecleartrendsobservedinthedata,seeFig-
ure 2, we believe our findings would speak against the
Wedidnotexplicitlyassesspreregistrationdeviations
replicability of social priming for any reasonable mea-
when sampling studies for this review. Recent research
sureofreplicationsuccess.
suggests that authors sometimes deviate from preregis-
tration plans without reporting those deviations (e.g.,
Conclusion
Claesen et al., 2021). Hence, our analysis of the influ-
ence of preregistration on replication might suffer lim- The current meta-analysis reports an unambiguous
itations we cannot identify at this time. We encour- pattern: independent replications of social priming ef-
age future investigations to conduct their preregistra- fectsfail. Areasonablequestioniswheredowegofrom
tionqualitychecksinaccordancewiththescopeoftheir here? Based on our findings, it may be warranted to
objectives. suggest that the limited resources available to conduct
One might also question the objectivity of meta- psychologicalresearcharebetterspentelsewhere. Ifre-
analyzing social priming effects by citing the broader searchersnonethelesswishtocontinueinvestigatingso-
conceptual question: what counts as social priming? cial priming, we recommend further efforts to conduct
Thatquestionisanissuestakeholderscontinuetograp- preregistered, and ideally independent, replications of
plewith(Molden,2014). Determiningaconsensusdef- key studies. Such replication efforts will be required
inition of social priming that all would agree upon is tocreatethecredibleevidence-basethatsocialpriming
beyondthescopeofthisstudy. Thus,aninevitablelim- theorysorelyneeds.
itation of our review—and any meta-analysis of social
priming(e.g.,Daietal.,2023)—isthatacriticcanhigh- AuthornoteandContact
light any number of studies included in our analysis as
We would like to thank Marcel Van Assen and Tim-
unfit. Conversely, the critic can cite an unpredictable
othy Luke for their input on statistical analyses, and
rangeofreasonstosupportaclaimthatweshouldhave
MadisonTunonforhelpingwithdatacollection. Partsof
included their preferred list of studies. Such an objec-
thisarticlearebasedontheunpublishedmaster’sthesis
tion is yet another species of concern, besides our find-
of the second author. Correspondence concerning this
ings, pointing to the elusiveness of social priming as a
article should be addressed to Erik Mac Giolla, Depart-
robustphenomenon.
ment of Nursing, Health Sciences and Integrated Care,
Molden (2014) notes that there is much diversity in
Atlantic Technological University, F23 X853, Mayo, Ire-
the social priming effects researchers have examined.
land. E-mail: erik.macgiolla@atu.ie
“[...][A]ny classification of such effects with the com-
mon label social priming can only broadly characterize
ConflictofInterestandFunding
this area of research rather than enumerate necessary
and sufficient criteria that precisely define any related Theauthorsdeclarenoconflictofinterest. Therewas
phenomenon (p. 6).” Therefore, our sampling strategy nofundingforthisproject.
waspragmatic,consistingofstudieswhereinauthorsex-
===== PAGE 13/15 =====
13
AuthorContributions Baumeister, R. F. (2016). Charting the future of so-
cialpsychologyonstormyseas:Winners,losers,
EMG,DN,andMBconceivedoftheideaforthestudy.
and recommendations. Journal of Experimental
SKwasprimarilyresponsibleforthedatacollection. SK
SocialPsychology,66,153–158.
wrotethefirstdraft. EMGandSKhadprimaryresponsi-
Benjamin, D. J., Berger, J. O., Johannesson, M., Nosek,
bilityfor theanalyses. Allauthors contributedsubstan-
B. A., Wagenmakers, E.-J., Berk, R., Johnson,
tiallytofurtherrevisions.
V. E., et al. (2018). Redefine statistical signifi-
cance.NatureHumanBehaviour,2,6–10.
OpenSciencePractices
Brandt, M. J., IJzerman, H., Dijksterhuis, A., Farach,
F. J., Geller, J., Giner-Sorolla, R., & Van’t Veer,
A. (2014). The replication recipe: What makes
for a convincing replication? Journal of Experi-
mentalSocialPsychology,50,217–224.
This article earned the Preregistration+, Open Data,
Carter, E. C., Schönbrodt, F. D., Gervais, W. M., & Hil-
Open Materials, and Open Code badge for preregister-
gard, J. (2019). Correcting for bias in psychol-
ing the hypothesis and analysis before data collection,
ogy: A comparison of meta-analytic methods.
and for making the data, materials, and code openly
Advances in Methods and Practices in Psycholog-
available. It has been verified that the analysis repro-
icalScience,2,115–144.
ducedtheresultspresentedinthearticle. Theentireed-
Cesario, J. (2014). Priming, replication, and the hard-
itorialprocess,includingtheopenreviews,ispublished
estscience.PerspectivesonPsychologicalScience,
intheonlinesupplement.
9(1), 40–48. https://doi.org/10.1177/
1745691613513470
References
Cheung, I., Campbell, L., LeBel, E. P., Ackerman,
Armbruster,S.(2021).Whatmakesareplicationsuccess- R. A., et al. (2016). Registered replication
ful? an investigation of frequentist and bayesian report. Perspectives on Psychological Science,
criteria to assess replication success [Doctoral 11(5), 750–764. https://doi.org/10.1177/
dissertation, Ludwig Maximilian University of 1745691616664694
Munich].https://doi.org/10.5282/ubm/epub. Claesen,A.,Gomes,S.,Tuerlinckx,F.,&Vanpaemel,W.
77434 (2021).Comparingdreamtoreality:Anassess-
Asendorpf, J. B., Conner, M., De Fruyt, F., De Houwer, mentofadherenceofthefirstgenerationofpre-
J.,Denissen,J.J.,Fiedler,K.,&Wicherts,J.M. registered studies. Royal Society Open Science,
(2013).Replicationismorethanhittingthelot- 8(10), 211037. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsos.
tery twice. European Journal of Personality, 27, 211037
138–138. Collins, A. M., & Loftus, E. F. (1975). A spreading-
Bakker, M., van Dijk, A., & Wicherts, J. M. (2012). activation theory of semantic processing. Psy-
The rules of the game called psychological chologicalReview,82(6),407–428.https://doi.
science. Perspectives on Psychological Science, org/10.1037/0033-295x.82.6.407
7(6), 543–554. https://doi.org/10.1177/ Cooper,H.(2010).Researchsynthesisandmeta-analysis:
1745691612459060 A step-by-step approach (4th ed.). SAGE Publi-
Bargh, J. A. (2006). What have we been priming all cations,Inc.
theseyears?onthedevelopment,mechanisms, Dai, W., Yang, T., White, B. X., Palmer, R., Sanders,
and ecology of nonconscious social behavior. E.K.,McDonald,J.A.,Leung,M.,&Albarracín,
European Journal of Social Psychology, 36(2), D. (2023). Priming behavior: A meta-analysis
147–168.https://doi.org/10.1002/ejsp.336 of the effects of behavioral and nonbehavioral
Bargh, J. A., Chen, M., & Burrows, L. (1996). Auto- primes on overt behavioral outcomes. Psycho-
maticity of social behavior: Direct effects of logical Bulletin, 149(1-2), 67–98. https://doi.
trait construct and stereotype activation on ac- org/10.1037/bul0000374
tion. Journal of Personality and Social Psychol- Dijksterhuis,A.,&Bargh,J.A.(2001).Theperception-
ogy,71(2),230–244.https://doi.org/10.1037/ behavior expressway: Automatic effects of so-
0022-3514.71.2.230 cial perception on social behavior. Advances in
Bates, D., Mächler, M., Bolker, B., & Walker, S. (2015). ExperimentalSocialPsychology,33,1–40.https:
Fittinglinearmixed-effectsmodelsusinglme4. //doi.org/10.1016/s0065-2601(01)80003-4
Journal of Statistical Software, 67, 1–48. https:
//doi.org/10.18637/jss.v067.i01
===== PAGE 14/15 =====
14
Dijksterhuis,A.,&vanKnippenberg,A.(1998).There- Morey, R. D., & Lakens, D. (2016). Why most of
lationbetweenperceptionandbehavior,orhow psychology is statistically unfalsifiable. Unpub-
to win a game of trivial pursuit. Journal of Per- lishedmanuscript.
sonalityandSocialPsychology,74(4),865–877. Neely, J. H. (1977). Semantic priming and retrieval
https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.74.4.865 from lexical memory: Roles of inhibitionless
Doyen, S., Klein, O., Simons, D. J., & Cleeremans, A. spreadingactivationandlimited-capacityatten-
(2014). On the other side of the mirror: Prim- tion. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Gen-
ing in cognitive and social psychology. Social eral, 106(3), 226–254. https://doi.org/10.
Cognition,32,12–32.https://doi.org/10.1521/ 1037/0096-3445.106.3.226
soco.2014.32.supp.12 Newell, B. R., & Shanks, D. R. (2014). Unconscious in-
Fiedler, K., & Schwarz, N. (2016). Questionable re- fluences on decision making: A critical review.
search practices revisited. Social Psychological BehavioralandBrainSciences,37,1–19.
andPersonalityScience,7,45–52. Nosek, B. A., & Errington, T. M. (2020). What is repli-
Francis, G. (2012). Too good to be true: Publication cation? PLoS Biology, 18(3), e3000691. https:
biasintwoprominentstudiesfromexperimen- //doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3000691
tal psychology. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, OpenScienceCollaboration.(2015).Estimatingthere-
19(2), 151–156. https://doi.org/10.3758/ producibility of psychological science. Science,
s13423-012-0227-9 349, 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.
Grimes,D.R.,Bauch,C.T.,&Ioannidis,J.P.A.(2018). aac4716
Modelling science trustworthiness under pub- Pashler, H., Coburn, N., & Harris, C. R. (2012). Prim-
lish or perish pressure. Royal Society Open Sci- ingofsocialdistance?failuretoreplicateeffects
ence, 5(171511), 171511. https://doi.org/10. onsocialandfoodjudgments.PLoSONE,7(8),
1098/rsos.171511 e42510. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
John, L. K., Loewenstein, G., & Prelec, D. (2012). Mea- pone.0042510
suring the prevalence of questionable research Patil,P.,Peng,R.D.,&Leek,J.T.(2016).Whatshould
practices with incentives for truth-telling. Psy- researchersexpectwhentheyreplicatestudies?
chologicalScience,23(5),524–532.https://doi. a statistical view of replicability in psychologi-
org/10.1177/0956797611430953 calscience.PerspectivesonPsychologicalScience,
Kühberger, A., Fritz, A., & Scherndl, T. (2014). Publi- 11(4),539–544.
cationbiasinpsychology:Adiagnosisbasedon Pecher,D.,vanMierlo,H.,Cañal-Bruland,R.,&Zeelen-
the correlation between effect size and sample berg, R. (2015). The burden of secrecy? no ef-
size.PloSone,9(9),e105825.https://doi.org/ fectonhillslantestimationandbeanbagthrow-
10.1371/journal.pone.0105825 ing. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Gen-
Kuznetsova,A.,Brockhoff,P.B.,&Christensen,R.H.B. eral, 144(4), e65–e72. https://doi.org/10.
(2017).lmerTestpackage:Testsinlinearmixed 1037/xge0000090
effects models. Journal of Statistical Software, Peels,R.,&Bouter,L.(2023).Replicationandtrustwor-
82(13), 1–26. https://doi.org/10.18637/jss. thiness. Accountability in Research, 30(2), 77–
v082.i13 87.
Kvarven, A., Strømland, E., & Johannesson, M. (2019). Rohrer, D., Pashler, H., & Harris, C. R. (2019). Dis-
Comparing meta-analyses and preregistered crepantdataandimprobableresults:Anexam-
multiple-laboratoryreplicationprojects.Nature inationofvohs,mead,andgoode(2006).Basic
Human Behaviour, 4(4), 423–434. https://doi. and Applied Social Psychology, 41(4), 263–271.
org/10.1038/s41562-019-0787-z https://doi.org/10.1080/01973533.2019.
Lakens,D.,&Evers,E.R.(2014).Sailingfromtheseas 1624965
of chaos into the corridor of stability: Practi- Schimmack, U. (2021). Replicability audit of ap dijk-
cal recommendations to increase the informa- sterhuis [Replicability-Index, April 23]. https:
tional value of studies. Perspectives on Psycho- //replicationindex.com/2021/04/23/r-audit-
logicalScience,9(3),278–292.https://doi.org/ ap-dijksterhuis/
10.1177/1745691614528520 Shanks, D. R. (2017). Misunderstanding the behav-
Molden,D.C.(2014).Understandingprimingeffectsin ior priming controversy: Comment on payne,
socialpsychology:Anoverviewandintegration. brown-iannuzzi,andloersch(2016).Journalof
SocialCognition,32,243–249.https://doi.org/ Experimental Psychology: General, 146, 1216–
10.1521/soco.2014.32.supp.243 1222.https://doi.org/10.1037/xge0000307
===== PAGE 15/15 =====
15
Simons, D. J. (2014). The value of direct repli- replications: A skeptical perspective on reli-
cation. Perspectives on Psychological Science, gious priming. Frontiers in Psychology, 6, 1–7.
9(1), 76–80. https://doi.org/10.1177/ https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2015.01365
1745691613514755 Viechtbauer, W. (2010). Conducting meta-analyses in r
Stroebe,W.(2019).Whatcanwelearnfrommanylabs withthemetaforpackage.JournalofStatistical
replications? Basic and Applied Social Psychol- Software,36,1–48.
ogy,41,91–103. Weingarten, E., Chen, Q., McAdams, M., Yi, J., Hepler,
Stroebe,W.,&Strack, F.(2014).Theallegedcrisisand J., & Albarracín, D. (2016). From primed con-
the illusion of exact replication. Perspectives on cepts to action: A meta-analysis of the behav-
Psychological Science, 9(1), 59–71. https://doi. ioral effects of incidentally presented words.
org/10.1177/1745691613514450 Psychological Bulletin, 142(5), 472–497. https:
Team,R.C.(2019).R:Alanguageandenvironmentfor //doi.org/10.1037/bul0000030
statisticalcomputing. Wickham,H.(2016).Ggplot2:Elegantgraphicsfordata
van Elk, M., Matzke, D., Gronau, Q. F., Guan, M., Van- analysis. Springer-Verlag New York. https://
dekerckhove,J.,&Wagenmakers,E.-J.(2015). ggplot2.tidyverse.org
Meta-analyses are no substitute for registered