
===== PAGE 1/17 =====
Opendata:NotApplicable
Meta-Psychology,2024,vol8,MP.2022.3322 Openmaterials:NotApplicable Editedby:RickardCarlsson
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2022.3322 OpenCode:Yes Reviewedby:StreamlinedPeerReview
Articletype:Commentary Openandreproducibleanalysis:Yes Analysisreproducedby:LucijaBatinovi´c
PublishedundertheCC-BY4.0license Openreviewsandeditorialprocess:Yes AllsupplementaryfilescanbeaccessedatOSF:
Preregistration:No https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/DBQGK
How should we investigate variation in the relation between social
media and well-being?
Niklas Johannes1, Philipp K. Masur2, Matti Vuorre1,3, and Andrew K. Przybylski1
1OxfordInternetInstitute,UniversityofOxford
2DepartmentofCommunicationScience,VrijeUniversiteitAmsterdam
3DepartmentofSocialPsychology,TilburgUniversity
Most researchers studying the relation between social media use and well-being find
smalltonoassociations,yetpolicymakersandpublicstakeholderskeepaskingformore
evidence. Onewaythefieldisreactingisbyinspectingthevariationaroundaverage
relations—with the goal of describing individual social media users. Here, we argue
thatthisapproachproducesfindingsthatarenotasinformativeastheycouldbe. Our
analysis begins by describing how the field got to this point. Then, we explain the
problemswiththecurrentapproachofstudyingvariationandhowitlosessightofone
ofthemostimportantgoalsofaquantitativesocialscience:generalizingfromasample
toapopulation. Weproposeaprincipledapproachtoquantify,interpret,andexplain
variationinaveragerelationsby:(1)conductingmodelcomparisons,(2)definingare-
gionofpracticalequivalenceandtestingthetheoreticaldistributionofrelationsagainst
thatregion,(3)definingasmallesteffectsizeofinterestandcomparingitagainstthe
theoretical distribution. We close with recommendations to either study moderators
assystematicfactorsthatexplainvariationortocommittoaperson-specificapproach
andconductN=1studiesandqualitativeresearch.
Keywords: Socialmedia,well-being,effectheterogeneity
The study of social media use and well-being is at gate variation around the average association—or lack
a critical junction. The evidence seems clear: The re- thereof—linkingsocialmediauseandwell-being. Their
lationship between social media use and the average aim: to investigate individual social media users and
user’swell-beingisclosetozeroandbelowanythresh- whatmakesthemsusceptibletolargeeffects(Aalberset
old for harm that would require intervention (Appel al.,2021;Beyensetal.,2020;Whitlock&Masur,2019).
et al., 2020; Bayer et al., 2020; Dickson et al., 2019; Studying variation might be informative, but the field
Dienlin & Johannes, 2020; Kross et al., 2021; Odgers hasnotyetmadeexplicitthegoalsbehindstudyingvari-
& Jensen, 2020; Orben, 2020b; Valkenburg, 2022; ation—nor has it developed a principled approach to
Valkenburg et al., 2022; vanden Abeele, 2020) Yet that researchingorunderstandingthatvariation. Beforewe
consensus has not reached the public, which continues present such an approach, we believe it is important to
to express concerns over the harmful effects of media pauseandaskourselves: Howdidwegethere? What’s
use (Grimes et al., 2008; Orben, 2020a), prompting theproblem? Andwheredowegofromhere? Studying
governmentstokeepaskingformoreevidence(Council variationbeforeasolidunderstandingofhowtoanswer
on Communications and Media, 2016; Dickson et al., these questions may investing resources that could be
2019), and, in some cases, act without it (BBC, 2021). more valuable elsewhere. Here, we tackle those ques-
Thedisconnectbetweenhavingdeliveredthatevidence tions in the hope that we can outline a principled ap-
and requests for more of it puts social scientists in an proachforthestudyofsocialmediaandwell-being.
unenviable position. After all, is the question about so-
cial media’s potential harm not answered? Wouldn’t it Howdidwegethere?
be prudent to stop investing resources into researching
Prescribingtheimpossible
effectsthatevidencesuggestsarenotthere?
Instead,thefieldhascalledforconsideringnecessary Eversincesocialmediabecamepopularattheturnof
nuance in studying social media (Dienlin & Johannes, the millennium, there have been concerns about their
2020; Masur, 2021; Meier & Reinecke, 2020; Orben et negative effects (e.g. Beard, 2005). While the social
al., 2020). Many researchers have started to investi- sciences were still figuring out how to study social me-
===== PAGE 2/17 =====
2
dia, the first popular science books abouttheir harmful lawful(Haaf&Rouder,2019;Hamaker,2012). Forex-
effects on our thinking (Carr, 2011) and social fabric ample, the relation between media use and well-being
(Turkle,2012)cameoutandcausedastirinpublicdis- might well be positive for everyone, even if there are
course. Policymakers reacted quickly. Above all, they differences in size. Figure 1b shows an example of an
wantedtoknowhowmuchtimeonsocialmediaissafe unlawful and Figure 1c shows an example of a lawful
for its users—particularly for children. For example, in process: Ifrelationswithineachpersonarenotallinthe
2016, the American Academy of Pediatrics released a same direction (Figure 1b), the average within-person
policy statement on Media and Young Minds, recom- effect is our best guess for individual media users, but
mending that children younger than 18 to 24 months wecan’tmakecorrectprescriptionsforeachuser. Ifre-
avoid digital media (except video-chatting) altogether lationswithineachpersonhavethesamedirection(e.g.,
(Council on Communications and Media, 2016). In positive, Figure 1c) prescriptions are possible. Unfor-
other words, the field was tasked to deliver prescrip- tunately, we’re not aware of many psychological pro-
tions,oftenforindividualusers: Howmuchscreentime cesses that follow such lawfulness (Bryan et al., 2021;
issafeformychild? Eronen & Bringmann, 2021; Haaf & Rouder, 2019)—
Such a task might well be impossible. Most work unlike some biochemical processes that will affect al-
in the quantitative social sciences is traditionally on mosteveryoneinasimilarway,buttodifferentdegrees
thegroup-level,comparingdifferencesbetweenpeople (Muthukrishna&Henrich,2019).
(Bryan et al., 2021; Hamaker, 2012; Richters, 2021): Even if we were to believe there’s lawfulness to es-
How are differences in social media use between peo- tablish in the relation between social media and well-
ple related to differences in well-being? Unfortunately, being,thatlawfulnessrestsonseveral,likelyuntenable,
what holds between people on the group-level doesn’t assumptions. For one, calls for prescriptive recommen-
automaticallytranslatetomembersofthegroup: Anef- dationsfollowalineardose-responsemodel: Howmuch
fectbetweenpeopleinalargegroupdoesn’tmeananef- time on social media will lead to how much change in
fectwithineachperson(seeFigure1a). Suchatransfer well-being (Johannes et al., 2022)? From the start,
from between-person to within-person is only admiss- there is good reason to believe such an assumption is
ableunderstrictassumptionsofso-calledergodicity(for overly simplistic (Griffioen et al., 2020; Kaye et al.,
details, see Fisher et al., 2018; Hamaker, 2012; Mole- 2020; Orben et al., 2020; Parry, Fisher, et al., 2021),
naar, 2004). A process is ergodic if it fulfills two con- butithasnonethelessshapedhowsocialscientistsstud-
ditions (simplified here): First, the psychological struc- ied social media. However, there is no convincing evi-
ture of a process is the same for each member of the dencethatsocialmediaareindeedthedosethatcauses
sample (homogeneity). Second, that the structure is aresponse. Moststudiesinthefieldcannotmakecausal
stable over time (stationarity; Molenaar and Campbell, claimsbecausethereisalackoftheorythatwouldallow
2009). In our case, we’d assume that the relation be- to test causal models with cross-sectional data (Eronen
tween social media and well-being is identical for each & Bringmann, 2021; Rohrer, 2018) or inform us about
user and doesn’t change over time. Both assumptions time-varyingconfoundersinlongitudinaldata(Hernán,
arerarely,ifever,fulfilled;behavior,thoughts,andfeel- 2018; Rohrer & Murayama, 2021; VanderWeele et al.,
ingsaresimplynotthesameforeveryone(Fisheretal., 2016). Thefewexperimentswithhighexternalvalidity
2018; Gelman, 2015; von Eye, 2009). Put differently: show no causal effect (Hall et al., 2019; Mitev et al.,
“Individual variability is the rule, not the exception” 2021; Przybylski et al., 2021). Therefore, it is ques-
(Rose et al., 2013, p. 152). Just because across our tionable whether social media use is indeed the dose
sample people who use an hour more of social media that causes a response (i.e., changes in well-being). It
experiencehalfapointlesswell-beingthanthoseusers also is unclear whether a dose-response relation would
with an hour less social media doesn’t mean an hour be linear, such that with each extra moment of social
moreofsocialmediaisassociatedwithhalfapointless mediause,well-beingvariestothesameextentaswith
well- being for every social media user in the popula- the next moment (Bruggeman et al., 2019; Johannes
tion. et al., 2022; Przybylski & Weinstein, 2017). The most
The challenge presented by ergodicity doesn’t bode unrealisticassumptionmightbethatofuniversaleffects
wellforsocialscientistswhoseektomakeprescriptions (Eronen & Bringmann, 2021; von Eye, 2009). Most
onsocialmediause. Whatifweexplicitlystudywithin- studies merely look at screen time and its relation to
person effects? We can’t generalize from between- arangeofwell-beingindicatorssuchaslifesatisfaction
person effects to individuals, but if we have repeated or self-esteem. Without taking the motivations of users
measures, can we translate the average within-person into account, inspecting different types of content that
effect to each person? We can, but only if relations are people engage with on social media, and testing rela-
===== PAGE 3/17 =====
3
Figure1
Examplesofdifferentbetween-personandwithin-personprocessesin5fictitiouspeople. Linesrepresentregressionlines
between social media use and well-being. a) No within-person effects (blue lines), but a positive between- person effect
(black ellipses, triangles are averages per person on social media use). b) No lawful within-person effect: Even though
theaveragewithin-personeffect(black)ispositive,noteveryparticipantshowsapositiveeffect(blue). c)Lawfulwithin-
person effect: The average within-person effect (black) is positive and can be generalized to every person because every
personexperiencesapositivewithin-personeffect(blue).
tions to mental health, these studies can only give us andthewithin-personlevel(Coyneetal.,2019;Dienlin
a coarse understanding of broad, net relations (Bayer etal.,2017;Houghtonetal.,2018;Orbenetal.,2019;
et al., 2020; Dienlin & Johannes, 2020; Kross et al., Orben&Przybylski,2019;Schemeretal.,2020;Thoris-
2021;Kushlev&Leitao,2020;Orbenetal.,2020). The dottiretal.,2019). Inotherwords,thosewhousemore
literature is largely ignorant of—or simply hasn’t been social media are not worse off compared to those who
able to measure (Davidson et al., 2022; Parry, David- usethemless(between-person)andusingsocialmedia
son, et al., 2021; Shaw et al., 2020)—social media use more than a person usually does is not systematically
with an adequate level of nuance. Taken together, all related to changes in that person’s well-being (within-
thosereasonsmakeitclosetoimpossibletomake(per- person).
sonalized) prescriptions on social media use: between- Therefore,we’representedwithacuriousmismatch:
person findings generalize to individual users only un- Thelackofevidencelinkingsocialmediaandwell-being
derstrictassumptionsthatlikelydon’tholdinthisfield; is out of step with public concerns about negative ef-
within-person lawfulness in social media effects is im- fects,addiction,anddistractions(Ellis,2019;Kardefelt-
plausible because of a lack of nuance around concep- Wintheretal.,2017;Loh&Kanai,2015;Satchelletal.,
tualizingandmeasuringsocialmedia,motivations,and 2021). Whenpublicopinionaboutmediaeffectsisthis
mentalhealth;theevidenceismerelycorrelational;and strong but social scientists are not able to produce evi-
wecan’tbecertainweindeedinvestigatealineareffect. denceinsupport,maybetheycan’tbetrustedwithpro-
ducing evidence for questions that have a (seemingly)
Dealingwiththeimpossible less obvious answer? Such a perception can have seri-
ousconsequencesforresearchfundingandthecredibil-
For the sake of argument, let’s set aside the chal-
ityofsocialscienceoverall(IJzermanetal., 2020). We
lenges of making person-specific prescriptions and in-
believe a widespread acceptance that the average rela-
stead take the current evidence in the literature at face
tion between social media use and well- being is negli-
value. Mostscholarshavereachedconsensus: Concerns
gible may well lead the research area to lose relevance
about general social media use don’t seem warranted.
inbothacademicandpublicpolicydiscussions.
Large-scale studies don’t support the conclusion that
The field initially reacted to that threat by focusing
there are sizable group-level relations between social
onsubgroupsinthepopulation,askingtoidentifythose
mediauseandwell-being(Dicksonetal.,2019;Dienlin
people who show non-negligible relations between so-
&Johannes,2020;Krossetal.,2021;Kushlev&Leitao,
cial media use and well-being (Griffioen et al., 2021;
2020; Masur, 2021; Meier et al., in press; Meier & Rei-
Orben, 2020a; Valkenburg & Peter, 2013). This shift
necke, 2020; Orben, 2020b; Valkenburg et al., 2022;
fromoverall,broadrelationstosubgroupsscaffoldsbe-
Whitlock&Masur,2019)—bothonthebetween-person
tweenapublicwhohaveawiderangeofconcernsabout
===== PAGE 4/17 =====
4
the general effects of social media and several specific the two approaches and study variation in a group to
cases (e.g., radicalization, bullying) that suggest that make person-specific inferences. Put differently: Goal
therearecontextsordistinctsubgroupsforwhichsocial (i.e.,person-specific)andmethodology(i.e.,inferences
media use has large effects (Valkenburg et al., 2021). about individuals) must be aligned. Next, we’ll explain
That is, media effects can differ because of differences how we believe that such a conflation is currently hap-
incontextordifferencesbetweenpeople. Oneproposal pening. If we decide thatwe want to studygroup-level
focuses on these differences between people and high- processes, we then need to develop a principled ap-
lightsaperson-specificapproachasanewparadigmfor proach towards identifying, interpreting, and explain-
media effects research (Valkenburg, 2022; Valkenburg ingvariationaroundaveragerelations.
et al., 2021). The reasoning behind the approach goes
as follows: Average relationships between social media What’stheproblem?
use and well-being aren’t informative. Instead, all peo-
Therewill(likely)alwaysbevariation
ple are different, so we must examine individual social
media users and the (within-person) relation between Becausetherearesomanydifferencesbetween(e.g.,
socialmediauseandwell-beingthatisspecifictothem. youaredifferentthanme)andwithinpeople(e.g.,you
Someuserswillshowpositiverelations,somenegative, are now different to you earlier), variation around ef-
and others no relation at all, leading to overall negli- fects is exceptionally likely in nearly any psychologi-
gible average relations (Aalbers et al., 2021; Beyens et cal phenomenon (Bryan et al., 2021; Molenaar, 2004;
al.,2020;Siebersetal.,2021;Valkenburgetal.,2021). Rose et al., 2013; von Eye, 2009). As far as we know,
Figure 2 (top) illustrates that reasoning: When the av- we have yet to identify an invariant phenomenon in
eragerelationbetweensocialmediauseandwell-being thesocialsciences. Becausehumancognition,emotion,
is zero, but there is variation around the average rela- andbehaviorarecomplexanddifficulttomeasure(Ero-
tion, negative and positive relations ’cancel’ each other nen & Bringmann, 2021), it is practically impossible to
out. If that variation is large, such a null distribution causallyexplainthemintheirtotality(Muthukrishna&
can hide real harm and benefits. Note that Figure 2 Henrich, 2019). Consider the well-known Stroop ef-
is merely a different way of presenting the information fect: Peopleareslowertonamethecolorofincongruent
of Figure 1 (b and c panels), showing the distribution words (i.e., the word RED in the color blue) compared
of within- person relations that are lawful (all positive, to congruent words (i.e., the word RED in the color
bluedistribution,bottomofFigure2)ornotlawful(all red). We assume the effect follows some lawfulness
otherdistributionsthatvaryinthesignoftheeffect). In ofcognitiveprocessingthatisuniversalacrosshumans.
the past year, several analyses of experience sampling Butitishighlylikelythateveneffectswhosedirectionis
data explored this idea of person-specific media effects universal have variance (Haaf & Rouder, 2019). There
and focused on the variation around average relations areamyriadofdifferentgeneticandenvironmentalin-
(Aalbersetal.,2021;Beyensetal.,2020;Siebersetal., fluencesonhumanbehavior—nottospeakofthediffer-
2021;Valkenburg,2022;Valkenburgetal.,2021). ences in affordances, content, and user motivation for
Such investigations of variation around average re- usingsocialmedia. Theseinfluencescanandwillinter-
lations may be of high value for the field. However, act;therefore,eachoccasionapersonusessocialmedia
we first need to agree on our goal behind investigat- issomultiplydeterminedastobenearlyunique.
ing variation (Howard & Hoffman, 2018). We believe As researchers, we’re ultimately interested in the in-
thataperson-specificapproachneedstobeclearonthat dividual person (Rose et al., 2013). At the same time,
premise to advance the field. Otherwise, prioritizing we want to generalize beyond that specific person.
variation over interpreting and understanding average These two goals often clash and require different goals
associations risks atomizing associations. If a person- and methodologies (Bergman & Vargha, 2013). Quan-
specificmediaeffectsparadigmfollowsinthefootsteps titative social science currently embraces the nomoth-
of the person-specific paradigm in Psychology and in- etic tradition which aims to make general predictions
deedwantstostudymediaeffectsthatliterallyarespe- about the population; it asks what applies in the ag-
cific to a person, its goals are to make inferences about gregate. The idiographic tradition aims to make pre-
social media and well-being for individual people, not dictions about the individual; it asks what applies in
groups. Alternatively, if it wants to make inferences the particular (Hamaker, 2012; Howard & Hoffman,
to a group, its goals are to study variation around av- 2018). As we have explained in an earlier section, we
erage, group-level effects to identify risk factors and can’t generalize from the group-level to the individual
susceptible groups, not individuals (Bryan et al., 2021; because of variation between and within people. What
Howard & Hoffman, 2018). However, it can’t conflate applies in the aggregate simply won’t apply to the par-
===== PAGE 5/17 =====
5
Figure2
Examples of the distributions of a null average effect (upper panel) and a large average effect (lower panel) under
differentlevelsofvariationbetweenindividuals’effects(littlevariationinblueandalotofvariationinblack).
ticular (Molenaar & Campbell, 2009). Studies within a person-specific and a variable-centered approach will
the nomothetic tradition often rely on what is called a focus on explaining the variation that seems inevitable
variable-centered approach: How are variables across in human behavior. But they will make inferences on
people related? For example, when we study how so- differentlevels. Weseepromiseinaperson-specificap-
cial media relates to well-being in a large group, not proach that investigates individual people and makes
taking into account individual people’s characteristics, inferences to these individual people. However, we be-
werelyonavariable-centeredapproach. Studieswithin lieve the field, claiming to follow a person-specific ap-
theidiographictraditionrelyonwhatiscalledaperson- proach,reliesonavariable-centeredapproachinstead:
specific approach: How are variables within this par- estimating and inspecting variation on the group-level.
ticular person related? For example, when we study If we accept that not all people are the same and so-
how social media relates to well- being for a particular cial media effects naturally contain variation, the con-
person,includingalltheirindividualcharacteristics,we clusion that media effects won’t be the same for every-
relyonaperson-specificapproach. onetakestheformofacircularargument. Next,weex-
These traditions require different methodologies plain how using a variable-centered approach to make
(Bergman&Vargha,2013;Howard&Hoffman,2018). person-specificinferencesneglectstheprimarypurpose
Let’sgobacktotheStroopexample: Avariable-centered ofavariable-centeredapproach.
approach aggregates over all participants in the Stroop
experimenttocompareresponsetimesofcongruentand Inferentialgoalsandproblems
incongruentwords. Theresultisagroup-levelestimate
Ifweadoptavariable-centeredapproach,wewantto
that can be generalized to the population the sample
studyrelationshipsbetweenvariablesinthepopulation.
is from. A person-specific approach estimates person-
Say we want to test the relation between social media
alized parameters to compare response times within a
use and well-being and sample 1,000 people. Next, we
particular person. The result is a person-specific esti-
build a statistical model that allows us to estimate the
matethatcanbegeneralizedtothepersononly(Mole-
directionandmagnitudeoftherelation. Ifwefindthat
naar, 2013). If we have multiple participants, we run
it’snegative,wedon’twanttoconcludethattherelation
as many models and summarize the results qualita-
only applies to those particular 1,000 people we hap-
tively—or use newer bottom-up models that find com-
pened to sample. If we were, we wouldn’t need infer-
monalities between people (Beltz et al., 2016). Both
===== PAGE 6/17 =====
6
ential statistics. We could just calculate the size of the portionsofnegativeandpositiveeffects(tocanceleach
relation and have our answer. But we sampled those other out) is less likely than merely a true null effect
1,000 people to draw an inference to the population withrandomvariation(Dahly,2021). Second,focusing
theycomefrom. Statisticalinferencewithinavariable- onthemodel’srandomslopesemphasizesdescriptionof
centered approach is thus necessarily inductive and on thesampleoverinferencetothepopulation. Itneglects
theaggregate: Toarriveataninferenceaboutthepopu- thepurposeofour models: theestimateoftheaverage
lation,wegeneralizeanaggregateestimatefromasam- associationin thepopulation. Thisissueisexacerbated
pleofthatpopulation. bynon-representativesamplestypicallyrecruitedinthe
Samplingintroducessamplingerror. Statisticalinfer- field.
ence attempts to separate signal (i.e., the true effect or That’s not to say that the variation around the fixed
association) from noise (i.e., the error), which means effectismeaningless,northatrandomslopesdon’tcarry
there will be variation in our measures—be it caused information. In fact, a random slope is indeed an es-
bymeasurementerror,samplingerror,ortruevariation timate specific to that person (Efron & Morris, 1977).
in the effect. That variation can occur on two levels: However,wefirstneedtoagreeunderwhatpremisewe
Between people (i.e., differences from one person to wanttostudysuchvariationandonwhichlevelofinfer-
another) and, if we have multiple measurements per ence we operate. If we’re after person-specific effects,
person, within people (i.e., variation around the per- we need to describe each individual participant and
son’s mean). In our statistical model, we should know their random slope; but we shouldn’t summarize them
whatsourcesofvariabilitytoaccountfortoidentifythe becausesuchasummary(e.g.,’50%ofparticipantshad
signal. Because we want to generalize from the people a negative relation’) merely describes the sample and
in our sample to the population, we need to account thereby defeats the purpose of a person-specific ap-
for variation of people being different from each other. proach. In contrast, under the premise of a variable-
Onlyifweaccountforthesedifferencesareweallowed centered approach, inspecting variation around the
to generalize to other people. Social scientists often fixedeffectcomplements,butdoesnotinanywaysup-
account for such variation in various forms of mixed- plant,informationthefixedeffectscarry—itcaninform
effects models by specifying grouping variables (Bates us about the expected variation from person to person
et al., 2015; Bolker et al., 2009; DeBruine & Barr, around the fixed effect. That variation, in turn, can in-
2021)—ideally all sources of variability that we want form us whether we should identify systematic causes
togeneralizeover(Yarkoni,2020). Therefore,whenwe forthisvariation,suchasmoderatorsorotherpredictors
predictwell-being,weobtainfixed(i.e.,average,aggre- ofvariance. (Moreonmoderatorslater.) Ifweagreeon
gaterelation)andrandomeffects(i.e.,relationsspecific that premise and the adequate level of inference, the
to individuals) for social media use. Random slopes question is not whether there will be variation around
mean that the model doesn’t assume that the relation the fixed effect. The questions are rather: How do we
will be the same for every participant; the model takes estimate variance around the fixed effect? How much
thesedifferencesbetweenpeopleintoaccountandpro- variation is there? And how much variance is relevant
vides us with the best estimate of the average relation to warrant further attention? The field must provide
onthegroup-level: thefixedeffect. benchmarks against which we measure the answers to
Therefore, fixed effects are the primary outcome of these questions; it must specify how much variation is
mixed models and we caution against treating them as meaningful and warrants further investigation. Next,
secondary. Forexample,nexttothefixedeffect,Beyens we therefore outline a principled approach to dealing
etal.(2020)reportedthedistributionofrandomslopes withvariationinaveragerelations.
oftherelationbetweensocialmediauseandwell-being,
categorizingindividualrandomslopesaccordingtosign Wheredowegofromhere?
and size. They state: “Because only small subsets of
Quantifyingvariation
adolescents experience small to moderate changes in
well-being, the true effects of social media reported in How to assess whether there is meaningful variabil-
previousstudieshaveprobablybeendilutedacrosshet- ityaroundtheaverageeffectisneitheranewchallenge
erogeneous samples of individuals that differ in their norisitonespecialtothestudyofsocialmedia. Forex-
susceptibility to media effects” (Beyens et al., 2020, p. ample, in the field of personalized medicine, there is a
2). We believe such a conclusion conflates several is- heavydebateonhowtounderstandvariationineffects
sues. First, as we’ve argued earlier, there will (likely) andhowtodemarkeffectsontheindividuallevelfrom
alwaysbevariation. Furthermore, foranullrelationto thoseonthegroup-level(Senn, 2016, 2018). Asimilar
result from a treatment that causes roughly equal pro- debatehasbeengoingoninthesocialsciencesforsev-
===== PAGE 7/17 =====
7
eral years (Fisher et al., 2018; Molenaar, 2004; Mole- negative associations (-0.41) that are 7 times more in-
naar&Campbell,2009;Richters,2021). Similarly,Bol- tenseandnegativethantheaveragepositiveassociation
ger et al., 2019 have addressed the question of mean- (0.06); others will display positive associations (0.53)
ingful variation in experimental effects extensively and thatare9timeslarger.
provide an overview of how to deal with effect hetero- Inthisexample,weusedpointestimatesofthefixed
geneity (i.e., variation in effects) (Hester et al., 2021; effectanditsstandarddeviationtoobtainaheterogene-
Liew et al., 2016). How has media effects research ityinterval. Inpractice,theseparametersareestimated
studied variation so far? Researchers most often start from data and therefore introduce their own source of
with model comparisons, where they compare a model uncertainty that ought to be included in further calcu-
with only a fixed slope (i.e., the effect will be the same lations (e.g., of heterogeneity intervals). Without rep-
for every person) to a model with additional random resentations of these uncertainties, for example in the
slopes(i.e.,eachpersonwilldiffertoadegreefromthe form of posterior distributions, researchers run the risk
overalleffect). Anothercommonpracticeisplottingthe of making overly confident statements. However, we
distribution of the observed random slopes to demon- only had access to point estimates for these examples
stratethevariationintherelationbetweensocialmedia and therefore continue working with them, while rec-
useandwell-being. Asubsequentstepisoftendefining ognizing that in practice such uncertainties should be
cutoffsforeffectsizesfollowingtheconventionalbench- described.
marks of Cohen, 1988 and describing what proportion Note that effect heterogeneity and the uncertainty
of random slopes in the sample exceeds these bench- around the fixed effects are not the same. The fixed
marks (e.g., 12% of the observed random slopes are effect is the average association between social media
considered large). Rather than reinventing the wheel use and well- being; its surrounding 95% confidence
forourarea,weaimtointegrateworkfromotherfields intervals inform us about variability in that average re-
and translate some steps taken by previous research to lation from sample to sample. If we ran infinite stud-
aprincipledapproachtostudyvariationinsocialmedia ies,95%oftheconfidenceintervalsaroundthefixedef-
research. fectwouldcontainthetruepopulationaveragerelation.
To illustrate that approach, we work along an exam- Incontrast,theheterogeneityintervalinformsusabout
ple taken from Beyens et al. (2020) who presented a variability in the association from person to person. If
study on the relation between active and passive social we ran infinite studies, 95% of the heterogeneity inter-
media use and well-being in an experience sampling vals would contain an individual person’s true relation
study. Theyfoundafixedeffectfortherelationbetween ofsocialmediauseandwell-being. However, theaccu-
passive social media use (in steps of five minutes) and racyoftheseparametersonlyholdsassumingadequate
well-being(howhappysomeonefeltinthemomenton sampling on both the between- and the within-person
a 7-point Likert scale) of .06. That association was on level. On the between-level, if we sample social media
the within-level: For the average person, spending five users that are not representative of the population we
moreminutespassivelyonsocialmediainthepasthour want to generalize to, our estimate of the variability of
than they typically do was associated with a 0.06 in- the effect is not representative either. The same limita-
crease in well-being. That fixed effect was not signifi- tion applies if we don’t obtain a representative sample
cant(p=.440). frompeople’severydaysocialmediauseandwell-being
How do we know how much that effect varies be- (e.g., via a random experience sampling procedure). If
tween people? The standard deviation of the random wedon’tstudyarepresentativesampleofaperson’slife,
slopesprovidesthatanswer. Inthecaseofourexample, inferences about the distribution of all participants in
thestandarddeviationwas0.24(σ2 =0.06fromTable our study will be flawed. Therefore, the accuracy of
3, Model 4b), more than four times as large as the av- any descriptive analysis of a distribution of individual
erage effect. From the standard deviation, we can cal- relationsdependsonsamplingonbothlevels: theindi-
culateanintervalaroundthefixedeffect,sometimesre- vidualandthegroup.
ferredtoasheterogeneityinterval(Bolgeretal.,2019), Assuming adequate sampling, the heterogeneity in-
as the 2.5 and 97.5 percentiles of the normal distribu- tervalthereforeanswersexactlythequestionwearein-
tionimpliedbythefixedeffectandthestandarddevia- terested in: What social media relations can we expect
tion(0.06±1.96x0.24). Therefore,ourheterogeneity in the population? Unfortunately, the field has not em-
interval is [-0.41, 0.53]. It tells us that 95% of person- ployed these intervals, which prevents social scientists
specificassociationsbetweensocialmediauseandwell- from being able to quantify variation in media effects
being in the population would fall within this range. from person to person in the population. Merely in-
According to the model, some people will experience spectingrandomslopesasevidenceofmeaningfulvari-
===== PAGE 8/17 =====
8
ationintherelationconfoundssample-to-samplevaria- posesoftheparticularapplication”(Kruschke,2014,p.
tion of the average relation and person-to-person vari- 336). (Note: We adopted Kruschke’s term; he didn’t
ation around the average relation. We recommend the apply ROPE to variation.) Let’s apply this definition to
fieldadoptsthepracticeofestimatingheterogeneityin- ourworkingexample. Beforewecollectdata,wedecide
tervals. As a quantitative discipline that is interested that our fixed effect of social media use on well-being
in variability of a parameter, we need to define how to hasnoteworthyvariationiftheeffectheterogeneitydis-
estimate that parameter before we can even begin to tributionexceedsarangeof±0.3Likert-pointsaround
interpretvariability. the fixed effect. Note that we operate on the natural
scale and not on standardized units because the natu-
Interpretingvariation ralscaleiseasiertointerpretandrequiresmoreprecise
theory (Baguley, 2009). Note also that this number is
Nowthatitcanbequantified,shouldweignoreeffect
entirelyarbitrary;“ROPElimits,bydefinition,cannotbe
heterogeneityorconsideritworthyoffurtherinvestiga-
uniquely’correct,’butinsteadareestablishedbypracti-
tion? Many social scientists hold the view that varia-
cal aims” (Kruschke, 2014, p. 338). We need expert
tionaroundeffectsisindirectevidenceofso-called’hid-
knowledgetodetermineourROPEandprovidecontext
den’moderators(Kunert,2016),therebyseeingallvari-
foranalyseswhichuseitasstandardinourmodels.
ationasmeaningfulandworthyoffurtherexamination.
For some, 0.3 will represent a meaningful and sen-
However,wecautionagainstadoptingthispositionasa
sible cutoff for this effect; for others, it won’t. Like
default. As we have explained, few, if any, psycholog-
Bayesianproceduresthatclearlycommunicatepriorbe-
ical phenomena will be invariant and much variation
liefs about an effect, being transparent and putting
wecanconsidernoise(e.g.,fromthesamplingstrategy,
ROPE up for discussion enables others to better scru-
sample size, the size of the fixed effect, measurement
tinize how we deal with effect heterogeneity (Dienes,
error,tonamejustafew). Explainingallvariationmay
2019). With this procedure, we communicate to read-
practicallybeimpossible—evenwithinaperson-specific
ers that we only find the variation around a fixed ef-
modelling approach that sacrifices parsimony of the
fectworthyoffurtherstudyifthatvariationdoesn’tfall
modelforbetterprediction(Howard&Hoffman,2018).
withintheROPE.
To distinguish meaningful from random variation—to
After having defined our ROPE, we need to test the
sort thesignal from thenoise—we suggest aprincipled
variation against the ROPE. Here, we don’t rely on the
workflow that follows three steps (see Table 1). First,
observedrandomslopes,butthetheoreticaldistribution
we can compare models as a baseline test. Second,
around the fixed effect, that is, the heterogeneity dis-
wemustdefineaRegionofPracticalEquivalence(here-
tribution from which we draw the heterogeneity inter-
afterROPE;Kruschke,2014)aroundthefixedeffectand
val (Bolger et al., 2019). The observed random effects
testourheterogeneitydistributionagainstthisROPEto
in the sample distract from the actual purpose of the
identify noteworthy variation. Third, we must define
model,whichistomakeaninferencetothepopulation.
a Smallest Effect Size of Interest (hereafter SESOI; An-
Asweexplainedinthesectiononquantifyingvariation,
vari et al., 2021; Lakens et al., 2018 and compare the
we can estimate this theoretical distribution with the
heterogeneity distribution against it. All of these steps
fixedeffectanditsstandarddeviation.
shouldbetakentogether,notinapiecemealway.
Wethencancalculatetheareaunderthattheoretical
First, Bolger et al., 2019 recommend model compar-
distributiontoinferwhatproportionofmediausersfall
isons as a starting point. During that step, we compare
below or above certain thresholds. In our recurring ex-
a model without random slopes to a model with ran-
ample,wehaveanaveragerelationof0.06andastan-
dom slopes. Goodness of fit is the standard by which
darddeviationof0.24. OurROPEof±0.3Likert-point
model comparisons are judged. If the slopes signifi-
hence ranges from –0.24 to 0.36 (.06 ± 0.3). Now, we
cantly improve model fit, we have initial evidence that
can calculate what proportion of our distribution falls
theremightbemeaningfulvariationaroundtheaverage
outside the ROPE. For this example, the area outside
effect. As already outlined earlier, this step is far from
this range is 22%. Depending on the research context,
conclusive. Theoretically, we know that people are dif-
we could conclude that there is therefore noteworthy
ferent and a model with random slopes will almost al-
variationaroundthefixedeffect(fordetailsonthecal-
ways yield a better fit (Barr et al., 2013). Therefore,
culation,seehttps://osf.io/b7rpx/).
modelcomparisonprovidesanecessary,butnotasuffi-
Note several points here: Because we use the the-
cient,firststep.
oretical distribution, and not observed slopes, we can
Second, we must define a ROPE which “indicates a
make an inference to the population. However, as we
small range of parameter values that are considered to
explained before, we have used a theoretical distribu-
bepracticallyequivalentto[thefixedeffect]forthepur-
===== PAGE 9/17 =====
9
Table1
Anexplanationofthethreestepsofinterpretingvariation.
Step Explanation
Modelcomparison Statisticallycompareamodelwithafixedeffectandran-
domslopetoamodelwithonlyafixedeffect.
RegionofPracticalEquivalence(ROPE) Definearegionofpracticalequivalenceandestimateand
compare theoretical distribution of average effect against
it.
SmallesEffectSizeofInterest(SESOI) Defineasmallesteffectsizeofinterestandcomparetheo-
reticaldistributionofaverageeffectagainstit.
tion derived from point estimates of fixed effect and cut cases (red distribution in Figure 3): For example,
its standard deviation. For an inference that takes un- wemighthavenoteworthyvariation, butsomepartsof
certainty into account, ideally we need to estimate the thedistributionareequivalenttoapracticallyinsignifi-
proportion of the theoretical distribution outside ROPE canteffect(i.e.,insidetheSESOIrange). Here,wehave
for each parameter combination in the posterior. This noteworthy variation and large parts of the population
approachisthereforemoreinformativethanmerelyde- showalargeeffect.
scribingwhatproportionofobservedrandomslopesare For our running example, we choose a large SESOI.
outside a cutoff, because observed random slopes de- Just like with ROPE, we define our SESOI on the raw
scribe the sample, not the population. Second, effect scale. Dependingontheoutcome,astandardizedeffect
heterogeneityisindependentofthelocationofthefixed that has medium size by Cohen’s (1988) benchmarks
effect: We specify the ROPE around wherever the fixed might be practically meaningless (Anvari et al., 2021;
effect will fall. Therefore, ROPE limits (i.e., its width) Baguley, 2009; Lakens et al., 2018). Therefore, once
arerelativetothelocationofthefixedeffect. again we need to apply our domain knowledge to de-
Third,nowthatwehavetestedwhetherthereiscon- finewhatweconsiderameaningful,absoluteeffect. In
siderablevariationaroundthefixedeffect,wecanmove ourexample,sayweonlyregardlargeassociationsofat
ontoinvestigatethelocationofthedistributionandits leastoneLikert-pointorlargerasrelevant(14%onthe
widthinrelationtoanabsolutelimit. Thiscombination 7-point response range). We found noteworthy varia-
answers whether there are meaningful associations in tion in the previous step because the distribution ex-
thepopulation. Toinvestigatewhetherthevariationwe ceededourROPE,butonly0.00007%ofthedistribution
considernoteworthyalsomatterspractically,weneedto fall outside the SESOI (similar to the blue distribution
define a smallest effect size of interest (SESOI) for the in Figure 3). Theoretically, we can expect 0.00007%
relationshipofinterest(e.g.,socialmediauseandwell- of the population to exhibit an association between so-
being). TheSESOItellsushowlargeanassociationhas cial media use and well-being that we consider plausi-
tobeforustoconsideritpracticallyrelevant(Anvariet bly meaningful. Note again that we’re using point es-
al.,2021;Anvari&Lakens,2021;Lakensetal.,2018). timates; ideally, we inspect what proportion of the het-
Both the ROPE (i.e., width of distribution, relative erogeneityinterval’slowerandupperboundslieoutside
limits) and the SESOI (i.e., location and width of dis- theSESOI.
tribution, absolute limits) matter, see Figure 3: Our ef- Such a small absolute percentage signals few prac-
fectheterogeneitymightwellexceedtheROPE,butthat tically relevant effects in the population. But what if
doesn’t mean it’s practically relevant. The distribution the number had been higher, say 17%? Is 17% enough
ofassociationswecaninferfromoursamplemightwell people to conclude that we need to explain that vari-
have noteworthy variation, but fall completely within ation? Again, there is no absolute rule here and the
the bounds of our SESOI (see blue distribution in Fig- answer depends on the researcher. Some will conclude
ure 3). Then we conclude that there is noteworthy that the variation in associations in itself is notewor-
variation,butthatvariationoperateswithinarangewe thy and probably worth studying (i.e., ROPE), were it
don’tconsiderrelevant. Ontheflipside,ourdistribution not for the generally small associations (i.e., SESOI):
might not exceed the ROPE, but lie completely outside Explaining even noteworthy variation might be incon-
ourSESOI(greydistributioninFigure3). Nowwedon’t sequential. Others will conclude that the variation in
find noteworthy variation, but everyone in the popula- associationsisnoteworthyandlargeenoughinenough
tionshowsarelevant,largeenoughassociation. Finally, casestoberelevantandworthyoffurtherstudy. What-
and probably most common, there may be less clear- everresearchersdecide,weurgethemtobeexplicitand
===== PAGE 10/17 =====
10
Figure3
ExamplesofhowROPE(RegionofPracticalEquivalence)andSESOI(SmallestEffectSizeofInterest)interact. Distribu-
tionshavedifferentROPEs(barsontop),butthesameSESOI(dashedverticallines). Theredcaseshowsadistribution
thatisoutsideROPEandoutsideSESOI.ThebluecaseshowsadistributionthatisoutsideROPE,butinsideSESOI.The
greycaseshowsadistributionthatisinsidetheROPE,butoutsidetheSESOI.
transparent in their choices of both ROPE and SESOI. the effect across the population, because they model
As a minimal standard, we suggest preregistration of how our average effect differs, on average, between
ROPE and SESOI as a tool for subjecting our hypothe- groupsofpeople. Oncemore,considertheStroopeffect
sis of effect heterogeneity to a more severe test (Lak- thatweusedasanexampleearlieron. Thefixedeffect
ens,2019)—ordisplayarangeofROPEsandSESOIsso willshowthatpeople,onaverage,aresloweronincon-
readerscaninterprettheresultsbetter(Dienes,2019). gruent trials compared to congruent trials. However,
that effect likely varies, such that some people show
Explainingvariation little slowing and others extreme slowing. For exam-
ple, differences in visual acuity might induce system-
Once we know how to quantify variation in media
atic differences between participants. If some partici-
effectsandhavedeterminedthemagnitudeofvariation
pantshaveforgottentheircontactlenses,theymightbe
necessarytoberelevantforsocialscienceresearch, the
slowertoreadandthereforeshowadifferenteffect.
finallogicalstepistoaskwhatfactorsexplainthatvari-
Inthecaseofsocialmediaandwell-being,ifwefind
ation. For whom does the effect differ and for what
that the relation between social media use and well-
reasons? A large amount of variation around the aver-
being has high variability, it’s possible that modelling
age effect can mean that there are unobserved factors
knowledge about group membership can explain parts
that explain why some people show a large and others
ofthatvariability. Forexample,whethersomeoneiden-
a small effect. It might be well worth to study these
tifieswithaparticulargendermightbeamoderatorbe-
factors. But if we rely on a variable-centered approach
causetherelationispresentforteenagegirls,butabsent
for studying those factors, we are yet again interested
for boys (Orben et al., 2019). But note that we infer
in fixed effects. We agree with previous research that
thatthismoderationgeneralizesonlytothepopulation
it’sanimportantstepforsocialmediaresearchtoiden-
whichwassampled: AlargegroupofBritishyoungpeo-
tifythosepeoplewhoaremoresusceptibletomediaef-
ple aged 10 to 15 years old. We’re not saying the rela-
fects(Beyensetal.,2020;Griffioenetal.,2021;Orben,
tion is negative for a specific girl, or null for a specific
2020b; Orben et al., 2019; Valkenburg & Peter, 2013).
boy. There’slittledoubtmanygirlsinthedatashowno
However, aslongaswe’recommittedtogroup-levelin-
relationwhereasanumberofboysshownegativeasso-
ferences, that step should not be taken for individual
ciations. Putdifferently, identifyingmoderatorswillre-
social media users; instead, we must study systematic
duceeffectheterogeneity,butcannotentirelyeliminate
individual differences or differences in the content of
it (Bolger et al., 2019). Identifying moderators echoes
socialmediathatcanaccountforvariationinsocialme-
callstotakeeffectheterogeneityseriously(Bryanetal.,
diaeffects.
2021),becausemoderatorsanswerthequestionofwhat
Identifyingsusceptiblepeoplemeansidentifyingfac-
factorsingroupsofpeoplecanexplainmediaeffectsfor
tors that can explain systematic variation in the effect.
groups—notwhatfactorsplayaroleforindividualme-
Statistically, those factors are modelled as moderators
diausers.
(Bryan et al., 2021). Moderators explain variation in
===== PAGE 11/17 =====
11
Identifying moderators in a disciplined, theory- tothegrouportoanindividual,identifyingandtesting
driven, and accurate way is difficult and we expect so- moderatorsshouldonlyhappeninconnectionwithtest-
cial scientists will be tempted to adopt a ’shot-gun ap- ingcausality. Acommoncause(akaconfounder)might
proach’ and measure and test a large number of con- increasevariationintherelationbetweentwovariables
structs as moderators. This strategy is doomed to fail- that are truly unrelated. However, it would be a fal-
ure. It will lead to high false positive rates and fool lacy to affirm the consequent: Finding that controlling
social scientists into giving more weight to those mod- forathirdvariablereducesheterogeneitydoesn’tmean
erators that ’worked’ (Munafò et al., 2017; Nosek et this variable is a common cause. Similarly, finding that
al., 2018). Testing a wide slate of seemingly plausi- a third variable moderates a relation doesn’t necessar-
ble moderators will inevitably yield statistically signif- ily mean that we’ve identified a causal process (Rohrer
icant results; but ignoring researcher degrees of free- et al., 2021). Introducing a time lag and focusing on
dom means these results will not be informative unless within-person moderators can help in identifying such
moreadvancedstatisticalmethodsareused(Gelman& causality, but it’s no guarantee that we’ve truly identi-
Loken, 2013; Simmons et al., 2011). Such exploratory fiedcausality(Rohrer&Murayama,2021;VanderWeele
findings must be subjected to confirmatory replications etal.,2016). Forthat,weneedcarefulexperimentation,
(Frankenhuis & Nettle, 2018). Ideally, theory should causalmodelling,andstrongertheories(Rohrer,2018).
identifymoderatorsthatresearcherstestintrulyconfir- The relation between aggregate social media use and
matory tests (Fried, 2020). Only such an approach can well-beingwecurrentlyhavecanonlybeastand-infor
systematically explain effect heterogeneity that can be a causal effect, and the field needs to put more effort
generalizedtothepopulation. into understanding causes and effects. Studying varia-
If, instead, social media research is truly interested tioninaveragerelationsisthusonlyameanstotheend
infollowingaperson-specificapproachandstudyingef- ofidentifyingcausality.
fects for each individual person, we argue that such a
focus requires a different approach. Researchers then Conclusion
need to study a single person over many measurement
Social science has shown that the average relations
occasions, which is sometimes called N = 1 studies.
linking general social media use to general well-being
Theyrepresentanintriguingalternativeresearchdirec-
are mostly close to zero. We can use these average re-
tion and are gaining popularity (Matias et al., 2022).
lations as a vantage point to identify factors that make
Such N = 1 studies allow inferences to the person un-
somepeoplemoreorlesssusceptibletopotentialeffects
der study only; they reveal effects unique to the spe-
of social media. However, we believe the field must be
cific person. Given the noisiness of social behavior, ob-
clear on what inferences we want to make if we pivot
tainingarepresentativesampleofthatspecificperson’s
from studying groups to studying individuals. Do we
usageepisodesaswellasensuringenoughpowertode-
want to follow a person-specific approach? If so, we
tectapotentiallysmalleffectspecifictothatpersonmay
must inspect individual people and make inferences to
require measuring variables hundreds of times and dif-
individual people. Or do we want to inspect variation
ferentanalysistechniques(e.g.,p-techniques;Molenaar
onthegroup-level? Thenwemustinspecteffecthetero-
andCampbell,2009;Roseetal.,2013).
geneityonthegroup-level,andnotconflatethisprocess
Oncewe’veconductedamodelperperson,wecanin-
withanidiographictradition.
formallysummarizetheresultsacrossallpeople’smod-
Here, we’ve argued that the field aims at individual-
els,butit’sinadmissibletoaggregatetheresultstogen-
level inferences, but inspects group-level variation.
eralize to the population these people come from. Re-
We’ve outlined how social media effects research has
centstatisticalmodelsaddressthisproblembyemploy-
gotten to this state and propose a path forward. Ei-
ing a bottom-up approach and finding commonalities
therwecommittogroup-levelinferenceswhichfollowa
among all person- specific models, whilst still allowing
principledapproachtothestudyofeffectheterogeneity:
eachpersontheirownmodelwiththeirownparameters
continue investigating fixed effects, develop principles
(GIMME,Beltzetal.,2016).
toquantifyandinterpreteffectheterogeneity,andiden-
Alternatively, researchers can also describe and un-
tifymoderatorsoftherelationbetweensocialmediause
derstandanindividualpersonthroughaqualitativeap-
and well-being. Or we commit to a person-specific ap-
proach. A qualitative approach won’t lead to quantifi-
proachandfocusonmakinginferencestoindividualso-
ablesocialmediaeffectestimates,buttoanuancedun-
cialmediausersandconductmorequalitativeandN=
derstanding of social media use and well-being in that
1 studies. Either of these paths will be insightful, but
specificperson.
wemustn’tconfusethem.
Regardlessofwhetherit’sourgoaltomakeinferences
===== PAGE 12/17 =====
12
AuthorContact References
Niklas Johannes https://orcid.org/ Aalbers, G., Vanden Abeele, M. M. P., Hendrickson,
0000-0001-6612-2842 A. T., de Marez, L., & Keijsers, L. (2021).
Philipp K. Masur https://orcid.org/ Caught in the moment: Are there person-
0000-0003-3065-7305 specific associations between momentary pro-
MattiVuorrehttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-5052-066X crastination and passively measured smart-
Corresponding author: Andrew K Przybyl- phone use? Mobile Media & Communication,
ski https://orcid.org/0000-0001-5547-2185, 2050157921993896.https://doi.org/10.1177/
andy.przybylski@oii.ox.ac.uk 2050157921993896
Anvari, F., Kievit, R., Lakens, D., Przybylski, A. K.,
ConflictofInterestandFunding Tiokhin,L.,Wiernik,B.M.,&Orben,A.(2021).
Evaluating the practical relevance of observed
Grants from the Huo Family Foundation and Eco-
effect sizes in psychological research. PsyArXiv.
nomic and Social Research Council (ES/T008709/1)
https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/g3vtr
supportedNJ,MV,andAKP.Theauthorsdeclarenocon-
Anvari, F., & Lakens, D. (2021). Using anchor-based
flictsofinterest. Thefundershadnoroleintheconcep-
methods to determine the smallest effect size
tionofthispaper,decisiontopublish,orpreparationof
of interest. Journal of Experimental Social Psy-
themanuscript.
chology,96,104159.https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jesp.2021.104159
AuthorContributions
Appel, M., Marker, C., & Gnambs, T. (2020). Are so-
Niklas had the idea for this article and wrote a first cial media ruining our lives? a review of meta-
draft. He discussed that draft with Philipp, Andy, and analyticevidence.ReviewofGeneralPsychology,
Matti. Andygavefeedbackonthestructureofthearticle 24(1), 60–74. https://doi.org/10.1177/
initsearlystages;Mattiprovidedfeedbackonthelogic 1089268019880891
ofeffectheterogeneity; Philippgavefeedbackonstruc- Baguley, T. (2009). Standardized or simple effect size:
tureandco-wrotethenextdraftswithNiklas,including Whatshouldbereported?BritishJournalofPsy-
developingtheprincipledapproachofinterpretingvari- chology, 100(3), 603–617. https://doi.org/10.
ation. NiklascreatedthefiguresindialoguewithPhilipp 1348/000712608X377117
andAndyfirst;thenMattiandPhilipprevisedseveralof Barr,D.J.,Levy,R.,Scheepers,C.,&Tily,H.J.(2013).
thefigures. Allauthorsreviewed,revised,andapproved Random effects structure for confirmatory hy-
thefinalversionofthemanuscript. pothesis testing: Keep it maximal. Journal of
Memory and Language, 68(3), 255–278. https:
OpenSciencePractices //doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2012.11.001
Bates,D.,Maechler,M.,Bolker,B.,&Walker,S.(2015).
Fittinglinearmixed-effectsmodelsusinglme4.
Journal of Statistical Software, 67(1), 1–48.
https://doi.org/10.18637/jss.v067.i01
Theeditorialprocessforthisarticlereliedonstream- Bayer,J.B.,Triu,P.,&Ellison,N.B.(2020).Socialme-
lined peer review where peer reviews obtained from diaelements,ecologies,andeffects.AnnualRe-
previous journal(s) were moved forward and used as viewofPsychology,71(1),471–497.https://doi.
the basis for the editorial decision. These reviews are org/10.1146/annurev-psych-010419-050944
shared in the supplementary files. The identities of the BBC.(2021).Chinacutschildren’sonlinegamingtoone
reviewers are shown or hidden in accordance with the hour. BBC News. https://www.bbc.com/news/
policyofthejournalthatoriginallyobtainedthem. technology-58384457
This article earned the Open Code badge for making Beard, K. W. (2005). Internet addiction: A review of
theanalysiscodeavailable. Ithasbeenverifiedthatthe currentassessmenttechniquesandpotentialas-
analysisreproducedtheresultspresentedinthearticle. sessment questions. CyberPsychology & Behav-
The entire editorial process is published in the online ior, 8(1), 7–14. https://doi.org/10.1089/cpb.
supplement. 2005.8.7
Beltz, A. M., Wright, A. G. C., Sprague, B. N., & Mole-
naar, P. C. M. (2016). Bridging the nomoth-
etic and idiographic approaches to the analy-
===== PAGE 13/17 =====
13
sisofclinicaldata.Assessment,23(4),447–458. Davidson, B. I., Ellis, D. A., Stachl, C., Taylor, P. J., &
https://doi.org/10.1177/1073191116648209 Joinson, A. N. (2022). Measurement practices
Bergman,L.R.,&Vargha,A.(2013).Matchingmethod exacerbatethegeneralizabilitycrisis:Noveldig-
to problem: A developmental science perspec- ital measures can help. Behavioral and Brain
tive. European Journal of Developmental Psy- Sciences, 45. https://doi.org/10.1017/
chology,10(1),9–28.https://doi.org/10.1080/ S0140525X21000534
17405629.2012.732920 DeBruine, L. M., & Barr, D. J. (2021). Understanding
Beyens, I., Pouwels, J. L., van Driel, I. I., Keijsers, L., & mixed-effects models through data simulation.
Valkenburg, P. M. (2020). The effect of social Advances in Methods and Practices in Psycholog-
media on well-being differs from adolescent ical Science, 4(1), 1–15. https://doi.org/10.
to adolescent. Scientific Reports, 10(1), 10763. 1177/2515245920965119
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-67727-7 Dickson, K., Richardson, M., Kwan, I., Macdowall,
Bolger, N., Zee, K. S., Rossignac-Milon, M., & Hassin, W., Burchett, H., Stansfield, C., & Thomas, J.
R. R. (2019). Causal processes in psychology (2019). Screen-based activities and children and
areheterogeneous.JournalofExperimentalPsy- young people’s mental health and psychosocial
chology:General,148(4),601–618.https://doi. wellbeing: A systematic map of reviews. EPPI-
org/10.1037/xge0000558 Centre,SocialScienceResearchUnit,UCLInsti-
Bolker,B.M.,Brooks,M.E.,Clark,C.J.,Geange,S.W., tuteofEducation,UniversityCollegeLondon.
Poulsen, J. R., Stevens, M. H. H., & White, Dienes,Z.(2019).Howdoiknowwhatmytheorypre-
J. S. S. (2009). Generalized linear mixed mod- dicts?AdvancesinMethodsandPracticesinPsy-
els:Apracticalguideforecologyandevolution. chological Science, 2(4), 364–377. https://doi.
Trends in Ecology and Evolution, 24(3), 127– org/10.1177/2515245919876960
135. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tree.2008. Dienlin,T.,&Johannes,N.(2020).Theimpactofdigital
10.008 technology use on adolescent well-being. Dia-
Bruggeman, H., Van Hiel, A., Van Hal, G., & Van Don- loguesinClinicalNeuroscience,22(2),135–142.
gen,S.(2019).Doestheuseofdigitalmediaaf- https://doi.org/10.31887/DCNS.2020.22.2/
fectpsychologicalwell-being?anempiricaltest tdienlin
amongchildrenaged9to12.ComputersinHu- Dienlin, T., Masur, P. K., & Trepte, S. (2017). Rein-
man Behavior, 101, 104–113. https://doi.org/ forcement or displacement? the reciprocity of
10.1016/j.chb.2019.07.015 ftf,im,andsnscommunicationandtheireffects
Bryan, C. J., Tipton, E., & Yeager, D. S. (2021). Be- on loneliness and life satisfaction. Journal of
havioural science is unlikely to change the Computer-MediatedCommunication,22(2),71–
world without a heterogeneity revolution. Na- 87.https://doi.org/10.1111/jcc4.12183
ture Human Behaviour, 5(8), 980–989. https: Efron,B.,&Morris,C.(1977).Stein’sparadoxinstatis-
//doi.org/10.1038/s41562-021-01143-3 tics.ScientificAmerican,236(5),119–127.
Carr, N. (2011). The shallows—how the internet is Ellis, D. A. (2019). Are smartphones really that bad?
changingthewaywethink,readandremember. improving the psychological measurement of
AtlanticBooks. technology-relatedbehaviors.ComputersinHu-
Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the be- man Behavior. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.
havioralsciences(2nd).LawrenceErlbaum. 2019.03.006
CouncilonCommunicationsandMedia.(2016).Media Eronen, M. I., & Bringmann, L. F. (2021). The the-
and young minds. Pediatrics, 138(5). https:// orycrisisinpsychology:Howtomoveforward.
doi.org/10.1542/peds.2016-2591 Perspectives on Psychological Science, 16(4),
Coyne, S. M., Rogers, A. A., Zurcher, J. D., Stockdale, 779–788. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 /
L., & Booth, M. (2019). Does time spent using 1745691620970586
social media impact mental health?: An eight Fisher,A.J.,Medaglia,J.D.,&Jeronimus,B.F.(2018).
year longitudinal study. Computers in Human Lackofgroup-to-individualgeneralizabilityisa
Behavior, 106160. https://doi.org/10.1016/ threat to human subjects research. Proceedings
j.chb.2019.106160 of the National Academy of Sciences, 115(27),
Dahly, D. (2021). Perils of personalized treatment ef- E6106–E6115. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.
fects. https://statsepi.substack.com/p/perils- 1711978115
of-personalized-treatments Frankenhuis, W., & Nettle, D. (2018). Open science is
liberating and can foster creativity. Perspectives
===== PAGE 14/17 =====
14
onPsychologicalScience,13(4),439–447.https: when people form impressions of others. Psy-
//doi.org/10.1177/1745691618767878 chological Science, 1–11. https://doi.org/10.
Fried, E. I. (2020). Lack of theory building and testing 1177/09567976211019950
impedesprogressinthefactorandnetworklit- Houghton, S., Lawrence, D., Hunter, S. C., Rosenberg,
erature. Psychological Inquiry, 31(4), 271–288. M., Zadow, C., Wood, L., & Shilton, T. (2018).
https://doi.org/10.1080/1047840X.2020. Reciprocalrelationshipsbetweentrajectoriesof
1853461 depressive symptoms and screen media use
Gelman, A. (2015). The connection between varying during adolescence. Journal of Youth and Ado-
treatment effects and the crisis of unreplica- lescence, 47(11), 2453–2467. https://doi.org/
bleresearch:Abayesianperspective.Journalof 10.1007/s10964-018-0901-y
Management,41(2),632–643.https://doi.org/ Howard, M. C., & Hoffman, M. E. (2018). Variable-
10.1073/pnas.1711978115 centered, person-centered, and person-specific
Gelman, A., & Loken, E. (2013). The garden of fork- approaches: Where theory meets the method.
ing paths: Why multiple comparisons can be a Organizational Research Methods, 21(4), 846–
problem, even when there is no “fishing expe- 876. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 /
dition”or“p-hacking”andtheresearchhypoth- 1094428117744021
esis was posited ahead of time. Department of IJzerman, H., Lewis, N. A., Przybylski, A. K., Wein-
Statistics,ColumbiaUniversity,348(1-17),3. stein,N.,DeBruine,L.,Ritchie,S.J.,Vazire,S.,
Griffioen, N., Rooij, M. v., Lichtwarck-Aschoff, A., & Forscher,P.S.,Morey,R.D.,Ivory,J.D.,&An-
Granic, I. (2020). Toward improved methods vari, F. (2020). Use caution when applying be-
insocialmediaresearch.Technology,Mind,and havioural science to policy. Nature Human Be-
Behavior, 1(1). https://doi.org/10.1037/ haviour,1–3.https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-
tmb0000005 020-00990-w
Griffioen, N., Scholten, H., Lichtwarck-Aschoff, A., van Johannes, N., Dienlin, T., Bakhshi, H., & Przybylski,
Rooij, M., & Granic, I. (2021). Everyone does A.K.(2022).Noeffectofdifferenttypesofme-
it—differently:Awindowintoemergingadults’ diaonwell-being.ScientificReports,12(61),1–
smartphoneuse.HumanitiesandSocialSciences 13. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-
Communications, 8(1), 1–11. https://doi.org/ 03218-7
10.1057/s41599-021-00863-1 Kardefelt-Winther, D., Heeren, A., Schimmenti, A.,
Grimes,T.,Anderson,J.A.,&Bergen,L.(2008).Media van Rooij, A., Maurage, P., Carras, M., Ed-
violenceandaggression:Scienceandideology. man, J., Blaszczynski, A., Khazaal, Y., & Bil-
Haaf, J. M., & Rouder, J. N. (2019). Some do and lieux,J.(2017).Howcanweconceptualizebe-
some don’t? accounting for variability of indi- haviouraladdictionwithoutpathologizingcom-
vidual difference structures. Psychonomic Bul- mon behaviours? Addiction, 112(10), 1709–
letin & Review, 26(3), 772–789. https://doi. 1715.https://doi.org/10.1111/add.13763
org/10.3758/s13423-018-1522-x Kaye, L. K., Orben, A., Ellis, D. A., Hunter, S. C.,
Hall, J. A., Xing, C., Ross, E. M., & Johnson, R. M. & Houghton, S. (2020). The conceptual and
(2019). Experimentally manipulating social methodologicalmayhemof“screen-time”.Open
media abstinence: Results of a four-week diary ScienceFramework.https://doi.org/10.31219/
study. Media Psychology, 0(0), 1–17. https:// osf.io/u4hqn
doi.org/10.1080/15213269.2019.1688171 Kross, E., Verduyn, P., Sheppes, G., Costello, C. K.,
Hamaker, E. L. (2012). Why researchers should think Jonides, J., & Ybarra, O. (2021). Social me-
"within-person": A paradigmatic rationale. In dia and well-being: Pitfalls, progress, and next
M.R.Mehl&T.S.Conner(Eds.),Handbookof steps. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 25(1), 55–
researchmethodsforstudyingdailylife(pp.43– 66. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2020.10.
61).GuilfordPress. 005
Hernán, M. A. (2018). The c-word: Scientific eu- Kruschke, J. K. (2014). Doing bayesian data analysis: A
phemisms do not improve causal inference tutorial introduction with r (2nd edition). Aca-
from observational data. American Journal of demicPress.
Public Health, 108(5), 616–619. https://doi. Kunert, R. (2016). Internal conceptual replications do
org/10.2105/AJPH.2018.304337 not increase independent replication success.
Hester, N., Xie, S. Y., & Hehman, E. (2021). Little PsychonomicBulletin&Review.https://doi.org/
between-region and between-country variance 10.3758/s13423-016-1030-9
===== PAGE 15/17 =====
15
Kushlev,K.,&Leitao,M.R.(2020).Theeffectsofsmart- chology, 10(1), 29–39. https://doi.org/10.
phones on well-being: Theoretical integration 1080/17405629.2012.747435
and research agenda. Current Opinion in Psy- Molenaar,P.C.M.,&Campbell,C.G.(2009).Thenew
chology,36,77–82.https://doi.org/10.1016/j. person-specificparadigminpsychology.Current
copsyc.2020.05.001 Directions in Psychological Science, 18(2), 112–
Lakens,D.,Scheel,A.M.,&Isager,P.M.(2018).Equiv- 117. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8721.
alence testing for psychological research: A tu- 2009.01619.x
torial.AdvancesinMethodsandPracticesinPsy- Munafò, M. R., Nosek, B. A., Bishop, D. V. M., Button,
chological Science, 1(2), 259–269. https://doi. K. S., Chambers, C. D., Percie, N., Simonsohn,
org/10.1177/2515245918770963 U., & Wagenmakers, E.-J. (2017). A manifesto
Liew, S. X., Howe, P. D. L., & Little, D. R. (2016). The forreproduciblescience.HumanNatureBehav-
appropriacyofaveraginginthestudyofcontext ior, 1, 1–9. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-
effects. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 23(5), 016-0021
1639–1646. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13423- Muthukrishna, M., & Henrich, J. (2019). A problem in
016-1032-7 theory. Nature Human Behaviour. https://doi.
Loh, K. K., & Kanai, R. (2015). How has the internet org/10.1038/s41562-018-0522-1
reshaped human cognition? The Neuroscientist. Nosek, B. A., Ebersole, C. R., DeHaven, A. C., & Mel-
https://doi.org/10.1177/1073858415595005 lor, D. T. (2018). The preregistration revolu-
Masur, P. K. (2021). Digital communication effects on tion.ProceedingsoftheNationalAcademyofSci-
loneliness and life satisfaction. In Oxford re- ences, 115(11), 2600–2606. https://doi.org/
search encyclopedia of communication. Oxford 10.1073/pnas.1708274114
University Press. https://doi.org/10.1093/ Odgers,C.L.,&Jensen,M.R.(2020).Annualresearch
acrefore/9780190228613.013.1129 review:Adolescentmentalhealthinthedigital
Matias,J.N.,Pennington,E.,&Chan,Z.T.(2022).Test- age:Facts,fears,andfuturedirections.Journal
ingconcernsabouttechnology’sbehavioralim- of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 61(3), 336–
pactswithN-of-onetrials.https://osf.io/jtdng/ 348.https://doi.org/10.1111/jcpp.13190
Meier, A., Domahidi, E., & Günter, E. (in press). Orben, A. (2020a). The sisyphean cycle of technol-
Computer-mediated communication and men- ogypanics.PerspectivesonPsychologicalScience,
tal health: A computational scoping review of 15(5), 1143–1157. https://doi.org/10.1177/
aninterdisciplinaryfield.InS.Yates&R.E.Rice 1745691620919372
(Eds.), The oxford handbook of digital technol- Orben,A.(2020b).Teenagers,screensandsocialmedia:
ogyandsociety.OxfordUniversityPress. A narrative review of reviews and key studies.
Meier, A., & Reinecke, L. (2020). Computer-mediated Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology.
communication, social media, and mental https://doi.org/10.1007/s00127-019-01825-4
health: A conceptual and empirical meta- Orben,A.,Dienlin,T.,&Przybylski,A.K.(2019).Social
review. Communication Research, 1–28. https: media’senduringeffectonadolescentlifesatis-
//doi.org/10.1177/0093650220958224 faction. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Mitev, K., Weinstein, N., Karabeliova, S., Nguyen, T., Sciences, 116(21), 10226–10228. https://doi.
Law, W., & Przybylski, A. (2021). Social me- org/10.1073/pnas.1902058116
dia use only helps, and does not harm, daily Orben, A., & Przybylski, A. K. (2019). Screens, teens,
interactions and well-being. Technology, Mind, and psychological well-being: Evidence from
and Behavior. https://doi.org/10.1037/ three time-use-diary studies. Psychological Sci-
tmb0000033 ence, 30(5), 682–696. https://doi.org/10.
Molenaar, P. C. M. (2004). A manifesto on psychol- 1177/0956797619830329
ogyasidiographicscience:Bringingtheperson Orben, A., Weinstein, N., & Przybylski, A. K. (2020).
back into scientific psychology, this time for- Only holistic and iterative change will fix dig-
ever. Measurement: Interdisciplinary Research & ital technology research. Psychological Inquiry,
Perspective,2(4),201–218.https://doi.org/10. 31(3), 235–241. https://doi.org/10.1080/
1207/s15366359mea0204_1 1047840X.2020.1820221
Molenaar, P. C. M. (2013). On the necessity to use Parry,D.A.,Davidson,B.I.,Sewall,C.J.R.,Fisher,J.T.,
person-specificdataanalysisapproachesinpsy- Mieczkowski, H., & Quintana, D. S. (2021). A
chology.EuropeanJournalofDevelopmentalPsy- systematicreviewandmeta-analysisofdiscrep-
ancies between logged and self-reported digi-
===== PAGE 16/17 =====
16
tal media use. Nature Human Behaviour, 1–13. media use on well-being: A longitudinal anal-
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-021-01117-5 ysis of adolescents across nine years. Journal
Parry, D. A., Fisher, J. T., Mieczkowski, H., Sewall, ofComputer-MediatedCommunication.https://
C.J.R.,&Davidson,B.I.(2021).Socialmedia doi.org/10.1093/jcmc/zmaa014
and well-being: A methodological perspective. Senn, S. (2016). Mastering variation: Variance compo-
CurrentOpinioninPsychology.https://doi.org/ nents and personalised medicine. Statistics in
10.1016/j.copsyc.2021.11.005 Medicine, 35(7), 966–977. https://doi.org/10.
Przybylski, A. K., Nguyen, T. T., Law, W., & Weinstein, 1002/sim.6739
N. (2021). Does taking a short break from so- Senn, S. (2018). Statistical pitfalls of personalized
cialmediahaveapositiveeffectonwell-being? medicine. Nature, 563(7733), 619–621. https:
evidence from three preregistered field experi- //doi.org/10.1038/d41586-018-07535-2
ments. Journal of Technology in Behavioral Sci- Shaw,H.,Ellis,D.A.,Geyer,K.,Davidson,B.I.,Ziegler,
ence. https://doi.org/10.1007/s41347-020- F. V., & Smith, A. (2020). Quantifying smart-
00189-w phone “use”: Choice of measurement impacts
Przybylski, A. K., & Weinstein, N. (2017). A large-scale relationshipsbetween“usage”andhealth.Tech-
test of the goldilocks hypothesis: Quantifying nology, Mind, and Behavior, 1(2). https://doi.
therelationsbetweendigital-screenuseandthe org/10.1037/tmb0000022
mental well-being of adolescents. Psychological Siebers, T., Beyens, I., Pouwels, J. L., & Valkenburg,
Science, 28(2), 204–215. https://doi.org/10. P. M. (2021). Social media and distraction: An
1177/0956797616678438 experience sampling study among adolescents.
Richters,J.E.(2021).Incredibleutility:Thelostcauses Media Psychology, 1–24. https://doi.org/10.
andcausaldebrisofpsychologicalscience.Basic 1080/15213269.2021.1959350
and Applied Social Psychology, 43(6), 366–405. Simmons,J.P.,Nelson,L.D.,&Simonsohn,U.(2011).
https://doi.org/10.1080/01973533.2021. False-positive psychology: Undisclosed flexibil-
1979003 ity in data collection and analysis allows pre-
Rohrer, J. M. (2018). Thinking clearly about correla- senting anything as significant. Psychological
tions and causation: Graphical causal models Science, 22(11), 1359–1366. https://doi.org/
forobservationaldata.AdvancesinMethodsand 10.1177/0956797611417632
Practices in Psychological Science, 1(1), 27–42. Thorisdottir, I. E., Sigurvinsdottir, R., Asgeirsdottir,
https://doi.org/10.1177/2515245917745629 B. B., Allegrante, J. P., & Sigfusdottir, I. D.
Rohrer,J.M.,Hünermund,P.,Arslan,R.C.,&Elson,M. (2019). Active and passive social media use
(2021).That’salottoPROCESS!pitfallsofpop- and symptoms of anxiety and depressed mood
ularpathmodels.PsyArXiv.https://doi.org/10. among icelandic adolescents. Cyberpsychology,
31234/osf.io/paeb7 Behavior, and Social Networking. https://doi.
Rohrer, J. M., & Murayama, K. (2021). These are not org/10.1089/cyber.2019.0079
the effects you are looking for: Causality and Turkle, S. (2012). Alone together: Why we expect more
the within-/between-person distinction in lon- from technology and less from each other. Basic
gitudinal data analysis. PsyArXiv. https://doi. books.
org/10.31234/osf.io/tg4vj Valkenburg, P. M. (2022). Social media use and well-
Rose, L. T., Rouhani, P., & Fischer, K. W. (2013). The being: What we know and what we need
science of the individual. Mind, Brain, and Ed- to know. Current Opinion in Psychology, 45,
ucation, 7(3), 152–158. https://doi.org/10. 101294. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.copsyc.
1111/mbe.12021 2021.12.006
Satchell,L.P.,Fido,D.,Harper,C.A.,Shaw,H.,David- Valkenburg,P.M.,Meier,A.,&Beyens,I.(2022).Social
son, B., Ellis, D. A., Hart, C. M., Jalil, R., Bar- media use and its impact on adolescent men-
toli, A. J., Kaye, L. K., Lancaster, G. L. J., & talhealth:Anumbrellareviewoftheevidence.
Pavetich,M.(2021).Developmentofanoffline- CurrentOpinioninPsychology,44,58–68.https:
friend addiction questionnaire (O-FAQ): Are //doi.org/10.1016/j.copsyc.2021.08.017
most people really social addicts? Behavior Re- Valkenburg, P. M., & Peter, J. (2013). The differential
searchMethods,53(3),1097–1106.https://doi. susceptibilitytomediaeffectsmodel.Journalof
org/10.3758/s13428-020-01462-9 Communication, 63(2), 221–243. https://doi.
Schemer,C.,Masur,P.K.,Geiß,S.,Müller,P.,&Schäfer, org/10.1111/jcom.12024
S. (2020). The impact of internet and social
===== PAGE 17/17 =====
17
Valkenburg, P. M., Pouwels, J. L., Beyens, I., van Driel, von Eye, A. (2009). Universals and individuals—is
I. I., & Keijsers, L. (2021). Adolescents’ so- this the end of the discussion? Measure-
cialmediaexperiencesandtheirself-esteem:A ment: Interdisciplinary Research & Perspective,
person-specific susceptibility perspective. Tech- 7(1), 3–7. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 /
nology,Mind,andBehavior.https://doi.org/10. 15366360802715320
1037/tmb0000037 Whitlock, J., & Masur, P. K. (2019). Disentangling
vanden Abeele, M. M. P. (2020). Digital wellbeing as the association of screen time with develop-
a dynamic construct. Communication Theory. mental outcomes and well-being: Problems,
https://doi.org/10.1093/ct/qtaa024 challenges, and opportunities. JAMA Pediatrics.
VanderWeele, T. J., Jackson, J. W., & Li, S. (2016). https://doi.org/10.1001/jamapediatrics.2019.
Causal inference and longitudinal data: A case 3191
studyofreligionandmentalhealth.SocialPsy- Yarkoni, T. (2020). The generalizability crisis. Behav-
chiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 51(11), ioralandBrainSciences,1–37.https://doi.org/
1457–1466. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00127- 10.1017/S0140525X20001685
016-1281-9