
===== PAGE 1/27 =====
Meta-Psychology,2024,vol8,MP.2022.3638 Opendata:NotApplicable Editedby:MattWilliams
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2022.3638 Openmaterials:Yes Reviewedby:JessicaK.Flake,SamParsons
Articletype:OriginalArticle Openandreproducibleanalysis:NotApplicable Analysisreproducedby:NotApplicable
PublishedundertheCC-BY4.0license Openreviewsandeditorialprocess:Yes AllsupplementaryfilescanbeaccessedatOSF:
Preregistration:No https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/C5NFJ
Knowing What We’re Talking About: Facilitating Decentralized,
Unequivocal Publication of and Reference to Psychological
Construct Definitions and Instructions
Gjalt-Jorn Peters1 and Rik Crutzen2
1DepartmentofTheory,Methods&Statistics,FacultyofPsychology,OpenUniversityoftheNetherlands
2DepartmentofHealthPromotion,CAPHRI,FacultyofHealth,MedicineandLifeSciences,MaastrichtUniversity
Atheorycrisisandmeasurementcrisishavebeenarguedtoberootcausesofpsychol-
ogy’sreplicationcrisis.Inboth,thelackofconceptualclarificationandthejingle-jangle
jungleattheconstructdefinitionlevelaswellthemeasurementlevelplayacentralrole.
Weintroduceaconceptualtoolthatcanaddresstheseissues: DecentralizedConstruct
Taxonomyspecifications(DCTs). Theseconsistofcomprehensivespecificationsofcon-
structdefinitions,correspondinginstructionsforquantitativeandqualitativeresearch,
anduniqueidentifiers. WediscusshowresearcherscandevelopDCTspecificationsas
well as how DCT specifications can be used in research, practice, and theory devel-
opment. Finally,wediscusstheimplicationsandpotentialforfuturedevelopmentsto
answer the call for conceptual clarification and epistemic iteration. This contributes
to the move towards a psychological science that progresses in a cumulative fashion
throughdiscussionandcomparison.
Keywords: Constructs,TheoryDevelopment,Jingle-JangleFallacy,Measurement,
Validity,EpistemicIteration
Recent large-scale efforts to replicate psychological & Baggio, 2020). These problems are referred to as
studies have shown disappointing results. Results of the "measurement crisis" and the "theory crisis" (Ero-
replicationsof100experimentalandcorrelationalstud- nen & Bringmann, 2021; Oberauer & Lewandowsky,
iespublishedinthreepsychologyjournals,forexample, 2019). The former concerns the validity of measure-
ledtoaclearconclusion: alargeportionofreplications ment instruments used to measure psychological con-
produced no or weaker evidence for the original find- structs, and the latter to the underlying cause: the na-
ings(OpenScienceCollaboration,2015). Thiswarrants tureofmuchpsychologicaltheory.
substantial skepticism regarding findings of psycholog-
ical studies and the way in which they are conducted Themeasurementcrisis
(Earp & Trafimow, 2015). The ensuing period of self-
The measurement crisis in a nutshell: Critical ex-
reflection for psychological science (sometimes dubbed
aminationofmeasurementinstrumentsdemonstrates—
the "replication crisis", "crisis of confidence", or more
over and over again—that measurement instruments
optimistically, "credibility revolution") was associated
that supposedly measure a given construct often turn
with large-scale promotion and adoption of Open Sci-
out to measure different things (i.e. the jingle fal-
ence principles to decrease risk of bias contributing to
lacy), and that measurement instruments for different
this replication crisis (Nosek & Bar-Anan, 2012; Nosek
constructs often turn out to measure the same thing
et al., 2012; Pashler & Wagenmakers, 2012; Uhlmann
(i.e. the jangle fallacy; Castanho Silva et al., 2020;
etal.,2019;Vazire,2018).
ReschlyandChristenson,2012;FriedandNesse,2015;
Open Science principles include, for example, Open
Fried,2017a;Hagger,2014;Lonsdorfetal.,2019;Pon-
Data (Miyakawa, 2020; Murray-Rust, 2018) and pre-
nock et al., 2020; Siegling and Petrides, 2016; Skinner,
registrations (Lakens, 2019; Nosek et al., 2018). Al-
1996;WarnellandRedcay,2019;Weidmanetal.,2017;
though such practices yield many benefits, they have
Williams and Rhodes, 2016). As one of the causes of
also been criticized as only being potential partial so-
these fallacies, the popularity of the construct validity
lutions to the replication crisis. This is because there
approachhasbeenidentified.
aremorefundamentalproblemsunderlyingthereplica-
Based on a critique of how construct validity is em-
tion crisis (Fried, 2020; Szollosi et al., 2020; Van Rooij
ployed in practice, Alexandrova and Haybron (2016)
===== PAGE 2/27 =====
2
conclude that construct validity is not valid, asserting theories. As construct definitions become more com-
thatitsubstitutestheorywithstatistics. Similarly,Bors- prehensive and precise, the value of theories involv-
boom et al. (2009) extensively discuss the logical and ing those constructs increases as both holistic and con-
epistemological problems of construct validity theory, trastivetheoreticalunderdeterminationdecrease(Oude
and propose to abandon construct validity in favor of Maatman, 2021). As Smaldino (2016, pp. 331) put
test validity: whether a test measures what it should it, "attempting to understand relationships among in-
measure (note that this is not what construct validity teractingsystemsofsuchstartlingcomplexityashuman
is; see Borsboom et al., 2009). In short, test validity is beings is a daunting task. Tackling it requires that we
based on the assumption that if a measurement instru- make the greatest attempt to specify precisely what we
ment measures what it should measure, the measured mean."Unfortunately,thecurrentstateofconstructdef-
attributeshouldbethecauseofthevariationintheitem initionsisindirestraits(Leising&Borgstede,2019).
scores. Aclaimthatameasurementinstrumentisvalid In practice, construct definitions are typically rela-
for a given construct should therefore be based on a tively short. Before going into why this brevity is prob-
theory of the item response processes and the role that lematic, we will illustrate it and speculate as to poten-
the construct plays in those processes. Similarly, Borg- tial causes. A recent list of 1164 construct definitions
stede and Eggert argue for theory-based measurement: waspublishedasapartofanontology-basedmodeling
"performingastandardizedapplicationofatheorythat systemforbehaviorchangetheories(Haleetal.,2020)
issuitabletoprovideenoughinformationtocalculatea andcontainsconstructdefinitionsrangingfrom3to72
hitherto unknown value for a theoretical term" (2022, wordsinlength(withamedianof15wordsandamean
p. 14). of 16 words). This typical brevity does not seem to be
Such approaches provide a promising and robust amatteroforiginalextensivedefinitionshavingeroded
foothold to address the measurement crisis, provided overtime(withoriginalcomprehensivedefinitionshav-
thatresearchershavesufficientlycomprehensivelyspec- ingbecome"lostintemporaltranslation"),becausedef-
ified theories about the constructs they want to mea- initionsinthelistpublishedbyHaleetal. wereformu-
sure. However, theoretical underpinning for measure- latedincarefulcollaborationwiththeoriginaltheorists
ment models and methods often remain latent at best (2020). Thus, these brief definitions are both common
(Fried,2020). Thisbringsustothesecondandarguably andgenerallyacceptedinpsychologicaltheory.
morefundamentalcrisis: thetheorycrisis. One of the reasons for this may be what has been
termed implicit realism (Yarkoni, 2020). This means
Thetheorycrisis that researchers tend to treat constructs as if they rep-
resent natural kinds (Fried, 2017b). In other words,
Themostlyqualitative,narrativenatureofmuchthe-
constructs are treated as if they represent more or less
ory in psychology is central to the lack of robustness in
discrete, modular parts of the natural world that are
psychologicalscience. Aproposedpartialsolutioncould
neatly delineated. This tendency is reflected by, for ex-
be formalizing theory and moving towards computa-
ample,thewidespread(andnotalwaysappropriate)re-
tional models (Guest and Martin, 2021; Borsboom et
liance on reflective measurement models (Gruijters et
al.,2021;Smaldino,2008;butalsoseeOudeMaatman,
al., 2021) and the neglect of ongoing construct vali-
2021; Eronen and Romeijn, 2020). Formalizing theory
dation (Flake et al., 2017). At the same time, in dis-
enablesmoreaccuraterepresentationofthetheoriesin
cussions about philosophy of science, when explicitly
scientists’ minds and renders them more widely acces-
prompted with this realist ontological perspective on
sible. Within health psychology, a formal system for
psychological attributes, few researchers subscribe to
describing theories was recently proposed (West et al.,
it in our experience. The argument that, for example,
2019). Thissystemcanfacilitatethetransitiontoformal
attitude exists as a bounded psychological entity that
modeling as it places more formal theory specification
is neatly delineated from other constructs such as risk
withinthegraspofallpsychologicalresearchersregard-
perception or self-efficacy has to our knowledge never
less of their computational modeling skills. However,
been seriously made. On the contrary, overlap among
this formal system is primarily concerned with specify-
psychologicalconstructsispostulatedbymanytheories
ingpostulatedrelationships(e.g.,"edges")betweenpsy-
(for example, theories on behavior, see e.g. Crutzen &
chological constructs (e.g., "nodes"). Formalizing these
Peters,2023a).
relationshipsisavaluablestepforward,buttheprecise
This discrepancy between what seemingly implicitly
definitionsoftheconstructsthatformthenodesremain
informs researchers’ methodological and operational
external to this specification as qualitative descriptions
decisions and the position they take when explicitly re-
usingnaturallanguage.
flectingontheirontologicalstancemaybeexplainedby
These precise definitions are crucial to build better
===== PAGE 3/27 =====
3
what has been called an essentialist bias (Brick et al., inexplicitdiscourse,earnestargumentsthatpsycholog-
2022). Inshort,thisbiasdescribespeople’stendencyto ical constructs are natural kinds are rare (as far as we
implicitly infer from the use of construct labels such as could find, non-existent). Because psychological con-
"attitude" or "depression" that some "attitude essence" structs are not more or less discrete, modular parts of
or "depression essence" exists (Brick et al., 2022). The the natural world that are neatly delineated, different
existence of such an essence would justify accepting definitions of the same construct can arise. In fact, in
brief and general definitions. However, from an em- any set of different definitions of the same construct,
pirical point of view, essences are unidentifiable (Borg- one definition cannot be considered "correct" and oth-
stede&Eggert,2022). Ifweuseessencestodefinecon- ers"incorrect". Ascomponentsofpsychologicalmodels,
structs, the definitions become circular (e.g., "attitude definitionscanbeconsideredtoshareacharacteristicof
is something that has attitude essence"); and the other modelsmoregenerally. AsBox(1979)famouslystated:
wayaround,correspondingconstructsbecomevacuous "Allmodelsarewrong,butsomeareuseful",andasim-
(e.g.,"everythingthathasattitudeessenceisattitude"). ilar stance may be adopted towards definitions of psy-
chologicalconstructs.
Hiddenheterogeneityandepistemicdiversity This ontological perspective suggests that there is
the potential for epistemic benefits through what Zoll-
Thesebriefandincompletedefinitionsofpsychologi-
man(2010)callstransientdiversity(epistemicdiversity
calconstructsrequireelaborationbeforebeingusablein
has been argued to have benefits more widely; see De-
empirical research. Given the variation in researchers’
vezer et al., 2019; Cartwright, 2021). When applied
cultures,histories,academictraining,andtheoriesfrom
toconstructdefinitions,theimplicationisthatscientific
psychologyandotherdisciplinesthatresearchersarefa-
progress is served better by heterogeneity in construct
miliar with, it makes sense that different groups of re-
definitions than by uniformity. The benefits of Feyer-
searchers arrive at different elaborated construct def-
abend’s theoretical pluralism (1965; i.e., emphasizing
initions. It is perhaps not surprising that these im-
the value of conflicting theories for scientific progress;
plicitlydifferentelaboratedconstructdefinitionsyielda
see Bschir and Lohse, 2022 for a recent discussion that
plethora of measurement instruments that purportedly
broadensthatperspective),then,mayapplynotonlyto
measure the same construct, but on closer inspection
theories,butalsoontheslightlylowerconceptuallevel
turn out to measure different things (Hodson, 2021;
of the constructs defined therein. In other words, hav-
Lawson&Robins,2021).
ing multiple different definitions of psychological con-
To give a concrete example, a great variety of mea-
structsmayacceleratescientificprogress.
surement instruments are used to assess depression
However, if having many different implicitly elabo-
severity (Santor et al., 2006). A content analysis of
rateddefinitionsofconstructssuchas"attitudes","intro-
125 items across 7 of these commonly used measure-
jected regulation", and "resilience" is in itself desirable
ment instruments revealed that they included 52 dis-
inlightofscientificprogress,thenwhatistheproblem?
parate depression symptoms (Fried, 2017a). Of these
The problem is the hidden nature of this heterogene-
52 symptoms, 21 (40%) appear only in one single in-
ity. The exact (i.e. researcher-elaborated) definitions
strument and only 6 (12%) feature across all instru-
used in a given psychological study can vary consider-
ments. This implies that using these measurement in-
ably but typically remain unknown. Instead, reports of
struments interchangeably poses a threat to the gener-
such studies tend to briefly (re)define the central con-
alizability and replicability of, in this case, depression
structs,oralternativelyciteoriginalformulationsofthe
research. Similarly, a recent investigation of mindful-
relevanttheory.
ness measurement instruments showed that eight com-
This is problematic because there is no reason to as-
monly used measurement instruments all measure dif-
sume that differences between different versions of the
ferent subsets of aspects of mindfulness (Altgassen et
same construct (i.e. the actually employed, implicitly
al., 2023). Unfortunately, these are not rare examples,
elaboratedconstructs)aretrivialandnonconsequential.
and such jingle-jangle fallacies seem the rule rather
The different auxiliary assumptions implied by differ-
than the exception in psychological research (Lawson
encesindefinitionsmayexplainpartoftheheterogene-
& Robins, 2021), so much so that Flake and Fried de-
ity in empirical findings (Smaldino, 2016), thus under-
votethefirstoftheirsixquestionstohelppreventQues-
lying replication failures as well as confounding differ-
tionableMeasurementPracticestoconstructexplication
ent results in different populations and contexts. A re-
(Flake&Fried,2020).
centlarge-scalecollaborationhighlightedthesedynam-
Despite the manifold problems of this heterogene-
ics (Landy et al., 2020). Fifteen research teams inde-
ity, this situation is not all bad. This is because de-
pendently designed studies and materials to test the
spite potential essentialist biases and implicit realism,
===== PAGE 4/27 =====
4
same five hypotheses. The results illustrated both the scribehowtheyfeltabouttheauthorities’publichealth
variability in different research teams’ design choices decisionsregardingthepandemic.
and the resulting heterogeneity in the observed effect De Graaf et al. (2017) report on the effects of a
sizes (Landy et al., 2020). In other words, this hid- smoking education intervention. They measured atti-
den heterogeneity likely contributes to both the mea- tude “with five items, following the stem ‘I find smok-
surementcrisisandthereplicationcrisis. ing ...’ measured on a four-point response scale rang-
ingfrom,forexample,verynegativetoverypositive,or
Anillustrationofhiddenheterogeneity veryunwisetoverywise.” Woodetal.(2014)reporton
a study into the potential role of attitude accessibility
To illustrate this hidden heterogeneity, we briefly re-
in the question-behavior effect, and used similar items.
flect on the five open access studies with "attitudes" in
Specifically,theyusedthreeitemswiththestem‘Forme,
their titles published in Psychology & Health1. None of
eatinghealthyfoodsinthenextfewweekswouldbe...’
the articles provides a definition of "attitude", suggest-
andseven-pointresponsescalesanchoredbynotworth-
ing that the authors assume that they share a common
while/worthwhile; bad/good; and not beneficial/bene-
and well-known definition with the readership. How-
ficial.
ever, each article did describe how attitude was mea-
Despite not having explicated attitude definitions
sured(forquantitativestudies)orwhichcharacteristics
available, these descriptions illustrate the heterogene-
of qualitative data fit with the authors’ attitude defini-
ity in the implicit definitions of the attitude construct.
tion(forqualitativestudies).
TheHRAS-13itemsassesstheimportanceofaperson’s
Huls et al. (2022) report on a validation study of an
health, thesubjectiveevaluationoftakingcareofone’s
attitudemeasurementinstrument,theHealth-RiskAtti-
body, and the impression of other people’s evaluations
tude Scale (HRAS-13). This measurement instrument
of one’s risk taking behavior (Huls et al., 2022). The
contains items such as "my health means everything to
corresponding definition of attitude seems to contain
me", "people say that I take risks with my health be-
elements of risk perception, social norms, and impor-
cause of my habits", and "I think that I take good care
tance. These elements seem absent from the defini-
of my body". These items have to be rated on a seven-
tion used by Taylor et al. (2022), which instead con-
pointresponsescalerangingfrom“completelydisagree”
tains elements of trust and moral norms. The defini-
to“completelyagree.”
tion of attitude used by Schnell et al. (2022) appears
Taylor et al.(2022) report on a mixedmethod study
to involve subjective evaluations of a policy as reason-
whereinterviewswereusedtodelvedeeperintomoth-
able, well-explained, meaningful, oppressive, and ille-
ers’attitudesregardingHPVvaccination. Theydescribe
gal. Finally,bothDeGraafetal.(2017)andWoodetal.
that"[...] allofthemothersattendedscreeningbecause
(2014) use items close to the recommendations in the
of its considered importance, with several expressing
ReasonedActionApproachlineagetheories(Fishbein&
theopinionthatitissomethingtheyhadtodo[...]. One
Ajzen, 2010), where attitude is a generic evaluation of
mother, Andrea, talked about how she attributed this
abehavior(butappearingtousedifferentdimensions).
attitude to an unquestioning trust in the importance of
How exactly the implicitly elaborated definitions of
cervicalscreening[...]. Belindaexplicitlydescribedher
these five groups of authors differ is hard to say based
unquestioning attitude towards it: ’I didn’t really ques-
on the limited available information. Given the het-
tionit,Ijustassumeditwasagoodthingtodo’(FG1).”
erogeneity in how attitude was measured or coded, it
Schnelletal.(2022)reportonastudyintoCOVID-19
seems unlikely that if they were to elaborate their im-
measure compliance. They explain that "[a]greement
plicit definitions into comprehensively described speci-
with and opposition to public health guidelines mea-
ficationsthiswouldyieldsimilardefinitions. Thishigh-
sured the participants’ attitudes towards these guide-
lightsthreeissuesrelatedtohiddenheterogeneity. First,
lines.” Agreement with public health guidelines as-
thefactthatthesearticlesreportonstudiesintopsycho-
sessed the extent to which respondents found these
logicalconstructswithouttransparentlycommunicating
measures appropriate, understandable, well-explained,
tothescientificcommunityhowthoseconstructsarede-
reasonable and meaningful (five items). Opposition to
fined is in itself problematic. We do not highlight this
public health guidelines measured the extent to which
to accuse the authors, editors, or reviewers, but quite
respondents found these measures oppressive, exces-
theopposite: toillustratehowwidespreadandaccepted
sive, unreasonably restrictive of their civil rights and
thepracticeofnotexplicitlydefiningpsychologicalcon-
unlawful surveillance (four items). Participants were
structs is. Second, if explicit definitions were omitted
asked to position a slider on an eleven-point response
scale(rangingfrom“notatall”to“verymuchso”)toin- 1Thissearchcanberepeatedbyvisitingtheirwebsite,per-
dicateforeachofthenineadjectiveshowmuchtheyde- sistentlyarchivedhere.
===== PAGE 5/27 =====
5
based on an assumption that all health psychologists ner that facilitates decentralized, unequivocal commu-
have the same definition of attitude in mind, this de- nication, epistemic iteration, and knowledge exchange
gree of hidden heterogeneity shows that assumption to and accumulation. This lack of concrete tools may be
beunwarranted. Third,thisheterogeneityprohibitsev- one of the causes for the observation that most psy-
idencesyntheses. Sciencereliesonknowledgeaccumu- chologicalfindingsare"notevenwrong"(Scheel,2022;
lation,butaprerequisitetosuchaccumulationisclarity Smaldino, 2016). For example, Scheel (2022) and
aboutwhatisstudiedinagivenstudy. Smaldino(2016)arguethattheverbalstatementsused
bypsychologicalresearchersoftenleavemuchtobede-
Towards a practical solution for hidden heterogene- sired in terms of specificity: theories, predictions, and
ityinconstructdefinitions hypothesesareproblematicallyunderspecified. Theyar-
gue for a shift towards formal modeling and machine-
The solution to the problem of hidden heterogene-
readable theory, prediction, and hypothesis specifica-
ity is making the heterogeneity explicit by publishing
tions. Atthesametime,thereisquiteachasmbetween
comprehensive construct definitions. These are ideally
the commonplace verbal, narrated descriptions of the-
so comprehensive that they eliminate the need for fur-
ories and constructs on the one hand and more precise
therelaborationwhenresearcherswanttousethecon-
specifications(Guest&Martin,2021). Weherepresent
struct. By providing such comprehensive definitions, it
DecentralizedConstructTaxonomiesasabridgetostart
becomes possible to identify subtle (or not so subtle)
crossingthatchasmfromthenarrativeside: aconcrete
differencesbetweenconstructdefinitions. Thefivestud-
tooltohelpcreatecomprehensive,explicit,transparent
iesdescribedabovewouldlikelyhaveatleastfour,and
constructdefinitions.
maybe even five different attitude definitions. Making
these explicit enables critical reflection on and discus-
DecentralizedConstructTaxonomyspecifications
sionofthosedifferences,aswellasempiricalinvestiga-
tion of the conditions under which different definitions Decentralized Construct Taxonomies are sets of one
performsimilarlyordifferent. ormoreDecentralizedConstructTaxonomy(DCT)spec-
This plea for explicit and comprehensive definitions ifications,eachofwhichspecifiesasingleconstructdef-
is in line with more broadly shared needs concerning inition, corresponding instructions for using the con-
conceptual clarity. For example, Alexandrova and Hay- struct in primary and secondary research, and meta-
bron (2016) argue that when validating psychological data. These accompanying instructions for using the
measures, researchers often focus on statistical proce- construct in research and practice are so tightly tied to
dures at the expense of theory, largely forgoing com- the construct definition itself to minimize the risk that
prehensiveconceptualclarification. Vazireetal.(2022) usingaconstructstillrequiresmoreimplicitelaboration
reviewanumberofstudiesthatillustrateproblemswith of a construct’s definition. In the current contribution,
conceptualclarityandvalidity. Bringmannetal.(2022) wesuggestthatadditionally,foursetsofinstructionsare
describe how a lack of conceptual clarity has held back specified. First, instructions to measure the construct
scientific progress in psychology and call for dedicated in a way consistent with the provided definition (e.g.,
effortstoremedythis. Theyemphasizethatconceptual to conduct quantitative research). Second, instructions
clarification enables epistemic iteration: iteratively im- tocodeorclassifyanexistingmeasurementinstrument
proving theoretical construct definitions and measure- as one that does or does not measure the construct as
ment instruments (Chang, 2007). Moreau and Wiebels defined in the definition (e.g., to conduct literature re-
(2022) argue that more attention for construct def- views). Third,instructionstoelicitqualitativedatathat
initions and more explicit heterogeneity in construct is informative about the construct; and fourth, instruc-
definitions enables escaping "local optima": definitions tionstocodequalitativedataasindicativeofcontentof
andoperationalizationsthatperformbetterthanclosely the construct. For an example of a construct view in a
related alternatives, but do not necessarily represent constructrepository,seeFigure1.
the best possible version. Finally, Lawson and Robins Intheremainderofthistext,wewillfirstdescribethe
(2021) include specific, comprehensive construct defi- componentsthatmakeupaDCTspecificationfollowed
nitionsasaprerequisiteforestablishinghowconstructs by three examples. We will then describe ways to de-
relatetoeachother. velopDCTspecifications,andthendescribewaystouse
Clearly, there is a consensus that psychological sci- them in research and practice. We will then briefly de-
enceshould,asBringmannetal.(2022)putit,goback scribeanumberofopensourcetechnologicaltoolsthat
to basics and establish conceptually clear and compre- implementDCTsandthatfacilitateworkingwiththem:
hensive construct definitions. At the same time, cur- amachine-andhuman-readablestandardtostoreDCT
rently no tools exist to scaffold this practice in a man- specifications in files; a way to generate Unique Con-
===== PAGE 6/27 =====
6
structIdentifiers(UCIDs);the{psyverse}Rpackageto synthesized estimates. In addition, these instructions
work with DCTs; a psychological construct repository; areusefulwhenresearchersorpractitionersarelooking
andaShinyapptoimport,edit,andsubmitDCTspeci- for a measurement instrument to use in an empirical
ficationstoapsychologicalconstructrepository. Wewill study,andtheywanttoensurethemeasurementinstru-
then discuss strengths and limitations and avenues for mentfitswiththeconstructdefinitiontheyuse.
furtherdevelopment. Theinstructionstoelicitandcodequalitativedataare
more closely related than those pertaining to measure-
Components of a Decentralized Construct Taxonomy
ment instruments. The former describes how qualita-
specification
tive data that is informative about the construct can be
obtained. This can include, for example, questions to
The construct definition is the central part of a DCT
ask participants, procedures for observation, or proce-
specification. It describes, as comprehensively aspossi-
dures for autophotography and photo elicitation (Glaw
ble,howaconstructisdefined. Onewaytothinkabout
et al., 2017). The instructions to code qualitative data
this is that ideally, this definition is so comprehensive
thendescribewhendatacanbeconsideredinformative
that it is easy for others to spot where they themselves
abouttheconstruct. Forexample,ifqualitativedataare
would define the construct differently: it is that poten-
elicited by asking people a question, the answers may
tialforheterogeneityindefinitionsthatallowsforepis-
not be informative about the corresponding construct;
temic iteration through empirically testing the implica-
people may be distracted, misunderstand the question,
tions of using the (potentially subtly) different defini-
or include irrelevant information. It is important to
tions. For any given difference in definition, learning
note that providing these instructions (e.g., clearly de-
thatitdoesnotmatterinpracticeisasvaluableaslearn-
scribing which types of expressions, behaviors, or in-
ing that it matters, and if so, how. Therefore, the more
terpersonal interactions can be coded as relevant to a
comprehensiveconstructdefinitionsare,thebetter: def-
given construct) does not require one to subscribe to
initions are the bedrock of empirical research, and ex-
any particular ontological or epistemological perspec-
cessively brief or vague definitions prevent valid mea-
tive regarding psychological attributes. For example,
surement(recallthatclarifyingconstructdefinitionsare
both from a hard realism perspective (e.g., assuming
the first step in preventing Questionable Measurement
inherent properties of constructs) and from a construc-
Practices;FlakeandFried,2020).
tivistperspective(e.g.,assumingconstructsaresocially
Theinstructiontodevelopmeasurementinstruments
constructed),differentconstructsexist,andtheycanbe
describeshowtheconstructcanbemeasured. Thiscan
distinguishedfromeachotherinempiricalresearch.
outline theoretical prerequisites and constraints, such
Not every set of instructions may apply to each con-
as auxiliary assumptions and procedures that must be
struct definition. For example, if researchers have a
followed to develop a valid measurement instrument.
constructivistperspectiveandassumeagivenconstruct
It can also point to one specific measurement instru-
cannot be measured, the instructions for measurement
ment and include the claim that that is the only pos-
could instead explain why the construct, as defined in
sible way to validly measure that construct. It can also
the definition section, cannot be measured. Similarly,
be a combination, referring to one or more existing in-
researchers may define a construct in a way that pre-
strumentsandincludinginstructionsonhowtodevelop
cludes qualitative investigation. In other scenarios, re-
additional measurement instruments. Here, too, the
searchers might only require explicit instructions for
adage is that more comprehensive instructions are bet-
coding measurement instruments (e.g., when they de-
ter. Flake and Fried (2020) provide a useful overview
velop the DCT specification for a systematic review),
ofmeasurement-relatedissuestoconsiderwhenwriting
and they may refrain from elaborating on other sets of
theseinstructions.
instructions for the sake of efficiency. In such cases, in-
Theinstructiontocodemeasurementinstrumentsde-
stead of specifying all sets of instructions, researchers
scribeswhenameasurementinstrumentcanbeconsid-
can describe why specific sets of instructions are not
ered a measurement instrument of the construct. The
added. We want to emphasize that any reason can be
primaryusecaseforsuchinstructionsisforconducting
valid, alsodependingonone’sperspective: wepropose
systematic reviews: the jingle-jangle jungle precludes
DCTs as a tool for increasing transparency, not to en-
blindly "trusting" that measurement instruments do in-
forceagivennormativeperspective(exceptperhapsthe
deed measure the construct as the original study au-
openscienceimperativetooptimizetransparency).
thors labeled it. This necessitates critical examination
ofallmeasuresto"reclassify"theminawaythatiscon-
sistent with the construct definitions used by the sys-
tematicreviewauthorsandsotrytopreventbiasinthe
===== PAGE 7/27 =====
7
Figure1
A screenshot of the Construct View of a single DCT specification in the PsyCoRe.one repository (specifically, psy-
core.one/instrAttitude_expectation_73dnt5z6). The contents of the definition and each of the four instructions has
beenreplacedwithabriefplaceholder.
ExamplesofdevelopedDCTs case, after extensive discussions in multiple meetings,
we were able to complete DCT specifications that re-
Example 1: A DCT specification for Instrumen-
flect our thinking about this theory (see Peters et al.,
tal Attitude Belief Expectation. This first example is
2020, which also visualizes the relationship between
one of the products of a project where we aimed to
constructs, and see osf.io/me3h2 for all files with DCT
produce DCT specifications for the entire Reasoned Ac-
specificationsandtheusedRscripts).
tion Approach (Fishbein & Ajzen, 2010). We started
We will describe one DCT specification in more
offusingasingletheoryapproach,usingtworesources:
detail: that of Instrumental Attitude Belief Expectation
the book on the Reasoned Action Approach (Fishbein
(psycore.one/instrAttitude_expectation_73dnt5z6). In
& Ajzen, 2010) and an article describing a formal sys-
its definition ("the expectation of how probable (i.e.
tem forrepresenting behavior-changetheories -among
unlikely versus likely) it is that engaging in the target
themtheReasonedActionApproach(Westetal.,2019).
behavior will cause one specific instrumental potential
Although we had this book available (comprising 518
consequence to come about"), we explicitly distinguish
pages about this specific theory) we were still not able
theconstructfromExperientialAttitudeBeliefExpecta-
to fully complete the DCT specifications for all con-
tion (psycore.one/expAttitude_expectation_73dnt5z1),
structs within the Reasoned Action Approach. Hence,
which captures expectations relating to experiences
we supplemented the single theory approach with the
and sensations (as opposed to Instrumental Attitude
expert-based rationalist approach—also based on our
Belief Expectation, which captures expectations as to
experiencewithapplyingthistheory(e.g.Crutzen&Pe-
howinstrumentalpotentialconsequencesofabehavior
ters, 2023b). When reporting about the development
are given an individual’s goals). We also explicitly
of DCT specifications, it is warranted to also describe
describe how this construct relates to related con-
which methods are used during the process. In our
===== PAGE 8/27 =====
8
structs,suchasInstrumentalAttitudeBeliefEvaluations explicitlystatethepreliminarynatureoftheconstruct.
(psycore.one/instrAttitude_evaluation_73dnt5z7) In their instructions, they describe how they are
and the compound construct (psy- working on measurement instruments, but do not pro-
core.one/instrAttitude_belief_73dnt5z8). vide explicit instructions. In their instructions for
Theinstructionsfordevelopingmeasurementinstru- coding measurement instruments (e.g., for system-
ments are extensive (almost 800 words). This is atic reviews), they explain that in their view, as yet,
meant to minimize heterogeneity by constraining re- no measurement instruments exist that can measure
searcher degrees of freedom in developing measure- Problematic Hypersexuality consistent with the defi-
mentinstruments. Forexample,takethefollowingfrag- nition they provided. They do provide instructions
ment: "Try to always be consistent in the scale va- for qualitative research, linking to the open materials
lence; in languages that are read from left to right, they use in a specific study. In addition, they have
always place the most passive/low/less/weak/unlikely since developed an updated DCT specification (psy-
scale extreme (anchor) on the left, and the most ac- core.one/ProblematicHypersexuality_7qfdty7g), where
tive/high/more/strong/likely scale extreme (anchor) they describe ongoing work to arrive at measurement
on the right. Do not reverse this order for one or instruments.
more items." This fragment leaves relatively little room
Example3: ADCTspecificationforLifeSatisfaction
forvariation,andsimultaneouslylikelycausesdisagree-
ment by some researchers (e.g. who believe that it is
A third example is a DCT specification for Life Sat-
importanttoincludereverse-codeditems). Notethatre-
isfaction (psycore.one/life_satisfaction_7pk39d16), de-
searchers can always copy the DCT specification, make
veloped by Panasiuk (2023). Because this is a rela-
adjustments,andthenusetheirownversion. However,
tivelybriefDCTspecification,weincludeithereinfull.
thisstillservestomakeexerciseofthosedegreesoffree-
This DCT specification contrasts with the Problematic
domsalient,andexplicatesthedifferencesinDCTspec-
Hypersexuality DCT specification by including a brief
ifications.
construct definition ("A global assessment of a person’s
satisfactionwiththeirlifeaccordingtotheirchosencri-
Example 2: A DCT specification for Problematic Hy-
teria."). It includes longer instructions for developing
persexuality
measurementinstruments("Lifesatisfactionisassessed
In their critical discussion of the theoreti- using a single or multi-item measure that prompts a
cal and methodological issues surrounding re- cognitiveevaluationofone’slifeaccordingtotheirown
search into hypersexuality, Van Tuijl, Verboon, perspective that can be interpreted as an attitude, as-
and Van Lankveld (2023) present an elaborated sessment, belief, evaluation or judgment. Items are,
definition of Problematic Hypersexuality (psy- ideally, ordinal 5- 7- 10- or 11-point Likert scales with
core.one/problematicHypersexuality_7mm4hr4f). verbal anchors at the bottom and top. Typically, finer-
In their definition, they draw on three diagnostic grainedscalesaremorereliable. Itemsmayormaynot
perspectives on problematic hypersexuality (i.e. sex prompt to think about a certain timeframe (e.g., ’last
addiction, hypersexual disorder, and compulsivesexual two weeks’, ’last year’) and scope (e.g., ’overall’, ’all
behavior disorder) and ten characteristics based on things considered’). Anchors at the bottom represent
criteria for Problematic Hypersexuality retries from the lowest levels of satisfaction with life (e.g., ’worst
these three perspectives. They postulate that these possiblelife’,’completelydissatisfied’,’dissatisfied’,’not
ten characteristics manifest as trait-like components of at all’). Anchors at the top represent the highest levels
ProblematicHypersexuality,andstatethattheirrelative of satisfaction with life (e.g., ’best possible life’, ’com-
importance can vary per population. In addition, they pletely satisfied’, ’satisfied’, ’completely’). Care should
describe two drivers as part of their definition (high betakenwhenincludinglifesatisfactioninalargersur-
sexualdesireandemotiondysregulationwithregardto vey. There is evidence that answers to life satisfaction
sexuality), and state that these are necessary but not scalesaresensitivetoquestionordereffects(Schwarz&
sufficientforhypersexualitytofallwithinthedefinition Strack,1999).").
of Problematic Hypersexuality. In addition, these The instructions to code measurement instruments
driverswouldneedtointeractwiththetencharacteris- are"LifesatisfactionismeasuredwithaLikertscalewith
ticsinacausalnetworkwherethedriversmanifestasa anchorsatthetopandbottomindicatingdissatisfaction
predisposition to engage in sex in response to negative andsatisfactionwithliferespectively. Toavoidambigu-
experiences, while engaging in sex strengthens the ten ity,itemsusuallyincludeatimeframe(e.g.,Asawhole,
characteristics,whichthenfurtheraugmentthedrivers. how satisfied are you with your life in the past year?).
They explicitly describe their ongoing research and Items measuring life satisfaction could either measure
===== PAGE 9/27 =====
9
one’s satisfaction with their life in the present moment spotaspectsofthisDCTspecificationtheydisagreewith.
or with their life as a whole, as far back as they can The Problematic Hypersexuality DCT definitions have
recall or is relevant to inform their judgment.", the in- a different profile again. Given their clear deviation
structionstoelicitqualitativedataare"Conductaqual- fromexistingdefinitionsofProblematicHypersexuality,
itativestudywhereparticipantsareinterviewedandin- asevidencedbytheirexplanationinthefirstDCTspec-
terviews are either recorded and transcribed, or notes ification that no existing measurement instruments can
are kept. These sources are then coded using the in- measuretheconstructastheydefineit,itislikelyother
structionforaspectcoding. Thesequestionsmaybefor- researchers will disagree with their definitions. This is
mulated in the following way: ’How do you feel about partly by virtue of how comprehensive and explicit the
your life?’ and ’How is your life going?’ or ’What do definition of Problematic Hypersexuality by Van Tuijl,
youthinkaboutyourlife’.",andtheinstructionstocode Verboon,andVanLankveld(2023)is. Theensuingem-
qualitative data are "Expressions that demonstrate ei- pirical work to compare definitions and the accompa-
ther positively or negatively valenced feelings towards nying measurement models (Van Tuijl, Verboon, & Van
one’s life express one’s satisfaction with life. For exam- Lankveld,2023),andthesubsequentupdatingofdefini-
ple,’mylifeisgoingwell’isanexpressionofsatisfaction tions(andassignmentofnewUCIDs)isagoodexample
withlife. Therecanalsobestatementsthatcouldbein- of what epistemic iteration can look like in psychology
forminglifesatisfaction,butitisnotapparentfromthe (psycore.one/ProblematicHypersexuality_7qfdty7g).
outset whether they positively or negatively contribute Note that from a scientific point of view, disagree-
to one’s life satisfaction. For example, ’I have a lot of mentsaboutDCTspecificationsarevaluable. Thepoint
responsibilities in life’ can be an expression signifying of DCT specifications is not to codify consensus. This
satisfaction or dissatisfaction with this fact. Ideally, the mayseemcounter-intuitive,sotobeclear: weconsider
interviewer would follow-up to identify whether this is this production of comprehensive construct definitions
apositiveornegativecontributortotheindividual’slife tiedtoexplicitinstructionsforusingthoseconstructsin
satisfaction." primary and secondary research a worthwhile accom-
plishment in itself. They represent opportunities to re-
Discussionoftheexamples
solve such disagreements with empirical research and
conceptual delineation of constructs, and they enable
These three examples illustrate how var-
unequivocal reference to constructs, decrease hidden
ied DCT specifications can be. The first one,
heterogeneity, and facilitate coherent research in sepa-
Instrumental Attitude Belief Expectation (psy-
rateprojects. However,itisimportanttorealizethatal-
core.one/instrAttitude_expectation_73dnt5z6), starts
thoughthosebenefitsarereal,thisactofcreatingthese
withtheexplicitdescriptionprovidedbytheauthorsof
DCT specifications does not suggest that these specific
the related theory, but includes elaboration — and as
construct definitions (and accompanying instructions)
such,decisionsthatothersmaywanttotakedifferently.
are necessarily correct or useful. As for the example
The second one, Problematic Hypersexuality (psy-
of the DCT specification we created (Instrumental Atti-
core.one/problematicHypersexuality_7mm4hr4f and
tude Belief Expectation): it is our hope that other re-
psycore.one/ProblematicHypersexuality_7qfdty7g),
searcherswilldisagreewithsomeorallofthedecisions
describes a much more recently postulated con-
we took when developing this DCT specification. As
struct and therefore contains more original foun-
such, we welcome suggestions for improvement, and
dational work. The third one, Life Satisfaction
consider these definitions an explicit starting point for
(psycore.one/life_satisfaction_7pk39d16), does the
reflections, discussions, and empirical work on the foci
opposite, and resembles closely how researchers who
ofsuchdisagreements.
study Life Satisfaction often approach the construct,
butmakingthisapproachexplicit.
MethodstodevelopDecentralizedConstruct
The instructions to develop measurement instru-
Taxonomyspecifications
ments for Life Satisfaction are consistent with the most
commonlyusedmeasurementinstruments(e.g.,Diener There are several methods to develop these DCT
et al., 1985), suggesting that perhaps of the three specifications. Thesemethodsdifferintermsof, forex-
DCT specifications, this is the one other researchers ample, point of departure (e.g., theory, expertise) and
will agree with most. On the other hand, in the DCT number of sources. We describe nine methods in Ap-
specification for Instrumental Attitude Belief Expecta- pendix1, "MethodstodevelopDecentralizedConstruct
tion, many decisions were taken in the process to sub- Taxonomyspecifications",andwilldescribefiveofthem
stantiallyelaboratethedefinitionandcorrespondingin- here. Itisimportanttokeepinmindthatthesemethods
structions. Thismeansthatitiseasierforresearchersto arewaystoelaborateconstructdefinitionsintocompre-
===== PAGE 10/27 =====
10
hensive definitions with corresponding instructions— specifications end up just describing how a team of re-
they are not ways to arrive at those constructs. To that searchersdecidedto"fillinblanks"intheconstructdef-
end, we direct readers to procedures to develop theory initions in the original theory formulation, that would
(e.g., Borsboom et al., 2021; Hawkins-Elder and Ward, providevaluablecontexttootherresearchers.
2020;Podsakoffetal.,2016).
Meta-empiricalapproach
Transparentdescriptiveapproach
Where the single theory approach and the multiple
Aninitialsteptomoveawayfromimplicitlydifferent theories approach (see Appendix 1) can be considered
construct definitions is to transparently describe con- deductive, the meta-empirical approach is instead in-
structs and the way in which they are used in a spe- ductive. It consists of conducting a scoping review
cific study. This transparency enables consumers of re- of empirical contributions in which psychological con-
search (e.g., readers of an article) to understand how structs have been used. This results in an overview of
producers of research (e.g., authors of an article) de- various (aspects of) definitions that are used in differ-
fined and used the constructs in that study. An advan- entempiricalcontributionsaswellastheiroperational-
tage is that this approach is very easily applicable—it izations (e.g., questionnaires, items, tasks). It casts a
is in line with the imperative for transparent reporting wide net of how the psychological construct of inter-
thatisalsostimulatedby,forexample,variousreporting est is used. Similar to conducting a systematic review
guidelinesconcerningwhataspectstodescribewhenre- withinthemultipletheoriesapproach,theresourcesre-
portingaspecificstudy(e.g.,CONSORTforrandomized quired for conducting a scoping review are relatively
trials, COREQ for qualitative research). Moreover, it high. However, a benefit is that an overview of mea-
caninprinciplealsobeappliedinhindsightafterinitial surementinstrumentsandapplicationsinqualitativere-
reporting of a study. On the one hand, this approach search is obtained, which can help the researchers by
can be seen as an initial step towards being more ex- groundingthefoursetsofinstructionsintheexistinglit-
plicit, even though the other methods described below erature. Foranexampleofthisapproach,seeSnippeet
are expected to result in more rigorous elaboration of al.(2021),andforasubsequentapplication,seeSnippe
constructdefinitions. Ontheotherhand, theenhanced etal.(2023). Likethemultipletheoryapproach,thisap-
transparency achieved by simply making explicit what proachstillrequiresthatchoicesneedtobemadeabout
would otherwise remain implicit makes even this most whether and how to integrate into one DCT specifica-
straightforwardapproachanimportantstepforward. tionormultipleDCTspecifications.
Singletheoryapproach Reverseengineeringapproach
The single theory approach consists of studying ex- It is not always feasible or necessary to conduct a
isting documentation about a specific theory. The pri- systematic review to develop a DCT specification. Re-
mary source is often the work of the original author(s) searchersmayalsoalreadyhaveameasurementinstru-
of the theory. A benefit is that this approach requires ment they typically use. In that case, they can derive
limited resources. Moreover, this approach is probably a construct definition from that instrument by closely
easilyapplicable,becauseintheory,atheoryshouldalso inspecting the items. In this process, the researchers
specifyhowtodevelopameasurementinstrument(and explicate those aspects of the construct that they con-
perhaps also how to conduct qualitative research using sidermostrelevant,aswellastheirinterpretation. Such
that theory). So, there is a more direct link between DCT specifications may start out relatively brief if the
theconstructdefinitionsandinstructionsonhowtouse item content does not provide much footing. However,
them in research. Over time, DCT specifications based even in such scenarios, brief initial DCT specifications
onasingletheorycanalsobeimprovedbytheoriginal still provide a convenient tool to enhance the trans-
author(s)—or other researchers using this specific the- parency about authors’ elaborated construct definition
ory(Kok&Ruiter,2014). Adownsideisthatinpractice, as it guided their theorizing and study design, and it
many theories have very brief construct definitions, let serves as a concrete starting point for further develop-
alone detailed instructions on how to use them in re- ment.
search. Thismayforceresearchersthemselvesto"fillin
theblanks"thatexistindocumentationaboutaspecific Expert-basedDelphiapproach
theory. And, more in general, relying on a single the-
The expert-based Delphi approach is similar to the
ory might result in a narrow view on the psychological
expert-based rationalist approach (see Appendix 1), al-
construct of interest. Still, even if the resulting DCT
though it usually involves a larger number of experts.
===== PAGE 11/27 =====
11
This approach is characterized by a systematic process definitionsandhowtheychangeoverthecourseofsub-
used to enable collective input of a panel of experts. sequentstudiescancontributetochangingtheresearch
Usually this process is characterized by multiple itera- culture(aneedalsoemphasizedbyRohreretal.,2021).
tive rounds in which input from previous rounds is fed To contribute to this, we provided the examples above
back in an anonymous way (Nasa et al., 2021). The basedonourowneffortsandthoseofothers.
benefitofthisanonymity isthatexpertsmightbemore
inclined to share their thinking about the psychologi- UsingexistingDCTspecificationsinresearchand
cal construct of interest and feel less vulnerable. Fur- practice
thermore,theDelphiapproachisgearedtowardsreach-
Now that we have described methods that can be
ing consensus (based on pre-specified criteria), which
used to develop comprehensive construct definitions,
might also contribute to broadly supported DCT spec-
wewilldescribehowtoworkwithDCTsinresearchand
ifications. A drawback of such consensus-based broad
inpractice.
support is that it may carry the risk of stagnating epis-
temic iteration (though awareness of that risk may al- Using Decentralized Construct Taxonomies in re-
lowmitigatingit). Aseconddrawbackisthatoptimizing search
for consensus does not simultaneously optimize for ac-
curacy, comprehensiveness, validity, or conceptual clar- DCT specifications can be used in research on two
ity,whilestillimbuingtheresultwithacertainauthority levels: thatofthelab,institution,orlearnedsocietyand
thatmaysuggestsuchmerits. Therefore,itisimportant that of the individual researcher or student. Organiza-
tobearinmindthatthissupportonitsownisnotinfor- tions can maintain dedicated Decentralized Construct
mativeregardingthequalityoftheDCTspecification. Taxonomies, which can then be used by the affiliated
researchers and students. This minimizes hidden het-
Methodologicalandhumanconsiderations erogeneitywithinthelab,institution,orlearnedsociety,
ensuring that the results can be synthesized relatively
Even though the approaches discussed here may ap-
effortlessly and with minimal risk of bias as a conse-
pear distinct, in practice we expect that they will often
quenceofdifferencesinconstructdefinitions,measure-
be combined. Another methodological consideration,
ment, or qualitative elicitation or coding. Note, how-
and one that holds for all methods, is that while ef-
ever, that when larger organizations provide standard-
forts to develop a DCT specification may result in one
ized Decentralized Construct Taxonomies, these run
DCTspecification,theymayalsoresultinmultipleDCT
the risk of being used by large groups of researchers,
specifications for each construct. The latter can hap-
which would decrease epistemic diversity (and poten-
pen when multiple researchers have different views on
tiallyslowdownscientificprogress).
a specific construct, but also when an individual re-
Individual researchers and students can use such
searcher develops their thinking about a construct. In-
repositories to obtain DCT specifications. For example,
tuitively, this might initially be perceived as not being
if their lab, institution, learned society, or other orga-
helpful and resulting in more heterogeneity. However,
nizationmaintainsapsychologicalconstructrepository,
theproblemtoaddressisnotheterogeneityitselfbutits
they can use it to locate the DCT specifications for the
hidden nature. DCT specifications foster openness and
constructs they aim to study. If researchers or students
thesespecificationsarenotinandofthemselvesrightor
have no access to a repository of "preferred construct
wrong. In fact, all DCT specifications might be wrong,
definitions", they can consult the literature and obtain
buttheirusefulnesstopsychologyisbasedontheirfos-
theDCTspecificationsthatarelinkedtoinotherreposi-
tering of transparency, not on a pretense to be correct.
toriesoraddedinthesupplementalmaterials. Theycan
Theirexplicitnessisacrucialsteptowardsapsycholog-
then either use those as-is or adapt them. If no preex-
icalsciencethatprogressesinacumulativefashionthat
isting DCT specifications are available that they would
isfueled bydiscussion, comparison, andepistemiciter-
like to use, they can develop their own (for example,
ation.
usingthetransparentdescriptiveapproachasdiscussed
At the same time, we realize that researchers might
above).
feel vulnerable to develop and publish DCT specifica-
It is important that researchers and students either
tions because their openness might lead to critique on
include the DCT specifications for the constructs they
and even falsification of aspects of their construct def-
study in the supplemental materials, or post them in
inition or operationalization. However, if this vulnera-
a repository and provide a link to the construct page
bility is a barrier to transparency and self-correction, it
in that repository. Without explicating the elaborated,
might actually hinder scientific progress (Rohrer et al.,
comprehensive definitions, others cannot be certain
2021). Inthissense, beingtransparentaboutconstruct
how constructs were defined exactly in a given study,
===== PAGE 12/27 =====
12
andhowthisdefinitionwastakentoresultinguidelines information is also valuable to include in the pre-
andconstraintsforquantitativeorqualitativeresearch. registration of a study or the application form for eth-
ical approval. DCT specifications concerning measure-
UsingDCTspecificationsinprimaryempiricalquan- ment instruments can be developed from scratch (e.g.,
titativeresearch when using measurement instruments specifically de-
velopedforthestudy),butcanalsobecompletedbased
In quantitative research, DCT specifications enable
onexistingmaterial. Forexample,whenmeasuringself-
answering the first question that researchers have to
efficacy,theremightbeanexistingmeasurementinstru-
answer to avoid Questionable Measurement Practices
mentavailable. Infact,therearemultiplemeasurement
(Flake & Fried, 2020): what is the construct that a re-
instrumentsavailable(Pancetal.,2012;Romppeletal.,
searcher wants to measure and how is it defined ex-
2013). Inthatcase,itmustbeclearhowthechoicefor
actly? The other five questions build upon this first
aspecificmeasurementisinlinewiththeconstructdef-
question, firmly placing comprehensive construct def-
inition used in that specific study and how it adheres
initions at the core of empirical research. Similarly,
to instructions regarding measurement instruments for
DCT specifications can be used to document the epis-
that construct. Over time, these DCT specifications can
temic iteration that occurs when studying participants’
be re-used in other studies by the same researchers or
response processes using Response Process Evaluation
others. This ensures consistency among studies when
(Wolfetal.,2023).
using the same DCT specification - and also makes ex-
Furthermore,DCTspecificationscanensurethatmul-
plicitwhendifferentspecificationsareusedforwhatap-
tiple studies in a lab or organization use the same con-
pearstobethesameconstruct(e.g.,self-efficacy).
struct definition, and when different measurement in-
struments are used, that these are nonetheless all con-
UsingDCTspecificationsinprimaryempiricalquali-
sistent with that definition (as they all fit with the in-
tativeresearch
struction for measurement instruments). This ensures
that studies produced by researchers and students in a Primaryempiricalqualitativeresearchcanbe,forex-
givenlabororganizationareinternallycoherent. Inad- ample, an interview study about patients’ beliefs con-
dition, DCT specifications provide a tangible, concrete cerning medication adherence. DCT specifications pro-
prompt for reflection on the used definitions and in- vide instructions regarding two important aspects of
structions,encouragingregularevaluationandrevision suchstudies: (1)howtoelicitconstructcontentand(2)
asateam. Inaway,thisachievesepistemiciterationon how to code qualitative data as informative about con-
asmallscale. structcontent. Theformercanbeusedtodevelopstudy
In addition, DCT specifications are a prerequisite for materials that are used during data collection (e.g., an
applying the first of the ten criteria for establishing to interview guide), the latter can be used during data
which degree constructs are sibling constructs (specif- analysis (e.g., in the codebook). For example, the Rea-
ically, the extent to which constructs are defined in a sonedActionApproachprovidesinstructionsonhowto
conceptually similar way; (Lawson & Robins, 2021)). elicit construct content by means of a belief elicitation
This, inturn, isanecessarystepbeforeresearcherscan procedure (Fishbein & Ajzen, 2010). For attitude be-
determine whether they can safely include variables as liefs,thisisdonebymeansofaskingthefollowingques-
covariates in multivariate analyses. Including two or tions: ‘Whatdoyouseeastheadvantagesofyouengag-
moresiblingconstructs(orconstructsthatotherwisede- ing in [target behavior]?’, ‘What do you see as the dis-
scribeoverlappingpartsofthehumanpsyche)resultsin advantages of you engaging in [target behavior]?’, and
biased estimates (Crutzen & Peters, 2023a; Lawson & ‘Whatelsecomestomindwhenyouthinkabout[target
Robins, 2021), so for all analyses including more than behavior]?’ Thesequestionscanbeincludedinaninter-
twovariables,itisvitalthatresearchersfirstobtainsuf- viewguidethatisusedduringdatacollection. Inother
ficientconceptualclarification. DCTspecificationsfacil- words,thisishelpfultoelicitconstructcontent,butnot
itatethisprocess. informativetoguidedecisionsduringdataanalyses.
Primary empirical quantitative research can be, for Therefore, when using a DCT specification that
example,across-sectionalsurveytoassessstressamong would include those instructions for eliciting qualita-
students or an experimental study investigating the ef- tive data, it should also be clear what to code as a be-
fect of various role model stories on self-efficacy. Re- lief evaluation and what as a belief expectation. And,
gardlessofstudydesign, thereshouldbeacomprehen- in the case of expectation, whether it concerns an ex-
sive and accurate definition of all psychological con- periental attitude belief expectation or an instrumental
structsmeasuredinthestudy(e.g.,stress,self-efficacy) one. In this example, the experiential nature of expec-
as well as the way in which they are measured. This tations means that these expected consequences must
===== PAGE 13/27 =====
13
concern experiences and sensations, such as pleasure ments specifically developed for the construct "fear of
or pain. These experiential attitude belief expectations falling." The FES conceptualizes fear of falling as low
cover acute hedonic expectations, disconnected from perceived self-efficacy at avoiding falls during essential
potential long-term consequences the target behavior non-hazardousactivitiesofdailyliving. Inotherwords,
may have. Experiential attitude belief expectations al- self-efficacy has been added to the construct of fear of
waysrefertoimmediatelyexperiencedconsequencesof falling. After this, measurement instruments for worry
abehavior. Expressionsofexpectationsofconsequences about falling and balance confidence were developed
that render the target behavior less or more desirable (e.g.,TheSurveyofActivitiesandFearofFallinginthe
without the immediate experiential effects of the be- Elderly and The Activities-specific Balance Confidence
havior playing a role are captured in instrumental at- scale). Allthesemeasurementinstrumentsandthecon-
titude belief expectations. Similar to empirical quanti- structstheyintendtomeasurewereputunderthesame
tative research, sometimes DCT specifications need to umbrellaandfearoffallingbecametheumbrellaterm.
bedevelopedfromscratch,buttheremightalsoalready Thisexampleclarifiestheneedforclearinstructionson
beinstructionsavailableforcertainaspects(suchasthe whichmeasurementinstrumentstocodewhenconduct-
belief elicitation procedure in this example). For both ing a literature review on fear of falling. This does not
aspects, elicitation and coding, instructions need to be mean that a review needs to be limited to a specific
inlinewiththeconstructdefinition. measurement instrument. In fact, it might even be of
Not all constructs can be studied qualitatively; and interest to compare data obtained by means of various
for some constructs that can be studied qualitatively, measurementinstruments. Inthatcase,itisevenmore
thereisnowayforresearcherstoelicitqualitativedata important to be explicit about the measurement instru-
thatlendsitselftostudyingtheconstruct. Insuchcases, mentsofinterestandhaveDTCspecificationsavailable
researchers can explain this in the relevant instruction, forallofthem.
andforexampleonlydescribehowqualitativedatacan
becodedasinformativeaboutagivenconstruct. UsingDCTspecificationsintheorydevelopment
DCT specifications are also valuable in the process
UsingDCTspecificationsinliteraturereviews
of theory development. This process does not happen
DCT specifications also facilitate literature reviews overnight and requires epistemic iteration. In Invent-
(e.g., scoping reviews, meta-analyses, and systematic ingTemperature,Chang(2007)examineshowscientists
reviews without meta-analysis). The instructions for createdthermometersandhowtheymanagedtoassess
coding measurement instruments are directly linked to thereliabilityandaccuracyoftheseinstrumentswithout
theseresearchmethods: researchersorstudentsengag- a circular reliance on the instruments themselves. This
ing in a literature review can use these in their instruc- process of iteratively improving construct definitions
tionsfordataextractionfromincludedprimarysources. and measurement instruments took centuries of work
This will ensure that all univariate and multivariate re- by many scientists—for a construct which in hindsight
sults that are extracted pertain to the constructs as de- seems straightforward to measure—and relied heavily
fined by the research team. That will in turn manifest on theory development during that process. This inter-
as lower heterogeneity among effect sizes, and so in a twined development of measurement instruments and
higher probability that meta-analysis can be justified. theorymanifestedinavarietyofdifferentmeasurement
Another way in which DCT specifications can facilitate instrumentsandcorrespondingtheorieshavingbeenin
literature review is analogous to the way they can be use simultaneously for decades, until enough evidence
usedinprimaryempiricalqualitativeresearch. Wehave accumulated to allow abandoning some instruments—
provided the example of coding attitude beliefs based andtheories.
ondataobtainedbymeansofaninterviewstudy. These If we consider 1879, the year that Wilhelm Wundt
instructionsonhowtocodequalitativedataasinforma- foundedthefirstlaboratoryofpsychology,thebirthyear
tive about construct content can also be used to code ofpsychologyasascience,thenitisnowonderthatre-
data from multiple studies identified in a literature re- searchconcerningmanypsychologicalconstructsisstill
view. Such a review might be useful to create a higher in its early stages in terms of construct definitions and
level overview of beliefs and might also facilitate com- measurementinstruments. However,inthecaseofpsy-
parisonbetween,forexample,differentsubgroups. chology,itappearsthewaymeasurementisapproached
For example, fear of falling was initially only used (e.g., heavily relying on construct validity and quanti-
to describe the fear that older people could develop tative psychometric methods) is, as Alexandrova and
after falling (Kruisbrink, 2022). The Falls Efficacy Haybron(2016)putit,theory-avoidant. Thiseffectively
Scale (FES) was one of the first measurement instru- stifles the potential for epistemic iteration, stagnating
===== PAGE 14/27 =====
14
further theory development. Therefore, psychology is Using DCT specifications in large-scale collabora-
simultaneously in the situation that it finds itself in its tions
infancy as a science in terms of theoretical maturity
In recent years, large-scale collaborations have been
and the corresponding maturity of its measurement in-
setuptoprogresspsychologicalscience(e.g.,OpenSci-
struments; and where the customary approach to mea-
ence Collaboration, 2015). DCT specifications can be
surement seems to stunt the potential for further mat-
helpfulinsuchlarge-collaborationsinthreeways. First,
uration. Specifying DCTs, as an explicit instrument to
they can document heterogeneity in construct defini-
shareanddiscussconstructdefinitionsandcorrespond-
tions and the corresponding measurements and inves-
ingmeasurementimplications,mayhelptobreakoutof
tigationsusingqualitativemethods. Landyetal.(2020)
thisstalemate.
showed that research teams studying the same hypoth-
For example, analogous to the multiphase approach
esis independently make many different design deci-
for theory construction in the psychopathology domain
sions, partly based on hidden heterogeneity in their
specifically (Hawkins-Elder & Ward, 2020), for most
elaborated construct definitions and implications for
psychological constructs in general we are in the sec-
measurement. LettingeachteamuseDCTspecifications
ondphase. Inthisphase,thekeyaimistofirstdevelop
to document these elaborations allows studying how
a rich compositional description of the construct of in-
these differences manifest in different study outcomes.
terest. DCT specifications help to document these de-
This approach can be used to provide insight into the
scriptions and their development over time and foster
amount of heterogeneity that exists "in the wild" for a
discussionaboutthesedevelopmentswithinandacross
givenconstructorresearchdomain.
researchteams. Inthisprocess,itmightbethatcertain
Second, instead of transparently documenting exist-
aspectsofaDCTspecificationcannotbecompletedyet.
ingheterogeneity,DCTspecificationscanalsobeusedto
For example, because it is too soon to provide instruc-
reduceheterogeneitywithinalarge-scalecollaboration.
tions about coding qualitative data because there is no
If all research teams use the same elaborated construct
definition yet or an attempt to develop a measurement
definitions and measurement instructions (for example
instrument failed. It is important to document this as
developing those collaboratively prior to engaging in
well, becauseintheformercasethismightbeinforma-
the design of the studies and data collection), the de-
tivetoothersintermsofwhattoprioritize,whileinthe
grees of freedom in design choices are decreased in a
lattercasethiscontributestolearningbymeansoftrial
theory-drivenmanner.
anderror.
Third, DCT specifications can also be useful to sys-
tematically explore the effects of differences between
UsingDCTspecificationsinpractice
construct definitions. In this approach, DCT specifica-
DCT specifications are also valuable in terms of tionsprovidetheinfrastructurerequiredtoconductcon-
knowledgetranslationfromresearchtopractice. Profes- ceptual multiverse studies as recommended by Bring-
sionalsworkinginpracticalsettingsoftenhavetomake mannetal.(2022). Insteadofallresearchteamscreat-
decisions concerning psychological constructs. For ex- ing their own DCT specification or using the same DCT
ample, a prevention worker that develops a behavior specification, sets of parallel DCT specifications are de-
changeinterventionneedstoknowwhichdeterminants veloped for the same construct in advance. This allows
to target in an intervention. These determinants of- systematicinvestigationoftheeffectsofthedifferences
ten concern psychological constructs such as attitude in construct definitions and measurement instructions
or self-efficacy. Assessment of employees in an orga- orinstructionsforqualitativeresearch.
nization, as another example, also often concerns psy-
chologicalconstructs,suchasflexibilityordecisiveness. ThetechnologicalimplementationofDCTs
DCT specifications can help professionals to apply the
The development of DCTs involved developing two
latest insights regarding a psychological construct that
types of tools: conceptual tooling (logical structures
are often not described in detail in scientific publica-
or procedures that aid certain intellectual or epistemic
tions. For example, repositories with construct defini-
tasks, e.g., Theory Construction Methodology, Bors-
tionsandcorrespondinginstructionscanhelpapreven-
boom et al., 2021) and technological tooling (the im-
tionworkersetupasurveyfortheirprioritypopulation,
plementation of such procedures in, often digital, in-
or improve assessment of employees by having instruc-
frastructure; e.g., Holcombe et al., 2020). The latter
tions on which questions to ask in a job interview to
facilitatestheformer,butalsorequiresanumberofad-
gaininsightintospecificpsychologicalconstructs.
ditional decisions that, in the case of scientific endeav-
ors, have their own epistemic consequences (also see
===== PAGE 15/27 =====
15
van Es, 2023). The conceptual tooling consists of the that implements DCTs is also easy to implement in a
structureofaDCTspecification(i.e. theconstructlabel, centralized manner: for example, a learned society or
identifiers,andfoursetsofinstructions). Astechnolog- a journal can copy and adapt the PsyCoRe.one psy-
ical tooling to implement this conceptual tooling, we chological construct repository and impose whichever
have developed five open source products: a machine- procedures and policies they deem beneficial to their
and human-readable standard to store DCT specifica- aims. This still allows others to implement alterna-
tionsinfiles;awaytogenerateUniqueConstructIden- tive instances, similar to how decentralized social me-
tifiers(UCIDs);the{psyverse}Rpackagetoworkwith diasuchasMastodonoperate(andwhichhasbeenpro-
DCTs;apsychologicalconstructrepository;andaShiny posed as a superior model for publishing scientific re-
app to import, edit, and submit DCT specifications to a sults: Brembsetal.,2023).
psychologicalconstructrepository. Theopensourcetechnicaltoolswedevelopedarede-
In developing these technological implementations, scribed in more detail in Appendix 2, "Technical tools
we aimed to keep the infrastructure both open (i.e. toworkwithDecentralizedConstructTaxonomies". We
open source, and so consistent with open science prac- hope these will enable individual researchers, labs, in-
tices)andlightweight,soastomakeitaseasyaspossi- stitutions,andsocietiestocreatetheirownrepositories
bleforanybodytosetuptheirownrepository,adaptthe with construct definitions to achieve unequivocal com-
Shiny app or R package, or develop additional tooling. munication. With this design for decentralization we
We aimed to make these implementations practically aim to as much as possible prevent the reliance of re-
usefultoasmanyresearchersaspossible(regardlessof searchers on a small number of curated databases of
theirphilosophical(ofscience),theoretical,ormethod- construct definitions (which would again impede epis-
ological perspective). Related, we designed them to be temic iteration in favor of sub-optimal local optima;
easy (and free or cheap) to create, share, and update. MoreauandWiebels,2022).
Furthermore, we designed the technical implementa-
tionofDCTswithopenstandardstofacilitatefindability, Discussion
accessibility,interoperability,andre-usability.
A strength of the concept of Decentralized Construct
Toexplainwhyweprioritizedthishighlevelofopen-
Taxonomy (DCT) specifications is that the value of ex-
ness and inclusiveness, contrast DCTs with the use of
plicationismostlyorthogonaltoone’sontological,epis-
ontologies that are gaining popularity (e.g., Marques
temological, and methodological perspectives (exclud-
et al., 2023 and Spadaro et al., 2022). Such ontolo-
ing e.g., pure operationalism or idealism). Clearly de-
gies (i.e. uniformized and interoperable standards to
scribing what you study in a way that lends itself well
describe concepts and their relationships) are powerful
tore-useorimprovementbyotherresearchers(oryour
and flexible tools for data modeling, and as such, for
future self) is useful regardless of whether one adopts
formalizing knowledge. However, this power and flex-
a hardcore relativist or a moderate realist stance to-
ibility comes at a literal price: developing and updat-
wardspsychologicalconstructs,orwhetheronebelieves
ing ontologies requires specialized training which psy-
that psychological processes are interaction-dominant
chologicalresearchersoftenlack,excludingresearchers
orcomponent-dominant;whetheronehasapragmatic,
withoutsuchtrainingorwithoutsufficientfundingfrom
constructivist, or positivist epistemological stance; and
participating in epistemic efforts scaffolded by ontolo-
whether one finds oneself primarily using complex sys-
gies. This effectively centralizes epistemological power
tems approaches, thematic analysis, clustered random-
around more privileged institutions and researchers,
ized trials, Mokken scaling, implicit association tasks,
whichisbothnotstraightforwardtoreconcilewithopen
grounded theory approaches, or experience sampling
science principles (UNESCO, 2021), and epistemologi-
methods.2
cally inefficient (Zollman, 2010; Devezer et al., 2019;
This design for ontological, epistemological, and
Cartwright,2021). InsteadofdesigningDCTsarounda
methodological orthogonality facilitates epistemic iter-
central authority on which use would then rely, we de-
ation by enabling a single DCT specification to be in-
signed this implementation to allow anybody to set up
voked in an epistemically diverse set of studies. It has
the required infrastructure. We mean this to do justice
been argued that mono-method research is the biggest
totheUNESCOOpenSciencerecommendationtobuild
community-owned,openinfrastructureforscientificen- 2Only if one’s conviction is that all concepts one studies
deavors(UNESCO,2021). However,justlikeepistemo- are entirely ephemeral and do not persist over time, striving
logical and methodological diversity benefits science, for unequivocality and minimal hidden heterogeneity has no
we believe the same to be true for organizational and benefit, since then there is no pretense that the results of a
operational diversity. The technological infrastructure studyhaveanyvalueinunderstandingtheworld.
===== PAGE 16/27 =====
16
threat to the advancement of the social sciences (On- tionswithinalabordepartment,orlarge-scalecollabo-
wuegbuzie & Leech, 2005), and by attempting to re- rations, so that all studies conducted there will be con-
mainuntetheredtoaspecificontological,epistemologi- sistent in terms of how the investigated constructs are
calormethodologicalapproach,DCTspecificationscan defined, measured, and coded. To try to minimize this
facilitatemultidisciplinarycollaboration. risk, we designed DCTs to be easy to implement in a
Despitethatgenericnatureandassociatedversatility, decentralized manner (by only requiring open source
theimplementationofDCTspecificationsaswepresent software and infrastructure that is ubiquitous and of-
them here entailed a number of decisions. In these de- ten free). If for example a large learned society (e.g.,
cisions, we aimed to approach a sweet spot in terms the American Psychological Association) would set up
of trade-offs of simplicity and ease of use, required IT and maintain the only construct repository, this would
infrastructure and costs, and versatility and flexibility. likely nudge researchers towards using the construct
However, their central functions (enabling unique ref- definitionsstoredthere,especiallyifthatsocietywould
erencetoconstructdefinitionswithoutcentralcuration; decide to moderate or curate the definitions in their
attachingspecificadditionalinstructions; andeasilyre- repository. This would centralize and likely constrain
using or changing existing specifications) can be ful- which epistemological considerations underlie the ac-
filled in myriad other ways. For the time being, we ceptedconstructdefinitions,limitingepistemiciteration
believe that consistent use of DCTs would be a good and bestowing considerable epistemological power on
first step to achieve decentralized unequivocality, but thatsociety.
we hope DCTs will be superseded by better technology. Note that this design for decentralized (and easy
For example, in its current technical implementation, andfree)implementationdoesnotprecludealandscape
the Unique Construct Identifiers (UCIDs) generated by with a number of large construct repositories. We be-
the{psyverse}packagearenotabsolutelyguaranteed lieve it would be beneficial if a plethora of construct
to be unique. In addition, they are not centrally regis- repositories evolves. Because DCTs native format is
tered. A community-owned not-for-profit organization machine-readable (i.e. YAML), this provides a straight-
could provide a central register where UCIDs could be forward starting point for harvesting the data and pro-
"minted", similar to how Crossref manages Digital Ob- viding access through other interfaces. This would re-
jectIdentifiers(DOIs). taintheDCTs’findability,therebyhelpingresearchersto
Existing infrastructure can also be leveraged to ob- seetheconstructforestforthetrees. However,because
tain these benefits. When posting a DCT specification it’srelativelyeasyforsingleresearchersorsmallgroups
in a psychological construct repository (such as Psy- to set up their own repository, this safeguards against
CoRe.one) researchers can publish the DCT specifica- the tendency towards centralization that would result
tion and its provenance in a journal, which couples the fromalesslightweightinfrastructure.
construct’s UCID to a DOI. Other services, such as Zen- A related consideration is that the fields that make
odo, enable researchers to deposit academic resources upaDCTspecification(UCID,label,definition,andthe
(such as construct definitions) and offer version man- fourinstructions)havebeenselectedbasedonourexpe-
agement, with separate DOIs for each subsequent ver- rienceofconductingresearchinhealthpsychologyand
sionaswellasonecanonicalDOIthatalwaysresolvesto what would be needed in that domain. However, in
the latest version. This enables researchers to curate a other domains of psychology, other fields may be more
seriesofconstructdefinitioniterations,whereeachiter- relevant for a DCT specification, and some may not be
ationhasitsownuniqueUCIDandDOI,butalsoallows useful. For example, in some domains, there may not
easy reference to the entire lineage of construct defini- be any constructs that lend themselves to study using
tionswithasingleDOI(seee.g.,Panasiuk,2023). This qualitative methods. Given that different fields may be
is one example of how DCTs can already be combined relevant to different domains, and that it will not be
withexistinginfrastructuretoaugmentitsfunctionality. possible to establish a universally optimal set of fields,
A risk of using DCT specifications is that while they we would see a proliferation of different DCT-like stan-
were designed to enable easy iteration, they carry the dards as scientific progress. We do not consider this a
risk of researchers simply reusing a specific set with- discouraging prospect. The goal is to decrease hidden
out reflection on its quality and using the methods de- heterogeneity,andaslongasuniqueidentifiersareused
scribed above to improve the set. Although this would and specifications can easily be re-used or changed by
partly ameliorate the amount of hidden heterogeneity, otherresearchers,thatgoalgetscloser.
epistemiciterationwouldstagnate. Ontheotherhand, Similar to how DCT-like standards could proliferate,
DCT specifications do lend themselves well for achiev- various procedures for establishing DCT specifications
ing explicit homogeneity in the used construct defini- canalsobedeveloped. Differentdomains,societies,and
===== PAGE 17/27 =====
17
labs mayhave different ideasabout what, forexample, to make data more findable, as it becomes possible to
quality control of DCT specifications could look like. A search for all data investigating a given construct us-
societysuchastheSocietyforMathematicalPsychology ingagivendefinition. Whendecentralizedoperational-
could maintain a repository where they require specifi- ization specifications are added as well, findability in-
cationofformalmodelswhendescribinginstructionsto creases further, as searches for datasets collected us-
developmeasurementinstruments(VanDerMaasetal., ing specific measurement instruments and items will
2011), whereas the editors of a journal such as Quali- become possible. In addition, datasets become truly
tative Research in Psychology could require extensive interoperable, not only for humans, but also for ma-
instructions for coding qualitative data. Given the va- chines. If each data series in a dataset (e.g., each col-
riety in ontological and epistemological stances taken umn if the dataset is in wide format) corresponds to
bypsychologicalresearchers,thewaydifferentcommu- anitem-leveldecentralizedoperationalizationspecifica-
nities envision the path of epistemic iteration can vary, tion, and each decentralized operationalization specifi-
andDCTsaspresentlydesigned(i.e. lightweight)allow cationliststhecorrespondingUCID,itbecomespossible
communities to devise their own procedures and addi- topartlyautomatedatasetaggregation. Combiningthis
tionalinfrastructure. withmachine-readablehypothesistestsasdescribedby
Another avenue for further development is the shift LakensandDeBruine(2021)willgoalongwaytowards
towards measurement. In their current form, DCT enabling automated living meta-analyses, all without
specifications facilitate both a more operationalist ap- requiring(butstillbeingcompatiblewith)curationbya
proach(byspecifyingintheinstructionsfordeveloping centralauthority.
measurement instruments that only one specific mea- In some domains of psychology, it could be benefi-
surement instrument can be used to measure the tar- cial to direct this same meta-approach (i.e. creating
get construct) and more epistemological flexibility (by meanstoenabledecentralizedunequivocalcomprehen-
specifying instructions to develop measurement instru- sive specification) towards the description of processes
ments). A next step could be to develop another stan- and mechanisms. While West et al. (2019) provide ac-
dardfordecentralizedoperationalizationspecifications: cessiblemeanstodescribetheoreticalrelationships,the
a medium-independent format for specifying a mea- definitions of these relationships are again brief, and
surementinstrument. Byattachinguniqueidentifiersto alsoleaveroomforhiddenheterogeneity. Asimilartool
suchspecificationsandspecifyingtheUCIDtheyarede- could be developed for relationships. In fact, this ap-
signedtomeasure,itbecomespossibletoautomatically parent distinction between "nodes" and "edges" as core
trace columns in datasets to constructs through their theoryconstituentsisitselfachoice.
decentralized operationalization specifications. This Regardless of which elements one deems sensible to
would eliminate the need for coding measurement in- distinguish, a decentralized way to document exten-
struments when conducting systematic reviews, facili- sive definitions, share those, and unequivocally refer
tating living individual participant data meta-analyses to them can be a powerful method to decrease hid-
and systematic reviews. Data management standards den heterogeneity. From this perspective, DCT spec-
such as the PsychDS3 standard can then integrate such ifications can be considered just one incarnation of a
functionality. meta-approach that can be applied to other theoretical
Taking this one step further, adding specifications of elements to provide a standard for specifying, updat-
themeasurementtheoryseemspromising. Forexample, ing,andunequivocallyreferringtotheoreticalterms: in
thehypothesizedresponseprocessescouldbedescribed other words, to make sure we know what we’re talk-
inadecentralizedoperationalizationspecification. Doc- ing about, which is arguably the least that society can
umenting these in a transparent manner would facili- expectfromscientists.
tate parallel epistemic iteration over variations of DCT
specifications for a given construct by making auxiliary AuthorContact
assumptions required for valid measurement explicit.
Gjalt-Jorn Peters, gjalt-jorn@behaviorchange.eu,
Thiswouldyieldatleastsomeofthebenefitsdescribed
orcid.org/0000-0002-0336-9589
by Robinaugh et al. (2021) even when formal model-
Rik Crutzen, rik.crutzen@maastrichtuniversity.nl,
ing is not possible or desirable. Essentially, this would
orcid.org/0000-0002-3731-6610
provide a unified operational tool for implementations
of approaches such as test validity (Borsboom et al., 3See the project’s landing page at github.com/psych-
2009)andtheory-basedmeasurement(Borgstede&Eg- ds/psych-DS.
gert,2022).
Adding UCIDs to dataset metadata has the potential
===== PAGE 18/27 =====
18
ConflictofInterestandFunding Borsboom,D.,VanderMaas,H.,Dalege,J.,Kievit,R.,&
Haig, B. (2021). Theory construction method-
Wearenotawareofanypotentialconflictofinterest.
ology:Apracticalframeworkforbuildingtheo-
In addition, this work was not funded apart from the
ries in psychology. Perspectives on Psychological
salariespaidbyourrespectiveuniversities.
Science, 16(4), 756–766. https://doi.org/10/
gh65nr
Acknowledgements
Box,G.E.P.(1979).Robustnessinthestrategyofscien-
We would like to thank editor Matt Williams and re- tific model building. In R. Launer & G. Wilkin-
viewersJessicaK.FlakeandSamParsonsforveryhelp- son (Eds.), Robustness in Statistics (pp. 201–
ful comments, and Lucija Batinovi´c for typesetting and 236). Academic Press, Inc. https://doi.org/
LaTeXtroubleshootinghelp. 10/gd32bv
Brembs, B., Lenardic, A., Murray-Rust, P., Chan, L., &
AuthorContributions Irawan,D.E.(2023).MastodonoverMammon:
Towards publicly owned scholarly knowledge.
BothauthorscontributedtoConceptualization,Writ-
Royal Society Open Science, 10(7), 230207.
ing (both the original draft and review & editing), and
https://doi.org/10/gstkx9
Methodology. Gjalt-JornPeterswrotetheSoftware.
Brick,C.,Hood,B.,Ekroll,V.,&De-Wit,L.(2022).Illu-
soryessences:Abiasholdingbacktheorizingin
OpenSciencePractices
psychologicalscience.PerspectivesonPsycholog-
ical Science, 17(2), 491–506. https://doi.org/
10/gmdj5f
Bringmann,L.,Elmer,T.,&Eronen,M.(2022).Backto
basics: The importance of conceptual clarifica-
This article earned the Open Materials badge for
tioninpsychologicalscience.CurrentDirections
sharing the materials. The entire editorial process, in-
inPsychologicalScience,31(4),340–346.https:
cluding the open reviews, is published in the online
//doi.org/10/gqmqg5
supplement. In addition, the files used to compute
Bschir, K., & Lohse, S. (2022). Pandemics, policy, and
the descriptives of the lengths of definitions are avail-
pluralism: A Feyerabend-inspired perspective
ableatosf.io/yeqpb/(andgitlab.com/psy-ops/intro-to-
on COVID-19. Synthese, 200(6), 441. https://
psyverse-and-dcts).
doi.org/10/gq5cz9
References Cartwright, N. (2021). Rigour versus the need for evi-
dential diversity. Synthese, 199, 13095–13119.
Alexandrova, A., & Haybron, D. (2016). Is construct https://doi.org/10/gstkzb
validation valid? Philosophy of Science, 83(5), Castanho Silva, B., Jungkunz, S., Helbling, M., &
1098–1109.https://doi.org/10/gg33wb Littvay, L. (2020). An empirical comparison
Altgassen, E., Geiger, M., & Wilhelm, O. (2023). Do of seven populist attitudes scales. Political Re-
you mind a closer look? A jingle-jangle fallacy search Quarterly, 73(2), 409–424. https://doi.
perspective on mindfulness. European Journal org/10/ghx8nm
of Personality, 089020702311745. https://doi. Chang, H. (2007). Inventing temperature: Measurement
org/10/kcrc andscientificprogress.OxfordUniversityPress.
Borgstede,M.,&Eggert,F.(2022).Squaringthecircle: Crutzen, R., & Peters, G.-J. Y. (2023a). The regression
Fromlatentvariablestotheory-basedmeasure- trap: Why regression analyses are not suitable
ment.Theory&Psychology.https://doi.org/10/ forselectingdeterminantstotargetinbehavior
grhv9p changeinterventions.HealthPsychologyandBe-
Borsboom, D., Cramer, A., Kievit, R., Scholten, A., & havioral Medicine, 11(1). https://doi.org/10/
Frani´c,S.(2009).Theendofconstructvalidity. k2x9
In R. Lissitz (Ed.), The concept of validity: Revi- Crutzen, R., & Peters, G.-J. Y. (2023b). A lean method
sions,newdirections,andapplications(pp.135– forselectingdeterminantswhendevelopingbe-
170).IAPInformationAgePublishing. havior change interventions. Health Psychol-
ogy and Behavioral Medicine, 11(1), 2167719.
https://doi.org/10/js9b
De Graaf, A., Van den Putte, B., Nguyen, M.-J., Ze-
bregs, S., Lammers, J., & Neijens, P. (2017).
===== PAGE 19/27 =====
19
The effectiveness of narrative versus informa- Fried, E. (2020). Lack of theory building and testing
tional smoking education on smoking beliefs, impedesprogressinthefactorandnetworklit-
attitudes and intentions of low-educated ado- erature. Psychological Inquiry, 31(4), 271–288.
lescents. Psychology & Health, 32(7), 810–825. https://doi.org/10/ghsbbk
https://doi.org/10/gstkzd Fried, E., & Nesse, R. (2015). Depression sum-scores
Devezer, B., Nardin, L., Baumgaertner, B., & Buzbas, don’t add up: Why analyzing specific depres-
E. (2019). Scientific discovery in a model- sion symptoms is essential. BMC Medicine,
centricframework:Reproducibility,innovation, 13(1),72.https://doi.org/10/f67sz8
and epistemic diversity. PLOS ONE, 14(5), Gibbs, G. (2007). Analyzing qualitative data. Sage Pub-
e0216125.https://doi.org/10/gf86cs licationsLtd.
Diener, E., Emmons, R. A., Larsen, R. J., & Griffin, Glaw, X., Inder, K., Kable, A., & Hazelton, M. (2017).
S. (1985). The Satisfaction With Life Scale. Visual Methodologies in Qualitative Research:
JournalofPersonalityAssessment,49(1),71–75. AutophotographyandPhotoElicitationApplied
https://doi.org/10/fqqbmr to Mental Health Research. International Jour-
Earp, B., & Trafimow, D. (2015). Replication, falsifica- nal of Qualitative Methods, 16(1). https://doi.
tion, and the crisis of confidence in social psy- org/10/gfvmq8
chology. Frontiers in psychology, 6, 621. https: Gruijters, S., Fleuren, B., & Peters, G.-J. (2021). Cross-
//doi.org/10/gfpn82 ing the seven Cs of internal consistency: As-
Eronen, M., & Bringmann, L. (2021). The theory crisis sessingthereliabilityofformativeinstruments.
in psychology: How to move forward. Perspec- PsyArXiv.https://doi.org/10/g5sh
tives on Psychological Science, 16(4), 779–788. Guest, O., & Martin, A. (2021). How computational
https://doi.org/10/ghw2x3 modeling can force theory building in psycho-
Eronen, M., & Romeijn, J.-W. (2020). Philosophy of logicalscience.PerspectivesonPsychologicalSci-
science and the formalization of psychological ence, 16(4), 789–802. https://doi.org/10/
theory. Theory & Psychology, 30(6), 786–799. ghvcwr
https://doi.org/10/ghqcr8 Hagger, M. (2014). Avoiding the “déjà-variable” phe-
Feyerabend, P. (1965). Problems of empiricism. In R. nomenon:Socialpsychologyneedsmoreguides
Colodny (Ed.), Beyond the edge of certainty. to constructs. Frontiers in Psychology, 5, 52.
Essays in contemporary science and philosophy. https://doi.org/10/gd7fkx
(pp.145–260).Prentice-Hall. Hale, J., Hastings, J., West, R., Lefevre, C., Direito, A.,
Fishbein, M., & Ajzen, I. (2010). Predicting and Chang- Bohlen,L.,Godinho,C.,Anderson,N.,Zink,S.,
ing Behavior: The Reasoned Action Approach. Groarke,H.,&Michie,S.(2020).Anontology-
Taylor&FrancisGroup. basedmodellingsystem(OBMS)forrepresent-
Flake,J.K.,&Fried,E.I.(2020).MeasurementSchmea- ing behaviour change theories applied to 76
surement:QuestionableMeasurementPractices theories.WellcomeOpenResearch,5,177.https:
and How to Avoid Them. Advances in Meth- //doi.org/10/ghgnb5
ods and Practices in Psychological Science, 3(4), Hawkins-Elder,H.,&Ward,T.(2020).Theoryconstruc-
456–465.https://doi.org/10/ghnbdg tion in the psychopathology domain: A mul-
Flake, J. K., Pek, J., & Hehman, E. (2017). Construct tiphase approach. Theory & Psychology, 30(1),
Validation in Social and Personality Research: 77–98.https://doi.org/10/ghvmvg
Current Practice and Recommendations. Social Hodson, G. (2021). Construct jangle or construct man-
PsychologicalandPersonalityScience,8(4),370– gle? Thinking straight about (nonredundant)
378.https://doi.org/10/gbf8nx psychological constructs. Journal of Theoretical
Fried, E. (2017a). The 52 symptoms of major depres- Social Psychology, 5(4), 576–590. https://doi.
sion:Lackofcontentoverlapamongsevencom- org/10/gng6pw
mon depression scales. Journal of Affective Dis- Holcombe, A. O., Kovacs, M., Aust, F., & Aczel, B.
orders, 208, 191–197. https://doi.org/10/ (2020). Documenting contributions to schol-
gcsk3p arly articles using CRediT and tenzing (C. R.
Fried, E. (2017b). What are psychological constructs? Sugimoto,Ed.).PLOSONE,15(12),e0244611.
On the nature and statistical modeling of emo- https://doi.org/10/gk347c
tions, intelligence, personality traits and men- Huls, S., Van Osch, S., Brouwer, W., Van Exel, J., &
tal disorders. Health Psychology Review, 11(2), Stiggelbout, A. (2022). Psychometric evalua-
130–134.https://doi.org/10/gfj8tz tion of the Health-Risk Attitude Scale (HRAS-
===== PAGE 20/27 =====
20
13): Assessing the reliability, dimensionality Technique Taxonomy v1. Wellcome Open Re-
and validity in the general population and a search,8,308.https://doi.org/10/kxj9
patientpopulation.Psychology&Health,37(1), Maul,A.(2017).Rethinkingtraditionalmethodsofsur-
34–50.https://doi.org/10/gstkzf vey validation. Measurement: Interdisciplinary
Kok, G., & Ruiter, R. (2014). Who has the authority to Research and Perspectives, 15(2), 51–69. https:
change a theory? Everyone! A commentary on //doi.org/10/gf5stn
HeadandNoar.HealthPsychologyReview,8(1), Metz,G.,Peters,G.-J.,&Crutzen,R.(2022).AcyclicBe-
61–64.https://doi.org/10/gstkzg havior Change Diagrams: A tool to report and
Kruisbrink, M. (2022). Towards enhanced management analyze interventions. Health Psychology and
of fear of falling in older people: Unravelling in- BehavioralMedicine.https://doi.org/10/hrz4
terventions and measuring related avoidance of Miyakawa, T. (2020). No raw data, no science: An-
activity [Doctoral dissertation, maastricht uni- other possible source of the reproducibility cri-
versity] [ISBN: 9789464217124]. https://doi. sis. Molecular Brain, 13, 24. https://doi.org/
org/10/kxkf 10/ggmgw6
Lakens, D. (2019). The value of preregistration for Moreau, D., & Wiebels, K. (2022). Psychological con-
psychological science: A conceptual analysis. structs as local optima. Nature Reviews Psychol-
JapanesePsychologicalReview,62(3),221–230. ogy,1(4),188–189.https://doi.org/10/grhkxq
https://doi.org/10/gk9jpb Murray-Rust, P. (2018). Open data in science. Nature
Lakens, D., & DeBruine, L. (2021). Improving trans- Precedings.https://doi.org/10/gnkn6x
parency, falsifiability, and rigor by making hy- Nasa, P., Jain, R., & Juneja, D. (2021). Delphi method-
pothesis tests machine-readable. Advances in ologyinhealthcareresearch:Howtodecideits
Methods and Practices in Psychological Science, appropriateness.WorldJournalofMethodology,
4(2), 251524592097094. https://doi.org/10/ 11(4),116–129.https://doi.org/10/gmpjvz
gmbq55 Nosek, B., & Bar-Anan, Y. (2012). Scientific Utopia:
Landy, J., Jia, M., Ding, I., Viganola, D., Tierney, W., I. Opening scientific communication [arXiv:
Dreber, A., Johannesson, M., Pfeiffer, T., Eber- 1205.1055]. Psychological Inquiry, 23(3), 217–
sole, C., Gronau, Q., Ly, A., Van den Bergh, D., 243.https://doi.org/10/gcsk27
Marsman, M., Derks, K., Wagenmakers, E.-J., Nosek, B., Ebersole, C., DeHaven, A., & Mellor, D.
Proctor, A., Bartels, D., Bauman, C., Brady, (2018). The preregistration revolution. Pro-
W., ... Uhlmann, E. (2020). Crowdsourcing ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
hypothesis tests: Making transparent how de- 115(11), 2600–2606. https://doi.org/10/
sign choices shape research results. Psychologi- gc6xk8
calBulletin,146(5),451–479.https://doi.org/ Nosek, B., Spies, J., & Motyl, M. (2012). Scientific
10/ggj87k Utopia: II. Restructuring incentives and prac-
Lawson,K.,&Robins,R.W.(2021).Siblingconstructs: tices to promote truth over publishability. Per-
What are they, why do they matter, and how spectives on Psychological Science, 7(6), 615–
should you handle them? Personality and So- 631.https://doi.org/10/f4fc2k
cial Psychology Review, 25(4), 344–366. https: Oberauer, K., & Lewandowsky, S. (2019). Address-
//doi.org/10/gm62mr ingthetheorycrisisinpsychology.Psychonomic
Leising, D., & Borgstede, M. (2019). Hypothetical con- Bulletin & Review, 26(5), 1596–1618. https://
structs. In V. Zeigler-Hill & T. Shackelford doi.org/10/gf8dr6
(Eds.), Encyclopedia of Personality and Individ- Onwuegbuzie, A., & Leech, N. (2005). On becoming a
ualDifferences(pp.1–6).Springer.https://doi. pragmatic researcher: The importance of com-
org/10/kxkb bining quantitative and qualitative research
Lonsdorf, T., Merz, C., & Fullana, M. (2019). Fear ex- methodologies. International Journal of Social
tinction retention: Is it what we think it is? Bi- Research Methodology, 8(5), 375–387. https://
ological Psychiatry, 85(12), 1074–1082. https: doi.org/10/bwmj6n
//doi.org/10/ggw7x6 OpenScienceCollaboration.(2015).Estimatingthere-
Marques, M. M., Wright, A. J., Corker, E., Johnston, producibility of psychological science. Science,
M., West, R., Hastings, J., Zhang, L., & Michie, 349(6251),aac4716.https://doi.org/10/68c
S. (2023). The Behaviour Change Technique Oude Maatman, F. (2021). Psychology’s theory cri-
Ontology: Transforming the Behaviour Change sis, and why formal modelling cannot solve it.
PsyArXiv.https://doi.org/10/jspz
===== PAGE 21/27 =====
21
Panasiuk,S.(2023).LifeSatisfaction:DCTspecification Social-Medicine, 10. https://doi.org/10/
[Publisher:Zenodo].https://doi.org/10/kqtb ggbbw8
Panc, T., Mihalcea, A., & Panc, I. (2012). Self-efficacy Santor, D., Gregus, M., & Welch, A. (2006). Eight
survey: A new assessment tool. Procedia - So- decades of measurement in depression. Mea-
cialandBehavioralSciences,33,880–884.https: surement:InterdisciplinaryResearchandPerspec-
//doi.org/10/gk6fwr tives,4,135–155.https://doi.org/10/fcmm9d
Pashler, H., & Wagenmakers, E.-J. (2012). Editors’ in- Scheel,A.M.(2022).Whymostpsychologicalresearch
troductiontothespecialsectiononreplicability findings are not even wrong. Infant and Child
inpsychologicalscience:Acrisisofconfidence? Development,31(1).https://doi.org/10/gn8sks
PerspectivesonPsychologicalScience,7(6),528– Schnell, T., Spitzenstätter, D., & Krampe, H. (2022).
530.https://doi.org/10/gckf56 Compliance with COVID-19 public health
Peters, G.-J. Y., Crutzen, R., Roozen, S., & Kok, G. guidelines: An attitude-behaviour gap bridged
(2020). The Reasoned Action Approach repre- bypersonalconcernanddistancetoconspiracy
sented as a Decentralized Construct Taxonomy ideation. Psychology & Health, 37(12), 1680–
(DCT).https://a-bc.gitlab.io/dct-raa/ 1701.https://doi.org/10/gm35dt
Podsakoff, P. M., MacKenzie, S. B., & Podsakoff, N. P. Siegling,A.,&Petrides,K.(2016).Zeroinginonmind-
(2016). Recommendations for Creating Better fulnessfacets:Similarities,validity,anddimen-
Concept Definitions in the Organizational, Be- sionality across three independent measures.
havioral, and Social Sciences. Organizational PLOS ONE, 11(4), e0153073. https://doi.org/
ResearchMethods,19(2),159–203.https://doi. 10/f8w3hz
org/10/f8fqdb Skinner, E. (1996). A guide to constructs of control.
Ponnock, A., Muenks, K., Morell, M., Seung Yang, J., Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
Gladstone, J., & Wigfield, A. (2020). Grit and 71(3),549–570.https://doi.org/10/d9q7cv
conscientiousness:Anotherjanglefallacy.Jour- Smaldino, P. (2008). Models are stupid, and we need
nalofResearchinPersonality,89,104021.https: more of them. In Computational social psychol-
//doi.org/10/ghcrsz ogy(pp.311–331).Routledge.
Reschly, A., & Christenson, S. (2012). Jingle, jangle, Smaldino,P.(2016).Notevenwrong:Imprecisionper-
and conceptual haziness: Evolution and future petuates the illusion of understanding at the
directions of the engagement construct. In S. cost of actual understanding. Behavioral and
Christenson, A. Reschly, & C. Wylie (Eds.), Brain Sciences, 39, e163. https://doi.org/10/
Handbook of Research on Student Engagement gjfx4j
(pp. 3–19). Springer. https://doi.org/10/ Snippe,M.H.M.,Peters,G.-J.Y.,&Kok,G.(2021).The
gmxbks operationalization of self-identity in reasoned
Robinaugh, D., Haslbeck, J., Ryan, O., Fried, E., & action models: A systematic review of self-
Waldorp, L. (2021). Invisible hands and fine identity operationalizations in three decades
calipers:Acalltouseformaltheoryasatoolkit of research. Health Psychology and Behavioral
for theory construction. Perspectives on Psycho- Medicine, 9(1), 48–69. https://doi.org/10/
logical Science, 16(4), 725–743. https://doi. gmzj98
org/10/gh65nn Snippe, M. H. M., Peters, G.-J. Y., & Kok, G. (2023).
Rohrer,J.,Tierney,W.,Uhlmann,E.,DeBruine,L.,Hey- Determining the Conceptual Independence of
man,T.,Jones,B.,Schmukle,S.,Silberzahn,R., Self-IdentityinReasonedActionModels.https:
Willén, R., Carlsson, R., et al. (2021). Putting //doi.org/10/kdwx
the self in self-correction: Findings from the Spadaro, G., Tiddi, I., Columbus, S., Jin, S., Ten Teije,
loss-of-confidence project. Perspectives on Psy- A.,CoDaTeam,&Balliet,D.(2022).TheCoop-
chological Science, 16(6), 1255–1269. https:// eration Databank: Machine-Readable Science
doi.org/10/gh6f6r Accelerates Research Synthesis. Perspectives on
Romppel, M., Herrmann-Lingen, C., Wachter, R., Edel- PsychologicalScience,17(5),1472–1489.https:
mann, F., Düngen, H.-D., Pieske, B., & Grande, //doi.org/10/gstkzh
G. (2013). A short form of the General Self- Szollosi, A., Kellen, D., Navarro, D., Shiffrin, R., Van
Efficacy Scale (GSE-6): Development, psycho- Rooij, I., Van Zandt, T., & Donkin, C. (2020).
metric properties and validity in an intercul- Is preregistration worthwhile? Trends in Cogni-
tural non-clinical sample and a sample of pa- tiveSciences,24(2),94–95.https://doi.org/10/
tients at risk for heart failure. GMS Psycho- ggf3pd
===== PAGE 22/27 =====
22
Taylor,J.,Nailer,E.,Cohen,C.,Redman,C.,&Sherman, cisemeasurement,casualscaleusage,andcon-
S.(2022).HPVvaccinationandcervicalscreen- ceptualfuzzinessinemotionresearch.Emotion,
ing: The knowledge and attitudes of mothers 17(2),267–295.https://doi.org/10/f9w6ff
of adolescent girls. Psychology & Health. https: West, R. (2021). PAT: An on-line paper authoring tool
//doi.org/10/gstkzj forwritinguprandomizedcontrolledtrials.Ad-
Uhlmann,E.L.,Ebersole,C.,Chartier,C.,Errington,T., diction, 116(8), 1938–1940. https://doi.org/
Kidwell, M., Lai, C., McCarthy, R., Riegelman, 10/gstkzm
A., Silberzahn, R., & Nosek, B. (2019). Scien- West, R., Godinho, C., Bohlen, L., Carey, R., Hast-
tificUtopiaIII:Crowdsourcingscience.Perspec- ings, J., Lefevre, C., & Michie, S. (2019). De-
tives on Psychological Science, 14(5), 711–733. velopment of a formal system for representing
https://doi.org/10/gf4jhq behaviour-change theories. Nature Human Be-
UNESCO. (2021). UNESCO Recommendation on Open haviour,3(5),526.https://doi.org/10/gf5fmd
Science(tech.rep.).UNESCO.https://unesdoc. Williams, D., & Rhodes, R. (2016). The confounded
unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000379949 self-efficacyconstruct:Review,conceptualanal-
Van Der Maas, H. L. J., Molenaar, D., Maris, G., Kievit, ysis,andrecommendationsforfutureresearch.
R. A., & Borsboom, D. (2011). Cognitive psy- Health Psychology Review, 10(2), 113–128.
chology meets psychometric theory: On the https://doi.org/10/ggzktz
relation between process models for decision Wolf,M.G.,Ihm,E.D.,Maul,A.,&Taves,A.(2023).The
making and latent variable models for individ- Response Process Evaluation Method (preprint).
ual differences. Psychological Review, 118(2), PsyArXiv.https://doi.org/10/rbd2x
339–356.https://doi.org/10/drf5nw Wood, C., Conner, M., Sandberg, T., Godin, G., &
VanRooij,I.,&Baggio,G.(2020).Theorydevelopment Sheeran,P.(2014).Whydoesaskingquestions
requiresanepistemologicalseachange.Psycho- change health behaviours? The mediating role
logical Inquiry, 31(4), 321–325. https://doi. of attitude accessibility. Psychology & Health,
org/10/gjzbzq 29(4),390–404.https://doi.org/10/gf83n2
VanTuijl,P.,Verboon,P.,&VanLankveld,J.(2023).Ini- Yarkoni,T.(2020).Implicitrealismimpedesprogressin
tial development and validation of item banks psychology:CommentonFried(2020).Psycho-
to measure problematic hypersexuality. Open logical Inquiry, 31(4), 326–333. https://doi.
Research Europe, 3, 129. https://doi.org/10/ org/10/ghzsjk
gstkzk Zollman, K. (2010). The epistemic benefit of transient
Van Tuijl, P., Verboon, P., & Van Lankveld, J. J. D. M. diversity.Erkenntnis,72(1),17–35.https://doi.
(2023). Three Quarks for Hypersexuality Re- org/10/dnjk7f
search. Sexes, 4(1), 118–132. https://doi.org/
10/kqjb
van Es, K. (2023). Unpacking tool criticism as prac-
tice, in practice. Digital Humanities Quarterly,
017(2). https://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/
vol/17/2/000692/000692.html
Vazire, S. (2018). Implications of the credibility revo-
lution for productivity, creativity, and progress.
Perspectives on Psychological Science, 13(4),
411–417.https://doi.org/10/gd59dt
Vazire, S., Schiavone, S., & Bottesini, J. (2022). Cred-
ibility beyond replicability: Improving the four
validities in psychological science. Current Di-
rections in Psychological Science, 31(2), 162–
168.https://doi.org/10/grht5z
Warnell, K., & Redcay, E. (2019). Minimal coherence
amongvariedtheoryofmindmeasuresinchild-
hood and adulthood. Cognition, 191, 103997.
https://doi.org/10/gf3787
Weidman, A., Steckler, C., & Tracy, J. (2017). The jin-
gle and jangle of emotion assessment: Impre-
===== PAGE 23/27 =====
23
Appendix1: MethodstodevelopDecentralizedCon- author(s)—or other researchers using this specific the-
structTaxonomyspecifications ory(Kok&Ruiter,2014). Adownsideisthatinpractice,
many theories have very brief construct definitions, let
There are several methods to develop these DCT
alone detailed instructions on how to use them in re-
specifications. Thesemethodsdifferintermsof, forex-
search. Thismayforceresearchersthemselvesto"fillin
ample, point of departure (e.g., theory, expertise) and
theblanks"thatexistindocumentationaboutaspecific
number of sources. We introduce these different meth-
theory. And, more in general, relying on a single the-
ods as well as their benefits and drawbacks. It is im-
ory might result in a narrow view on the psychological
portanttokeepinmindthatthesemethodsarewaysto
construct of interest. Still, even if the resulting DCT
elaborate construct definitions into comprehensive def-
specifications end up just describing how a team of re-
initionswithcorrespondinginstructions—theyarenot
searchersdecidedto"fillinblanks"intheconstructdef-
waystoarriveatthoseconstructs. Tothatend,wedirect
initions in the original theory formulation, that would
readerstoprocedurestodeveloptheory(e.g.,Borsboom
providevaluablecontexttootherresearchers.
etal.,2021;Hawkins-Elder&Ward,2020;Podsakoffet
al.,2016). Multipletheoriesapproach
Transparentdescriptiveapproach The multiple theories approach consists of conduct-
ing a systematic review of primary sources of various
Aninitialsteptomoveawayfromimplicitlydifferent
theories. This results in a comprehensive overview of
construct definitions is to transparently describe con-
theoretical contributions. For such an overview to be
structs and the way in which they are used in a spe-
comprehensive, the search strategy should not be fo-
cific study. This transparency enables consumers of re-
cusedonspecifictheories,butonthepsychologicalcon-
search (e.g., readers of an article) to understand how
struct of interest. A benefit similar to the single the-
producers of research (e.g., authors of an article) de-
ory approach is the direct link between the construct
fined and used the constructs in that study. An advan-
definitions and instructions on how to use them in re-
tage is that this approach is very easily applicable—it
search (if they are specified). The resources required
is in line with the imperative for transparent reporting
arerelativelyhigh,giventheneedtoconductasystem-
thatisalsostimulatedby,forexample,variousreporting
atic review. This investment likely pays off through ob-
guidelinesconcerningwhataspectstodescribewhenre-
tainingvariousconstructdefinitionsandinstructionson
portingaspecificstudy(e.g.,CONSORTforrandomized
how to use them in research. The researchers can then
trials, COREQ for qualitative research). Moreover, it
choose to integrate these into one comprehensive DCT
caninprinciplealsobeappliedinhindsightafterinitial
specification, or alternatively, to develop multiple DCT
reporting of a study. On the one hand, this approach
specifications. This choice between producing one or
can be seen as an initial step towards being more ex-
multipleDCTspecificationsisamethodologicalconsid-
plicit, even though the other methods described below
eration that does not only hold for this specific method
are expected to result in more rigorous elaboration of
todevelopDCTspecifications.
constructdefinitions. Ontheotherhand, theenhanced
transparency achieved by simply making explicit what Meta-empiricalapproach
would otherwise remain implicit makes even this most
Where the single theory approach and the multi-
straightforwardapproachanimportantstepforward.
ple theories approach can be considered deductive, the
Singletheoryapproach meta-empirical approach is instead inductive. It con-
sists of conducting a scoping review of empirical con-
The single theory approach consists of studying ex-
tributions in which psychological constructs have been
isting documentation about a specific theory. The pri-
used. Thisresultsinanoverviewofvarious(aspectsof)
mary source is often the work of the original author(s)
definitions that are used in different empirical contri-
of the theory. A benefit is that this approach requires
butions as well as their operationalizations (e.g., ques-
limited resources. Moreover, this approach is probably
tionnaires, items, tasks). It casts a wide net of how the
easilyapplicable,becauseintheory,atheoryshouldalso
psychological construct of interest is used. Similar to
specifyhowtodevelopameasurementinstrument(and
conductingasystematicreviewwithinthemultiplethe-
perhaps also how to conduct qualitative research using
ories approach, the resources required for conducting
that theory). So, there is a more direct link between
a scoping review are relatively high. However, a bene-
theconstructdefinitionsandinstructionsonhowtouse
fitisthatanoverviewofmeasurementinstrumentsand
them in research. Over time, DCT specifications based
applications in qualitative research is obtained, which
onasingletheorycanalsobeimprovedbytheoriginal
can help the researchers by grounding the four sets of
===== PAGE 24/27 =====
24
instructionsintheexistingliterature. Foranexampleof is characterized by a systematic process used to en-
this approach, see Snippe et al. (2021), and for a sub- able collective input of a panel of experts. Usually this
sequent application, see Snippe et al. (2023). Like the process is characterized by multiple iterative rounds in
multiple theory approach, this approach still requires which input from previous rounds is fed back in an
that choices need to be made about whether and how anonymous way (Nasa et al., 2021). The benefit of
tointegrateintooneDCTspecificationormultipleDCT thisanonymityisthatexpertsmightbemoreinclinedto
specifications. share their thinking about the psychological construct
of interest and feel less vulnerable. Furthermore, the
Reverseengineeringapproach
Delphi approach is geared towards reaching consen-
sus (based on pre-specified criteria), which might also
It is not always feasible or necessary to conduct a
contribute to broadly supported DCT specifications. A
systematic review to develop a DCT specification. Re-
drawbackofsuchconsensus-basedbroadsupportisthat
searchersmayalsoalreadyhaveameasurementinstru-
it may carry the risk of stagnating epistemic iteration
ment they typically use. In that case, they can derive
(though awareness of that risk may allow mitigating
a construct definition from that instrument by closely
it). A second drawback is that optimizing for consen-
inspecting the items. In this process, the researchers
susdoesnotsimultaneouslyoptimizeforaccuracy,com-
explicate those aspects of the construct that they con-
prehensiveness,validity,orconceptualclarity,whilestill
sidermostrelevant,aswellastheirinterpretation. Such
imbuing the result with a certain authority that may
DCT specifications may start out relatively brief if the
suggest such merits. Therefore, it is important to bear
item content does not provide much footing. However,
in mind that this support on its own is not informative
even in such scenarios, brief initial DCT specifications
regardingthequalityoftheDTCspecification.
still provide a convenient tool to enhance the trans-
parency about authors’ elaborated construct definition
Primaryqualitativeresearchapproach
as it guided their theorizing and study design, and it
serves as a concrete starting point for further develop- Besides the approaches based on available literature
ment. or expertise, also primary research approaches can be
used to develop DCT specifications. The primary quali-
Expert-basedrationalistapproach
tativeresearchapproachconsistsofinterviewingpeople
about a preliminary conceptualization of a construct.
Whilethepreviouslydiscussedapproachesarebased
The transcripts of these interviews are then coded—a
onwhatisavailableineithertheoreticalorempiricallit-
process of identifying passages in the text, searching
erature,DCTspecificationscanalsobedevelopedbased
and identifying concepts and finding relations between
onone’sownthinkingaboutthepsychologicalconstruct
them(Gibbs,2007). Thisallowsforintegrationoflived
of interest. Reasoning by experts is then the point of
experiences of people in DCT specifications. A down-
departure, which is why this is labeled as a rational-
side,however,isthatthepreliminaryconceptualization
ist approach. This can be done by a single expert or a
is based on an initial construct definition that serves
(mostly small) team of experts. This approach requires
as a starting point for interview questions. This might
limited resources. An important benefit is, in contrast
steer interviewees when elaborating on the psychologi-
torelyingonwhatisavailableinexistingliterature,the
cal construct of interest. It is recommended, therefore,
level of detail in the DCT specifications can be as ex-
to document this initial construct definition in a DCT
tensiveasneeded. Thisenablesadetailedspecification
specification and use the results from primary qualita-
of the direct link between the construct definitions and
tive research to develop a new DCT specification. This
instructions on how to use them in research (which is
contributestotransparencyintheprocessofdeveloping
often lacking in existing literature). Given that this ap-
construct definitions. This approach can be seen as an
proachreliesonalimitednumberofexperts,thismight
example of epistemic iteration, albeit on a very small
result in a narrow view on the psychological construct
scale.
ofinterest. Amoreimportantdownsideisthatestimates
ofindividualexpertsaboutpsychologicalconstructsare
Primarypsychometricresearchapproach
pronetoerror(Crutzen&Peters,2023b).
Another method relying on data from participants is
Expert-basedDelphiapproach
the primary psychometric research approach. Imagine
that a content analysis of 7 commonly used measure-
The expert-based Delphi approach is similar to the
mentinstrumentsreveals52disparatedepressionsymp-
expert-based rationalist approach, although it usually
toms (Fried, 2017a). A next step could then be to col-
involves a larger number of experts. This approach
latealltheseitemsfromtheexistingmeasurementsand
===== PAGE 25/27 =====
25
run an exploratory factor analysis to identify (and sub- Appendix2: TechnicaltoolstoworkwithDecentral-
sequentlydefine)oneormorepsychologicalconstructs. izedConstructTaxonomies
At first glance, this might sound like an appealing ap-
Wedevelopedfiveopensourcetechnicaltoolstosup-
proachbecauseoftworeasons. First,manyresearchers
port working with DCT specifications. The first is a
are already familiar with the required statistical proce-
way to store and share DCT specifications using the
dures, and collecting data from large numbers of par-
YAML file format. The second is the {psyverse} R
ticipants may be taken to imply generalizable findings.
package that supports creating and reading such files.
Second, a focus on psychometrics can be seen as legit-
The third is the generation of Unique Construct Identi-
imizing psychology as a "hard" science (Alexandrova &
fiers (UCIDs). The fourth is the Constructor Shiny App
Haybron, 2016). However, this approach also suffers
that provides a graphical user interface to {psyverse}
fromanumberofdrawbacks. First,thesetofitemsthat
to make it as easy as possible to create files with DCT
isusedalreadynarrowsdownwhatcouldpotentiallybe
specifications. The fifth is an open source and open ac-
partofthosedefinitions(likeintheprimaryqualitative
cess repository that hosts DCT files; organizes them in
research approach). Second, as mentioned before, sets
anumberofoverviewsaswellasinasearchabletable;
ofitemsdesignedtonotmeasureanycoherentpsycho-
andproducesuniqueUCID-basedURLsforagivenDCT
logical construct can still yield factor loading patterns
specification. Wewillbrieflydiscusseachtechnicaltool
consistentwithbeingvalidmeasures(Maul,2017). For
here.
psychometric analyses to be informative, a strong the-
ory is first required as well as a well-justified measure-
TheDCTYAMLstandard
ment model, and when still working towards adequate
constructdefinitions,thismaynotyetbeavailable. It is important that published construct definitions
aresimultaneouslyhuman-andmachine-readable. This
imperative is included in the UNESCO Open Science
recommendation (UNESCO, 2021) and put into prac-
tice in a rapidly growing number of recent innovations
(Lakens & DeBruine, 2021; Metz et al., 2022; West,
2021). In order to achieve this machine-readability,
a data serialization file format needs to be chosen,
and we have chosen YAML (a recursive acronym that
stands for "YAML Ain’t Markup Language"). This for-
mat is designed to be simultaneously human-readable
and machine-readable. An additional advantage isthat
YAML is also a superset of the JavaScript Object Nota-
tion(JSON)standard, whichmeansthatDCTscanalso
bespecifiedinJSONifresearchersprefer(butnotethat
YAMLismorehuman-readable).
A DCT specification has to be stored with the key
"dct", the value of which should be a list containing
a set of values with keys "version" (containing one
value: the version of the DCT specification format),
"id" (containing the UCID), "label" (containing the
human-readablelabelfortheconstruct,whichdoesnot
have to be unique), "date" (containing the date the
DCT specification was created), as well as lists with
keys "definition", "measure_dev", "measure_code",
"aspect_dev", and "aspect_code". The "definition"
list contains at least one key-value pair with key
"definition"andasvaluetheconstructdefinition. The
last four lists contain at least one key-value pair with
key"instruction"andasvaluetheinstructionsfor,re-
spectively, developing measurement instruments, cod-
ingmeasurementinstruments,elicitingqualitativedata,
andcodingqualitativedata.
===== PAGE 26/27 =====
26
There are also a number of optional additional key- tent is specified for field "id", that is used as the UCID.
value pairs. For example, as metadata, directly within Ifcontentisspecifiedforfield"prefix", aquasi-unique
the "dct" list, "dct_version" can be specified, which string is appended to create a UCID. If both "prefix"
holds the version of the DCT specification. Given the and "id" are specified, the prefix must be exactly the
aim to establish a practice of epistemic iteration, being prefixasusedintheidentifier. Thelastoptionalfieldis
abletorefertoaversionofaconstructdefinitioncanbe the"comments"field.
moreconvenientthanusingtheUCIDordate. Itisalso
UniqueConstructIdentifiers(UCIDs)
possible to specify one or more sources the DCT speci-
fication was based on, as well as relationships to other
Unequivocal reference to constructs requires unique
DCTspecifications. Thereisalsoanoptional"comments"
construct identifiers. However, without a central au-
field which can be used to specify, for example, the au-
thority that implements procedures to prevent dupli-
thors, additional metadata, or link to repositories or
cate identifiers (as is the case for digital object identi-
web pages with more information. Finally, there are
fiers (DOIs) and the identifiers used by the Open Sci-
twofieldsthatcanbeusedtoautomaticallyretireolder
ence Framework (OSF)), this is not trivial to accom-
versions of DCT specifications ("retires") and to doc-
plish. Most decentralized implementations of univer-
ument their lineage ("ancestry"). The "retires" field
sallyuniqueidentifierscombinelocalidentifierssuchas
instructs repositories to no longer show DCTs with the
network adapter MAC addresses with the exact time,
specified UCIDs. This can be used if a DCT specifica-
but have the drawback of being relatively long (unlike,
tionsupersedesolderversion. The"ancestry"fieldcan
forexample,shortDOIsandOSFidentifiers).
be used to document which DCT specifications a given In{psyverse},wesolvethisproblembylettingusers
DCT specification was based on, allowing a repository
specifyaprefixandcombiningthiswithanalreadyrea-
toshowconstructs’"familytrees".
sonably unique brief text string. That text string is the
localtimeaccuratetoonehundredthofasecondrepre-
The{psyverse}Rpackage
sented as the number of seconds since the UNIX epoch
We implemented functionality to create and (1970-01-0100:00:00UT),multipliedby100,andthen
read DCT specifications in the {psyverse} converted to a 30-character number system to shorten
R package. Notable functions in this pack- it. Theresultingidentifierhastwoadvantagesovermost
age are "psyverse::dct_object()" (to di- universally unique identifiers: it is relatively brief and
rectly create a DCT specification object), its prefix conveys human-readable information about
"psyverse::dct_object_to_html()" (to show a therelevantconstruct.
human-readableHTMLrepresentationoftheDCTspec- TheseUCIDscanbeusedinpublicationstoefficiently
ification),"psyverse::save_to_yaml()"(tosaveaDCT and unequivocally refer to a given DCT specification.
specification to a file), "psyverse::dct_from_gs()" In addition, they can be used in URLs to create URIs
and "psyverse::dct_from_xlsx()" (to create a DCT that can be resolved to the corresponding DCT specifi-
from a Google sheet or Office Open XML spreadsheet, cation. Forexample, theopensourcerepositoryatpsy-
respectively, and optionally save them as YAML), and core.one exposes the DCT specifications it contains at
"psyverse::generate_id()" (to generate a UCID; see https://psycore.one/x, where x represents a UCID (e.g.,
thefollowingsection). psycore.one/instrAttitude_expectation_73dnt5z6).
When importing a DCT specification from a spread-
TheConstructorShinyApp
sheetformat,thespreadsheetmustcontainoneormore
worksheetswhereeachworksheetcontainsatleasttwo
The Constructor Shiny App facilitates constructing
columns labeled "field" and "content". Each subse-
DCT specifications. It is a web application that allows
quent row contains one key-value pair, and at least the
users to type in or copy-paste the different parts of
followingfieldsmustbespecified: "label"(withascon-
a DCT specification and download the resulting YAML
tent,thehuman-readablelabel),"definition"(withas
file. It is also possible to convert a DCT specification
content, theconstructdefinition), "measure_dev"(with
in a spreadsheet to the YAML format, or to upload an
as content, the instruction for developing measure-
existing YAML file so it can be edited and downloaded
ment instruments), "measure_code" (with as content,
again. Finally, it is possible to submit a DCT specifica-
the instruction for coding measurement instruments),
tion to the PsyCoRe.one repository, after which it be-
"aspect_dev" (with as content, the instruction for elic-
comespubliclyavailable. TheConstructorShinyAppis
itingqualitativedata),and"aspect_code"(withascon-
availableatpsycore.one/constructor.
tent,theinstructionforcodingqualitativedata).
Optionally,"prefix"and"id"canbespecified. Ifcon-
===== PAGE 27/27 =====
27
An open source repository of construct definitions: andsoprovidebothauser-friendlyinterfacetoaddnew
PsyCoRe DCTspecificationsandtobrowseexistingspecifications.
Becausetherepositoryisastaticsitegenerator,itcanbe
Thefinaltoolwedevelopedtosupportimplementing
hosted on a number of free services, including an open
DCTsinresearchworkflowsisanopensourcerepository
sourceCodebergorGitLabinstanceadministeredbythe
for psychological constructs: Psychological Construct
learnedsociety,institution,lab,orindividualresearcher.
RepositoryorPsyCoRe. Weoriginallybuiltthiswiththe
However, a drawback of these design choices is that
Hugo static site generator, leveraging its ability to inte-
there is no backend running server-side code, which
gratedatafromYAMLfilesinasitetocreatearepository
prohibits, for example, user management or verifica-
that can be hosted with minimal infrastructural depen-
tion. Implementing verification could be added to the
dencies (e.g. without requiring a database backend or
current project architecture by adapting the Construc-
a server-side parsed language). The Quarto ecosystem
torShinyApptorequireuserstospecifyausername,e-
offers similar functionality, and has the added benefits
mailaddress,andpersonalaccesstoken,butthiswould
of being simpler and quickly gaining popularity among
considerablydecreaseuserfriendliness. Hence,tolower
researchers. TheproductsgeneratedbyHugoorQuarto
barriers for initial use, we decided not to do this in the
(a set of static files) can be hosted using open source
instanceofPsyCoRethatwerun.
(andsoopenscience-compatible)servicessuchasCode-
bergPagesorGitLabPages,orevenusingclosedsource
alternativessuchasNetlifyorGitHubPages,forprojects We run an instance of PsyCoRe at psycore.one, and
whereapplyingopenscienceprinciplesisnotdesirable. it is this instance to which the Constructor Shiny
Allcomponentsareopensourcesoftware,whichmeans App submits new DCT specifications. This submis-
the repository can easily be cloned and adapted to the sion process consists of a pushed Git commit which
needsofdifferentresearchers,labs,institutions,andso- triggers the execution of a number of commands us-
cieties(seegitlab.com/psy-ops/PsyCoRe.one). ing either GitLab’s continuous integration / continuous
PsyCoRealsocreatesuniqueURLsusingtheUCIDof deployment functionality (in our original version) or
each included DCT specification, allowing unequivocal that triggers a bash script on the server (in our cur-
reference to construct definitions. These URLs show rent implementation). The server or Codeberg/Git-
the construct’s UCID, label, definition, and the four Lab Pages runner then runs Quarto or Hugo to re-
sets of instructions. It also links to the DCT specifica- build the website. Quarto or Hugo then integrates all
tion’sYAML fileon GitLab, allowingresearchers toeas- data from the DCT specifications in the YAML files (in-
ily download it (and then, for example, adjust it and cluding any newly committed files) in the overviews
upload the adjusted version, which will then obtain a and construct pages. In our implementation, the Git
unique UCID). In addition to creating a webpage for commit causes a webhook on our own server to be
each DCT specification, PsyCoRe also creates a number called,whichthenpullstherepositoryandrunsQuarto.
of overviews: a searchable table showing all constructs This server also includes an .htaccess file which is
andwhichinstructionsareavailableforeachaswellas used to rewrite shortened UCID URLs (such as psy-
overviewswithalldefinitionsandanoverviewforeach core.one/instrAttitude_expectation_73dnt5z6) to the
typeofinstruction. URLcreatedbyQuarto(suchaspsycore.one/construct?
BecauseboththeConstructorShinyAppandthePsy- ucid=instrAttitude_expectation_73dnt5z6). This in-
CoRe repository are fully open source software, it is stance of PsyCoRe does not yet support automatically
relatively easy for learned societies, institutions, labs, retiringDCTspecificationsorshowingDCTspecification
orindividualresearcherstosetuptheirownrepository ancestry(seesection"TheDCTYAMLstandard"above).