
===== PAGE 1/3 =====
Opendata:Notapplicable Editedby:DanielLakens
Meta-Psychology,2024,vol8,MP.2022.3652 Openmaterials:Notapplicable Reviewedby:ThomasHostler,VictorAuger
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2022.3652 Openandreproducibleanalysis:Notapplicable Analysisreproducedby:NotApplicable
Articletype:Commentary Openreviewsandeditorialprocess:Yes AllsupplementaryfilescanbeaccessedatOSF:
PublishedundertheCC-BY4.0license Preregistration:No https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/27NF6
A broader view of research contributions: Necessary adjustments
to DORA for hiring and promotion in psychology.
Gavin T. L. Brown1
1TheUniversityofAuckland
RecentlySchönbrodtetal.(2022)releasedrecommendationsforimprovinghowpsy-
chologistscouldbeevaluatedforrecruitment, retention, andpromotion. Specifically,
theyprovidedfourprinciplesofresponsibleresearchassessmentinresponsetocurrent
methods that rely heavily on bibliometric indices of journal quality and research im-
pact. They build their case for these principles on the San Francisco Declaration on
ResearchAssessment(DORA)perspectivethatdecriesrelianceoninvalidquantitative
metricsofresearchqualityandproductivityinhiringandpromotion. Thepapermakes
clear the tension panels have to address in evaluating applications—too little time to
do an in-depth evaluation of an individual’s career and contribution, so reliance on
easytounderstand,butperhapsinvalid,metrics. Thisdilemmarequiresanalternative
mechanismratherthansimplyarejectionofmetrics. Tothatend,theauthorsaretobe
congratulated for operationalising what those alternatives might look like. Nonethe-
less,thedetailsembeddedintheprinciplesseemoverlynarrowandrestrictive.
Keywords: pedagogicalresources,conferencepapers,handbookchapters,textbooks
DiversifyingResearchOutputs? concernisabouttheunintendednegativeimpactofthe
narrowingofvalidresearchoutputstojournalarticles.
InPrinciple1,theauthorscorrectlypointouttheim-
portance of considering the teaching, leadership, ser-
ConferencePapers
vice and social impact of an academic’s career when
making judgments about hiring and promotion. The Not every field of psychology values most highly the
paper then proceeds to focus on how to better evalu- journal article. For example, researchin humanfactors
ate the research component of an academic profile. To in computing values most highly conference papers in
thatendFigure1focusesonthreekindsofoutput(i.e., highlyselectiveassociations(e.g.,theACMCHIConfer-
journal articles, data sets, and research software). The enceonHumanFactorsinComputingSystemsProceed-
authors provide indicators of rigour for each category, ingshaveanH-index=74). Psychologistsworkingwith
whichseemwell-alignedwithopenscienceframeworks computers will report their work in these supposedly
(e.g., registered reports, independently verified repli- lowly regarded conference proceedings. Hence, evalu-
cation, FAIRness, independent review, etc.). In addi- ators need to know that within this discipline journal
tion,theyprovidesuggestionsforhowtheimpactcould articles are not the gold standard. Thus, disciplinary
be determined using citation counts (an extant quan- normsforpublicationneedtobeconsidered.
titative metric in the H-index), the number of reuses,
GitHub stars, and Digital Science’s Altmetric score. For Handbooks
quantity,theyseemtosuggestthesumandfrequencyof
This concern for disciplinary norms extends to my
use are appropriate. These recommendations resemble
ownfieldofeducationalpsychology. Despitetheimpor-
stronglycurrentquantitativemetrics. However,thereal
tance of journal articles, education as a field still val-
focus of the manuscript is a narrowing of research out-
ues the book and the book chapter. This is even more
puts to journal articles at the expense of other kinds of
valued if authors contribute to highly regarded hand-
research publication and a broadening of research out-
books,suchastheAPAHandbookofResearchMethods
putstoopenscienceartefactsofdatasetsandsoftware
inPsychology,theAPAHandbookofMultimethodMea-
applications. Theinclusionofdatasetsandsoftwareare
surement in Psychology, the APA Educational Psychol-
welcomed additions to the underlying idea that contri-
ogy Handbook, or the NCME/AERA/APA Educational
bution to research methods is an important way to dis-
Measurement series. These chapters provide authori-
cern whether a scientist has added value to a field. My
tativeguidestothefieldbothpedagogicallybutalsoas
===== PAGE 2/3 =====
2
pointerstofurtherresearch. Authorshipisanindication Major textbooks on general and specific methods
ofbothpeeresteembutalsodeepcompetence. (e.g., Bollen, 1989; Field, 2005; Fitzmaurice et al.,
2004;Goldstein,2011;HancockandMueller,2010;Lit-
LimitationsofPrinciple1 tleandRubin,2002;TabachnikandFidell,2007)make
complexmethodologiesaccessibletojuniorresearchers
I suspect the real objective of this principle is not to
and for experienced researchers who are new to a spe-
restrict research value to journal articles, data sets, or
cific method. This type of work makes invaluable con-
software. I hope these are meant to be examples of
tributiontothefieldandwhilethismightbetreatedas
how research science can be adjudged, rather than a
contribution to teaching, in my view there is a strong
narrowspecificationofvalue. Nonetheless,asitstands,
cross-over to the notion of research contribution. A
this principle provides a very narrow a way of constru-
well-developedtechniquethatnooneknowsabout,can
ing what it means to add value as a research scien-
understand,orfollowisnotavaluablecontribution. In
tist. Valuable methodological contributions to any do-
contrast, a text that makes psychological methods ac-
mainincludetests,instruments,andprotocols. Indeed,
cessible is an indicator of both competence and contri-
publication of protocols is a key principle of open sci-
bution to the field. Indeed, it would be a rare com-
ence,butinthemselvestheydonotproducenewknowl-
mittee that would not hire or promote the author of a
edge. Inmanypsychologicalfields,developingandval-
methodstextbookthathadmorethan100,000citations
idating new ways to collect data from humans through
on Google Scholar (i.e., Andy Field’s 2013 Discovering
standardised tests or self-report instruments and mak-
Statistics Using IBM SPSS Statistics). In addition to
ing those instruments available for wider use is an im-
print-based publications, online open-access resources
portant contribution. For example, a recent follow-
such as Lakens (2022) demonstrate both competence
up study of the treatment of neo-natal hypoglaecemia
and contribution of research scientists and should be
upon educational outcomes in mid-childhood (Shah et
takenasasignofresearchcompetencewhenbeingeval-
al., 2022) made use of a standardised educational test-
uated.
ing system of reading comprehension and mathematics
Most research journals understandably publish
(Hattie et al., 2004). Under Principle 1, that method-
cutting-edgecontent-focusedresearch. Highlyregarded
ologicaldevelopment(awaytomeasurestudentlearn-
methodological journals (e.g., Psychometrika, Psycho-
ing in schooling) would not be valued, despite its con-
logical Methods, or Advances in Methods and Practice
tributiontomedicalresearch.
in Psychological Science) are committed to publishing
A key mechanism for exploring the psychology of
new methods that improve how data can be collected
learners is the self-report inventory. Well-developed in-
or analysed. However, few methodological journals
ventories, both theoretically and empirically, have con-
specialise in pedagogical instructional texts. An im-
siderable power to reveal insights into the mind of
portant exception in my view is Practical Assessment,
participants and the impact of those insights onto be-
Research, & Evaluation, a platinum (no APC, no sub-
haviour (e.g., self-perceptions of feedback; Brown and
scriptioncharges)journal,listedinScopuswitha2021
Zhao, 2023). The invention, development, and publi-
CiteScore of 2.1 and a rank at the 61st percentile. This
cation of such research tools is a real contribution to
suggests that contributions to this journal are read and
any field of investigation. Unfortunately, the current
cited for their methodological guidance. However, the
statement of Principle 1 would exclude useful method-
journaldoesnotpublishbasicresearchandisnotlisted
ological contributions that do not exist as data sets or
by the Web of Science and is likely to be ignored in re-
software.
searcher evaluations. Consequently, the potential to ig-
nore the impact of contributions in this kind of journal
PedagogicalContributionstoResearch
woulddoadisservicetoresearchscientistsandpsychol-
While it is important that new software and meth- ogyitself.
odsaremadeavailable,pedagogicalorinstructionalre- Although the authors state that indicators are not a
sources are needed to ensure the methods are under- validwaytoassessresearchcontribution,Iwasdiscon-
stoodandused. Hence,thisnarrowingdoesadisservice certedtoseereferencetoAltmetricsinFigure1asaway
toresearchandscientists. Unless,newresearcherslearn of quantising the impact of a research publication. In
how to use software and master the intricacies of new myexperience,robustAltmetricsscorescanbeobtained
data collection or analytic methods, the scientific field if there is a good marketing department surrounding
will not advance robustly. Pedagogical resources are anacademic. Fewresearchacademicsarerewardedfor
often disseminated in books, chapters, online instruc- botheringtowriteaPRpiecefromanewresearchout-
tionalvideos,andothermedia. put,andfewerinstitutionalmarketingdepartmentsun-
===== PAGE 3/3 =====
3
derstand how psychological research could be turned References
into material for the media. In my own career, a piece
withAltmetric=227(asof25May, 2023)hadtheini-
tial media release written by the lead scientist and a
Bollen, K. A. (1989). Structural equations with latent
piece with Altmetric = 168 (as of 25 May, 2023) ap-
variables.JohnWiley Sons,Inc.
peared in a high-ranking medical journal and was the
Brown, G. T. L., & Zhao, A. (2023). In defence of psy-
subject of the journal’s editorial. Hence, this metric
chometricmeasurement:Asystematicreviewof
seems to be sensitive to factors that may have little to
contemporary self-report feedback inventories.
do with the quality of the fundamental research. Fur-
Educational Psychologist. https://doi.org/10.
ther, it relies on Twitter as a source, which has seen an
1080/00461520.2023.2208670
exodus of research scientists to other platforms such as
Field, A. (2005). Discovering statistics using SPSS (and
Mastodon (Stokel-Walker, 2022). It would be tragic if
sex,drugsandrock’n’roll)(2nded.).SAGE.
this metric led to puffery and exaggeration by reward-
Fitzmaurice, G.M., Laird, N.M., &Ware, J. W.(2004).
ingresearch thatis surroundedby motivatedpublicre-
Appliedlongitudinalanalysis.Wiley.
lationsteams,ratherthanreflectingrealmerit.
Goldstein, H. (2011). Multilevel statistical models
Becausesomanyresearchpsychologistsworkinuni-
(4thed.).JohnWiley&Sons,Ltd.
versities, it is short-sighted to remove pedagogical re-
Hancock, G. R., & Mueller, R. O. (Eds.). (2010). The
sources from research evaluation. Universities teach
reviewer’s guide to quantitative methods in the
and so research scientists must develop resources to
socialsciences.Routledge.
help future researchers become research scientists. To
Hattie, J. A. C., Brown, G. T. L., Keegan, P. J., MacKay,
ignore that aspect of a researcher’s career would not
A. J., Irving, S. E., Cutforth, S., Campbell, A.,
help any employer in deciding to hire or promote a
Patel, P., Sussex, K., Sutherland, T., McCall,
psychological scientist. Likewise, peer-reviewed re-
S., Mooyman, D., & Yu, J. (2004). Assessment
search contributions that do not easily fit into the
ToolsforTeachingandLearning(asTTle)Manual
three prioritised categories in Principle 1 are impor-
(tech.rep.).UniversityofAuckland/Ministryof
tant in many sub-disciplines of psychology. Not includ-
Education/ Learning Media. https://doi.org/
ing them would do a disservice to psychological scien-
10.17608/k6.auckland.14977503.v1
tists. Nonetheless, extending valued research outputs
Lakens, D. (2022). Improving your statistical inferences.
toincludedatasetsandsoftwareapplicationsisagood
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6409077
thing. But this should not be done at the expense of
Little,R.J.A.,&Rubin,D.B.(2002).Statisticalanalysis
traditionaloutputsandespeciallypedagogicaloutputs.
withmissingdata(2nded.).JohnWiley&Sons.
Schönbrodt,F.D.,Gärtner,A.,Frank,M.,Gollwitzer,M.,
AuthorContact
Ihle,M.,Mischkowski,D., Phan,L.V.,Schmitt,
Gavin T L Brown, Faculty of Education & So- M., Scheel, A. M., Schubert, A.-L., Steinberg,
cial Work, The University of Auckland, Private Bag U., & Leising, D. (2022). Responsible research
92019, Victoria St. West, Auckland, 1142, New assessment i: Implementing dora for hiring
Zealand, or by email: gt.brown@auckland.ac.nz. OR- and promotion in psychology. Meta-Psychology.
CID:http://orcid.org/0000-0002-8352-2351 https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/rgh5b
Shah,R.,Dai,D.W.T.,Alsweiler,J.M.,Brown,G.T.L.,
ConflictofInterestandFunding
Chase, J. G., Gamble, G. D., Harris, D. L., Kee-
Noconflictofinterestisdeclared,Nofundingforthis gan,P.J.,Nivins,S.,Wouldes,T.A.,Thompson,
wasreceived. B.,Turuwhenua,J.,Harding,J.E.,&McKinlay,
C. J. D. (2022). Association of neonatal hypo-
AuthorContributions glycemia with academic performance at mid-
childhood. Journal of the American Medical As-
TheauthorisresponsibleforConceptualization,Writ-
sociation, 327(12), 1158–1170. https://doi.
ing-OriginalDraft,Writing-Review&Editing.
org/10.1001/jama.2022.0992
Stokel-Walker,C.(2022).ShouldIjoinMastodon?Asci-
OpenSciencePractices
entists’guidetoTwitter’srival.Nature.https://
This article is a commentary and is not eligible for www.nature.com/articles/d41586-022-03668-
any Open Science badges. The entire editorial process, 7
including the open reviews, is published in the online Tabachnik,B.G.,&Fidell,L.S.(2007).Usingmultivari-
supplement. atestatistics(5thed.).Pearson.