
===== PAGE 1/4 =====
Opendata:NotApplicable Editedby:DanielLakens
Meta-Psychology,2024,vol8,MP.2023.3679 Openmaterials:NotApplicable Reviewedby:SvenUlpts,AlejandroSandoval-Lentisco
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2023.3679 Openandreproducibleanalysis:NotApplicable Analysisreproducedby:NotApplicable
Articletype:Commentary Openreviewsandeditorialprocess:Yes AllsupplementaryfilescanbeaccessedatOSF:
PublishedundertheCC-BY4.0license Preregistration:No https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/27NF6
Interdisciplinary Value
Veli-Matti Karhulahti1
1UniversityofJyväskylä
This is a commentary on interdisciplinary value in the special issue "Responsible Re-
searchAssessment: ImplementingDORAforhiringandpromotioninpsychology."
Keywords: Assessment,Axiology,Meta-science
Iwritethiscommentarywithaconflictofinterestand Interdisciplinaryresearchisdifficulttocarryoutand
confirmation bias. As an interdisciplinary researcher, it thosewhopursueitseriouslyoftenstruggleformanyre-
is my personal interest to highlight the value of such latedreasons. Someyearsago,Iwasinvolvedinawork-
research, which could also be debated. From this posi- shop series where we discussed and sought solutions
tion, I argue that the four largely welcome research as- for the practical challenges of interdisciplinarity (NOS-
sessmentprinciplesforpsychology,proposedbySchön- HS Collaboration, 2020). One of the collectively iden-
brodtetal.(2022)andGärtneretal.(2022),shouldin- tified key issues concern the poor recognition of heavy
clude a fifth one: interdisciplinary value. Not everyone interdisciplinary efforts, especially for early career re-
needs to be interdisciplinary, but those who are should searchers whose work is typically assessed by (and in)
beevaluatedassuch. monodisciplinaryunits(seealsoGoringetal.,2014). If
For the working purposes in the present commen- theevaluatorsarenotsufficientlyfamiliarwiththecon-
tary, we may think of interdisciplinarity in research as structs, methods, practices, and theories appliedby the
themergingofelementsfromdifferentdisciplines. The assessed researcher—or interdisciplinary complexity in
term “elements” is important, as what is being merged general—itisbutnaturalforthemtonotperceivethese
maydifferfromconstructsandmethodstopracticesand elementsofhighvalue.
theories. Without entering deeper terminological de- The research outputs and evaluation schemes pro-
bates,itisimportanttoseparateinterdisciplinaryefforts posed by Schönbrodt et al. (2022) and Gärtner et al.
frommultidisciplinaryones,thelatterofwhichoperate (2022), while carrying clear potential for quantitative
on multiple disciplines not in interconnected ways but psychology, also exemplify the challenges facing many
respectively (e.g., Nicolescu, 2014). In one sense, psy- interdisciplinary psychologists. Because psychology, in
chology itself could be considered an interdisciplinary its current form, has developed a rigid identity as a
scienceduetoitshistoricalblendingacrossmethodolog- field driven by statistical methods, hypothesis testing,
ical,pragmatic,andotherdomains. and publication of various effects (and “the effects”),
One cannot have missed the recurring authoritative researchers who do things differently are easily inter-
calls for better and more interdisciplinarity across sci- preted as lacking in rigor or not meeting the best cri-
ences. For instance, a policy brief from the European teria or practices. The present space allows for a few
Commission explicitly asserts that “to foster, harness, examples,withfocusonthesectionpublications.
andleveragecollaborativeinterdisciplinarityshouldbe- Whenpresentingpublicationsasthefirstoutputtype
comeakeypriorityforEUresearchandinnovationpol- (of three), Schönbrodt et al. (2022) start by explicitly
icy”(Allmendinger,2015,p. 4). Criticallyrelatedtothe suggesting “journal articles” as the defining category.
target articles, the policy brief also notes how interdis- From an interdisciplinary perspective, the journal arti-
ciplinaryresearch: cle is but one of many relevant publications. For in-
stance, in computer science and related fields, due to
challenges common quality assurance and evalu-
their distinct lineages, the foremost publication cate-
ation devices which zoom in research excellence
gory is the proceedings article (for an historically con-
as the main, or sometimes only, criteria for mea-
textualized disciplinary diagnosis, see Fortnow, 2009).
suringperformanceandimpact. Thisiswhyinter-
Meanwhile, in fields like anthropology, literature, and
disciplinary work also carries much higher risks
sociology, which often engage in theoretical dialogue
for academic careers than research that is firmly
via in-depth cases, the monograph has been a key pub-
basedintraditionaldisciplineswhichstillserveas
lication format and, not uncommonly, also an explicit
gatekeepers(p. 5)
===== PAGE 2/4 =====
2
tenure requirement (e.g., Levine 2007). By the princi- part of research assessment, the below what, how, and
ples of Schönbrodt et al. (2022), interdisciplinary psy- whycouldbeconsideredbyanymotivatedcommittee.
chologists who publish their core research also outside
What?
the journal article category would be overlooked in (or
completelyleftoutof)evaluationsalreadybythenature
Some three decades ago, Nissani (1995) suggested
oftheirdifferentpublicationpractices.
that interdisciplinary “richness” could be weighted by
Ontheotherhand,whenresearcherspublishjournal
fourvariables: numberofdisciplines,distancebetween
articles in psychology journals, the evaluation schemes
them, novelty, and integration. In other words, when
proposed by Gärtner et al. (2022) are so specifi-
evaluating the degree to which an applicant or study
cally crafted for statistical designs that even conven-
thrivesininterdisciplinarity,oneshouldpayattentionto
tionally trained psychologists who deviate from the
a) how many disciplines are successfully combined, b)
norm—for instance, by doing qualitative research (in-
towhatintensity,c)whethersuchlinksarecommonor
terdisciplinaryornot)—wouldnotbeproperlyassessed.
pavethewayfornewbridges,andd)towhatdegreeare
Becausethequalityconceptshavealwaysbeendifferent
these bridges integrated meaningfully. In theory, these
inqualitativeresearch(e.g.,Stenbacka,2001),theyre-
variablescouldalsobeturnedintoametric,butagood
main difficult to score in the presented format; mean-
startwouldbetokeeptheminmindwhenqualitatively
while,itemslike“verifiedcomputationalresults”would
assessing the merits of interdisciplinary applicants and
hardly be applicable to any qualitative analyses at all.
theirpublications.
These issues would leave qualitatively specialized ap-
plicants in a weaker position by default. Similar notes How?
can be made of the two other publication types, data
Tocarryouthigh-levelassessmentofapplicantswith
andsoftware,whichremainunconventionalinthequal-
diverseinterdisciplinary(includingmethodological)ex-
itativedomainduetovariousmethods-specificreasons,
perience and expertise, evaluators, too, should repre-
such as the excessive resource demands of safely pub-
sentexperienceandexpertiseinvariousways. Because
lishing qualitative datasets and the lesser relevance of
a pre-set committee would unlikely have the knowl-
softwareintheiranalyses(seeKarhulahti,2022).
edge of future applicants (Kekecs et al., 2023), it is of-
To be clear, I completely agree with Schönbrodt et
ten practical to recruit external experts based on the
al. (2022) and Gärtner et al. (2022) when it comes to
applicants’ backgrounds. In addition to this already-
discarding journal or publisher metrics, and I am not
common procedure, it is essential that at least some
against valuing journal articles, datasets, and software.
evaluators also have personal experience of interdisci-
Mypointisthatassessmentshouldnotfocus—orworse,
plinary research (not merely representing multiple dis-
be limited to—such categories, as this would only con-
ciplines respectively). Successfully carrying out inter-
tribute to further narrowing of what good (psychologi-
disciplinary projects typically involves challenges and
calandother)researchisorshouldbe. WhereIamcur-
creativesolutionsthatmaybevisibleonlytothosewho
rently based, the Finnish National Board on Research
engageininterdisciplinaryworkthemselves.
Integrity (https://tenk.fi/en) has developed multidisci-
plinary assessment guidelines that take into considera- Why?
tion a wider spectrum of achievements, rewards, and
skills. With reference to these guidelines, the Research Some pieces of empirical evidence and common
Council of Finland already highlights that the “use of sense imply that interdisciplinary research operates by
journal-based metrics in the assessment is prohibited, delayed gratification. For instance, being trained in
nor may applicants add metrics to their applications”; multiple disciplines (their histories, methods, and the-
moreover, researchers are explicitly asked to list publi- ories) is time-consuming and usually results in lower
cations in nine categories ranging from “peer-reviewed quantitiesofinitialproductivity, whichnonethelesscan
scientific articles” to “scientific monographs” and “au- enablehigherproductivityandqualitylater(seeGoring
diovisualmaterial&software”(ResearchCouncilofFin- et al., 2014). Likewise, whereas interdisciplinary stud-
land, 2022b). Other contributions, such as “datasets”, ies tend to gain less attention and citations in the first
“guides”, “infrastructures”, “methods”, and “promoting years after publication—perhaps due to their unortho-
open science” are reported and evaluated respectively doxresearchdesigns—itseemsthat13yearsafterpub-
(Research Council of Finland, 2022a). This dynamic licationthesamestudiesalreadyexceedthecitationsof
model welcomes diversely specialized scholars, includ- monodisciplinary work (Noorden, 2015). If the value
inginterdisciplinaryones,withlesspredefinedbias. of interdisciplinary research accumulates exceptionally
To accommodate interdisciplinarity even further as overtime,anypsychologycommitteewithlong-termin-
terestscanharvestbenefitsfromidentifyingitearlyon.
===== PAGE 3/4 =====
3
In closing, I commend Schönbrodt et al. (2022) for Goring, S. J., Weathers, K. C., Dodds, W. K., Soranno,
their important suggestion to provide applicants “the P. A., Sweet, L. C., Cheruvelil, K. S., et al.
opportunity to explain in a few sentences if and why (2014). Improving the culture of interdisci-
theythinkthatsomethingimportantisbeingoverlooked plinary collaboration in ecology by expanding
when using these indicators” (p. 5). Although inter- measuresofsuccess.FrontiersinEcologyandthe
disciplinaryapplicantscouldusethesefewsentencesto Environment, 12(1), 39–47. https://doi.org/
explain the efforts, outcomes, and limitations involved 10.1890/120370
in interdisciplinary research, this would unlikely have Karhulahti, V.-M. (2022). Reasons for qualitative psy-
anymeaningfuleffectonacommitteethatisotherwise chologiststosharehumandata.BritishJournal
unprepared for such assessment. Interdisciplinary value of Social Psychology. https://doi.org/10.1111/
should be one of the research assessment principles in bjso.12573
psychology. Kekecs, Z., Palfi, B., Szaszi, B., Szecsi, P., Zrubka, M.,
Kovacs, M., et al. (2023). Raising the value of
AuthorContact research studies in psychological science by in-
creasingthecredibilityofresearchreports:The
veli-matti.m.karhulahti@jyu.fi
transparent psi project. Royal Society Open Sci-
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3709-5341
ence,10(2),191375.https://doi.org/10.1098/
rsos.191375
ConflictofInterestandFunding
Nicolescu, B. (2014). Multidisciplinarity, interdisci-
No meaningful conflicts of interest beyond the ones plinarity, indisciplinarity, and transdisciplinar-
mentionedatthestart. FundedbytheEuropeanUnion ity: Similarities and differences. RCC perspec-
(ERC,ORE,101042052). Viewsandopinionsexpressed tives,(2),19–26.
arehoweverthoseoftheauthor(s)onlyanddonotnec- Nissani, M. (1995). Fruits, salads, and smoothies: A
essarily reflect those of the European Union or the Eu- working definition of interdisciplinarity. The
ropean Research Council. Neither the European Union Journal of Educational Thought (JET)/Revue de
nor the granting authority can be held responsible for la Pensée Éducative, 121–128. https://www.
them. jstor.org/stable/23767672
Noorden, R., van. (2015). Interdisciplinary research
AuthorContributions by the numbers. Nature, 525(7569), 306–307.
https://doi.org/10.1038/525306a
Thisisasingle-authorpaper.
NOS-HS Collaboration. (2020). Research policy brief on
OpenSciencePractices thepracticalchallengesofinterdisciplinarity.Pol-
icyBriefbythePlaceoftheCognitiveinLiterary
This article is a commentary and is not eligible for
Studies 2018–2019. Oslo: University of Oslo.
anyOpenSciemcebadges. Theentireeditorialprocess,
https://research.utu.fi/converis/portal/detail/
including the open reviews, is published in the online
Publication/46300826
supplement.
Research Council of Finland. (2022a). Cv guidelines.
https://www.aka.fi/en/research-funding/
References
apply-for-funding/how-to-apply-for-funding/
Allmendinger,J.(2015).Questsforinterdisciplinarity:A az- index- of- application- guidelines2/cv-
challenge for the era and horizon 2020. Policy guidelines/
Brief by the Research, Innovation, and Science Research Council of Finland. (2022b). List of publica-
PolicyExperts(RISE).Brussels:EuropeanCom- tions. https://www.aka.fi/en/research-
mission.https://data.europa.eu/doi/10.2777/ funding/apply-for-funding/how-to-apply-for-
499518 funding/az-index-of-application-guidelines2/
Fortnow, L. (2009). Viewpoint: Time for computer sci- list-of-publications/
ence to grow up. Communications of the ACM, Schönbrodt, F., Gärtner, A., Frank, M., Gollwitzer, M.,
52(8), 33–35. https://doi.org/10.1145/ Ihle,M.,Mischkowski,D.,etal.(2022).Respon-
1536616.1536631 sible research assessment i: Implementing dora
Gärtner, A., Leising, D., & Schönbrodt, F. (2022). Re- for hiring and promotion in psychology. https:
sponsible research assessment ii: A specific pro- //psyarxiv.com/rgh5b
posal for hiring and promotion in psychology. Stenbacka, C. (2001). Qualitative research requires
https://psyarxiv.com/5yexm/ quality concepts of its own. Management De-
===== PAGE 4/4 =====
4
cision, 39(7), 551–556. https://doi.org/10.
1108/EUM0000000005801