
===== PAGE 1/3 =====
Opendata:NotApplicable Editedby:DanielLakens
Meta-Psychology,2024,vol8,MP.2023.3685 Openmaterials:NotApplicable Reviewedby:Sandoval-Lentisco,A.,Karhulahti,V.
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2023.3685 Openandreproducibleanalysis:NotApplicable Analysisreproducedby:NotApplicable
Articletype:Commentary Openreviewsandeditorialprocess:Yes AllsupplementaryfilescanbeaccessedatOSF:
PublishedundertheCC-BY4.0license Preregistration:No https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/27NF6
Comment on: Responsible Research Assessment I and Responsible
Research Assessment II
Erich H. Witte1
1UniversityofHamburg,Instituteofpsychology
A long-term personnel policy in filling professorships, aimed at remedying deficits in
psychologicalresearch,shouldbeabletosignificantlyimprovethescientificqualityof
psychology: “The main reason is that the hiring and promotion of such researchers
is most likely to contribute to the emergence of a credible scientific knowledge base“
(Gärtneretal.,inpress).
Keywords: historyofscience,theorydevelopment,systemtheory,motivation,
innovation
Therearethreefundamentalcriteriaforselectingin- different three levels and determined by the subjective
dividuals for professorships:a general criterion relates view of the authors. If, in addition to publications, one
to the state of the scientific discipline of psychology. It also uses the creation of data collections and software
should be derived from criticism of the discipline and developments,thenthisisunsuitableforageneraleval-
rewardsperceivedasinadequate. Accordingtothiscri- uation basis for professorships. Here, specialization is
terion, preference was given to those applicants who applied and continuous support by a methods profes-
were least oriented towards the inappropriate criteria. sorship or by external institutions is a better solution.
Themaingoalisthepositivedevelopmentofthesubject The development and maintenance of software as well
inthefuture. asthebuildingupofdatacollectionsshouldnotbetied
The second criterion refers to the needs of the insti- toeveryprofessorship,becausethisisafull-timeactivity
tute as a smaller concrete unit. There are tasks that beyond the content research if the quality is high. This
a person must fulfill as a professor. By focusing on re- cannot and should not be done on the side, because
search,existingprioritiescanbeidentified,whichcanbe then substantive research can easily fall short. This is
consideredwhenfillingtheprofessorship. Theselection where psychology needs to build its own focus, as it is
servesthepositivescientificdevelopmentoftheinstitu- doing. Therefore,Iwouldleavethesetwoaspects(data
tion. collection and software development) out of the evalu-
The third criterion then relates specifically to the ationcriteriaforanon-methodologicalprofessorship.
person of the applicant. In the previous activity of The idea now is to look at the instantaneous scien-
the applicant, indicators of cognitive competence, mo- tific status of psychology and to derive criteria from
tivational perseverance and implemented actions are the identified deficient developments that can reward
sought. In this context, superficial success is not the highqualityresearchbyappropriateevaluationcriteria.
bestindicator,becausehigh-qualityresearchisbasedon The discussion of misguided reward criteria that have
innovationsthatinitiallymeetwithrejection. Thereare brought about this state of affairs is extensive (Witte,
enough examples from the history of science. Physics 2023). This insight can now be used to highly value
providesprominentexampleswiththespecialandgen- precisely those criteria that work against the deficits.
eraltheoriesofrelativity. However,therearealsomuch Threedeficits areunmistakable: First, thelackofrepli-
more mundane innovations that have taken a similar cation of empirical results from individual studies; sec-
path from rejection to full acceptance (Witte, 1994). ond, thesmallbutstillhomogeneouseffectsinalarger
Therefore,specialattentionshouldbepaidtoindicators research context (meta-analyses); and the almost com-
that can be judged as a deviation from normal science. pletelackoftheorybuilding. Thesethreecentraldeficits
Thisalsorewardstheindividualriskthateveryresearch arenotindependent,becauseonlyawell-confirmedthe-
developmentneeds. Thiscanberecognizedbytheneg- oryleadstolargehomogeneouseffectsandhighreplica-
ativecorrelationofusualindicatorswithresearchqual- tion rates. This leads to the main criterion for research
ity,asdescribedintheoriginalarticle. quality, namely theory building. This includes the em-
Ifonestartsfromthesethreelevelsofreference,then piricaltestingoftheoreticalassumptionswithstudiesof
the four principles still seem too little related to the high quality and the integration of several studies into
===== PAGE 2/3 =====
2
one research program. If this integration is also done of course depending on one’s age, can be recognized
internationally, then this is particularly high-quality re- by whether someone has written a non-cumulative dis-
search. Notonlyconfirmationsaretobeevaluatedpos- sertation and a non-cumulative habilitation (opusmag-
itively, but also clear rejections. The result must be num). If there is a high-quality monograph, then one
transparent with respect to the theoretical assumption. can assume that someone is intrinsically motivated for
On this background, one can recognize the inferential research. (Booksarenotmentionedatallassubjectsof
statistical quality of the empirical studies (power, sta- evaluationintheproposalmade).
tisticalintegration)andthequalityoftheempiricalset- For actions in the research context, one would look
tings used (objectivity, reliability, validity). By the way, at active attendance at congresses, participation in in-
because of the innovative and therefore risky research ternationalgroups,owninitiatives(writingresearchre-
project, the publication that took place cannot make ports, conducting workshops, etc.), and obtaining ex-
the evaluation. It is conceivable that an opinion of a ternalfunding. Inthiscontext,theapprovalofexternal
researchprovisionallypublishedonthewebisobtained funding depends on many factors, but the application
from an independent international body. Indeed, rejec- is one’s own initiative. So, one should not use the ap-
tions by editors also use economic criteria with the im- proved amount as a criterion, but only the application
pact factor of the journal, which then correlates nega- process.
tivelywithquality. Thestandardpeerreviewprocessis Along-termpersonnelpolicyinfillingprofessorships,
alsonotasatisfactorysolution. Weprobablywouldnot aimed at remedying deficits in psychological research,
havefoundtheHiggsbosonbytoday. should be able to significantly improve the scientific
This concentration of evaluation criteria for profes- qualityofpsychology: “Themainreasonisthatthehir-
sorships from the field of research will very quickly re- ing and promotion of such researchers is most likely
duce the number of applicants to a manageable size. to contribute to the emergence of a credible scientific
Onethenevaluatesonlytheapplicant’sowntheoryand knowledgebase“(Gärtneretal.,inpress).
itsempiricaltestsasaselectioncriterion. Ifonefocuses
onthis,Ithinkitisconceivablethatnoapplicationwill AuthorContact
meettherequirements,incontrasttothefloodofappli-
Prof. (em.) Dr. ErichH.Witte
cations in the instantaneous standard procedure. This
University of Hamburg, Psychological Institute. Von-
is an empirical question that can be gleaned from past
Melle-Park5D-20146Hamburg
applicationsifoneanalyzesthefiles.
E-mail: witte_e_h@uni-hamburg.de
The second criterion relates to the institution where
webpage: https://www.psy.uni-hamburg.de/personen
theprofessorshipislocated. Globally,onecangoforho-
/prof-im-ruhestand/witte-erich.html
mogenization or diversity at the institution. Obviously,
Orcid-ID:0000-0002-9446-3211
thereare nogeneral criteriahere thatcould bederived
from psychology. So, these criteria must be developed
ConflictofInterest
specifically by the researchers on site. The goal now is
notresearchquality,butthedevelopmentofaninstitute Thereisnoconflictofinterest. Thereisnofunding.
in research. What do we want, what do we need nec-
essary, what helps us? That is what the institute must AuthorContributions
determine. Thisisasecondarycriterionbecauseitonly
Iamthesingleauthor.
indirectlyincreasesthequalityofresearch.
The third criterion is related to the person. One OpenSciencePractices
looks at the indicators for three aspects: the cognitive
This article is a commentary and not eligible for any
competence, themotivationalperseveranceandtheac-
Open Science badges. The entire editorial process, in-
tions shown. Behind this is the search for a researcher
cludingtheopenreviews,ispublishedintheonlinesup-
personality that can advance psychology scientifically.
plement.
One will be able to derive the cognitive competence
from the methodological foundation of the conclusions
References
by looking at the critical reflection of the statistical
methods used, the scientific-theoretical foundation of Gärtner,A.,Leising,D.,&Schönbrodt,F.(inpress).Re-
one’sownapproachandtheformalizationoftheoretical sponsibleresearchassessmentii:Aspecificpro-
statements. Connectionstoneighboringdisciplinesand posal for hiring and promotion in psychology.
to a historical perspective can also be beneficial. The Meta-Psychology.
motivational stamina to penetrate a field of research,
===== PAGE 3/3 =====
3
Witte, E. H. (1994). Minority influences and innova- Witte, E. H. (2023). Diagnosis and therapy of psychol-
tions:Thesearchforanintegratedexplanation ogy by means of the systematicity theory. https:
of psychological and sociological models. In S. //doi.org/10.31219/osf.io/dy4kx;
Moscovici,A.Mucchi-Faina,&A.Maass(Eds.),
Minorityinfluence(pp.67–93).Nelson-Hall.