
===== PAGE 1/4 =====
Opendata:NotApplicable Editedby:DanielLakens
Meta-Psychology,2024,vol8,MP.2023.3715 Openmaterials:NotApplicable Reviewedby:RomanStengelin,ErichWitte
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2023.3715 Openandreproducibleanalysis:NotApplicable Analysisreproducedby:NotApplicable
Articletype:Commentary Openreviewsandeditorialprocess:Yes AllsupplementaryfilescanbeaccessedatOSF:
PublishedundertheCC-BY4.0license Preregistration:No https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/27NF6
Assessing rigor and impact of research software for hiring and
promotion in psychology: A comment on Gärtner et al. (2022)
Andreas M. Brandmaier1,2,3, Maximilian Ernst2,4, and Aaron Peikert2,3,5
1DepartmentofPsychology,MSBMedicalSchoolBerlin,Berlin,Germany
2CenterforLifespanPsychology,MaxPlanckInstituteforHumanDevelopment,Berlin,Germany
3MaxPlanckUCLCentreforComputationalPsychiatryandAgeingResearch,Berlin,Germany
4MaxPlanckSchoolofCognition,Leipzig,Germany
5DepartmentofImagingNeuroscience,UniversityCollegeLondon,London,UK
Basedonfourprinciplesofamoreresponsibleresearchassessmentinacademichiring
and promotion processes, Gärtner et al. (2022) suggested an evaluation scheme for
published manuscripts, reusable data sets, and research software. This commentary
responds to the proposed indicators for the evaluation of research software contribu-
tionsinacademichiringandpromotionprocesses. Acknowledgingthesignificanceof
researchsoftwareasacriticalcomponentofmodernscience,weproposethatanevalu-
ationschememustemphasizethetwomajordimensionsofrigorandimpact.Generally,
webelievethatresearchsoftwareshouldberecognizedasvaluablescientificoutputin
academichiringandpromotion,withthehopethatthisincentivizesthedevelopment
ofmoreopenandbetterresearchsoftware.
Keywords: researchsoftware,openscience,metrics,rigor,impact
Introduction best practices for ensuring transparency, correctness,
andre-usabilityofapieceofsoftware. Bysettingahigh
Based on four principles of a more responsible re-
barofrigorinresearchsoftwareassessmentinacademic
search assessment in academic hiring and promotion
hiringandpromotion,wehopetofosterthecreationof
processes (Schönbrodt et al., 2022), Gärtner et al.
bettersoftwareand,thus,betterscience. Fromthisper-
(2022)suggestedaconcreteevaluationschemeforpub-
spective, we comment on some indicators of the pro-
lished manuscripts, reusable data sets, and research
posed evaluation scheme for research software contri-
software. We strongly support the increased emphasis
butions(Table3ofGärtneretal.,2022).
on research software as a creditable and commendable
scientific contribution. Why are research software con-
ProposedCriteria
tributionsimportantscientificcontributions? Wewould
like to respond with a quote from the Science Code ID9: CitationsandID5: Dateoffirstfullyfunctional
Manifesto(ClimateCodeFoundation,2011): “Software publicversion
is a cornerstone of science. Without software, twenty-
Considering citations in relation to age of software
first century science would be impossible” and “soft-
seems to be inconsistent with the proposal of Schön-
ware is an essential research product, and the effort
brodtetal.(2022),whoremindedusthatacoreprinci-
to produce, maintain, adapt, and curate code must be
ple of the implementation of DORA is to “abandon the
recognized.” However, despite the heavy reliance on
use of invalid quantitative metrics of research quality
computational infrastructure, the current academic in-
and productivity in hiring and promotion” (p.2). It is
frastructure does not adequately incentivize software
unclearwhyacitation-basedmetricforsoftwarewould
development and, specifically, good software engineer-
bemorevalidthantheequivalentforarticles. Infact,ci-
ing practice (Baxter et al., 2012). In line with prin-
tations suffer from additional shortcomings when used
ciple 3 of Schönbrodt et al. (2022), we suggest that
to evaluate the impact of research software, particu-
criteria for research software contributions must cap-
larly when used comparatively in the context of hir-
ture two major dimensions: rigor and impact. Impact
ing and promotion. For example, citing data analysis
measureswhetherthescholarlyeffort,implementation,
packages is much more commonly accepted than cit-
and dissemination actually had a visible effect on the
ingsupportingpackages(suchaspapaja, Aust&Barth,
field. Rigor means implementing high standards and
2022, used to render this article). Further, functional-
===== PAGE 2/4 =====
2
ity of successful, modular scientific software is ideally ID7: ContributorRolesandInvolvement
reused in other software packages to avoid code dupli-
We support the standardized assessment of project
cation and enable faster development of new software.
contributor roles, similar to the Contributor Roles Tax-
While we highly encourage reuse from both a software
onomy (CRediT; https://credit.niso.org). However, we
engineering perspective and for scientific progress, it
like to point out that the current evaluation schemes
challenges the validity of citation-based metrics for im-
yields different scores for the same effort of the indi-
pact. For example, consider the NLopt optimization
vidualresearcherdependingonthesizeofthesoftware
suite(Johnson,2014), whichcounts1,711citationson
project.
Google Scholar at the time of writing. NLopt is a back-
boneformanyscientificpackagesbothbecauseitimple-
ID8: License
mentsvariousoptimizationalgorithmsbutalsobecause
itis open-sourceandcan inspirere-implementationsof Atpresent,whetherapieceofsoftwareisopensource
these algorithms. One such example is the well-known is not evaluated at the pre-screening stage. However,
lme4package(Batesetal.,2015)forgeneralizedlinear an open license is central for assessing both rigor and
mixed-effects models, which is partly based on NLopt. (potential) impact, and should be part of the phase I
lme4hasmorethan58,000citationsonGooglescholar, assessment. Above, we already discussed the differ-
yetitisunlikelythatresearcherswillcitetheunderlying ent ways research software can have an impact — not
optimization algorithm. For another example, the pdc only by direct usage, but also by reusing software in
package (Brandmaier, 2015) offers functions to clus- other packages. Open-source software makes broader
ter time series based on one specific algorithm. The impact more likely and is a prerequisite for full trans-
TSclust package (Montero & Vilar, 2014) is a wrap- parency and reproducibility (Peikert et al., 2021). In
perpackage,whichimportsandmakesaccessiblefunc- addition,manyaspectsofrigorareimpossibletoevalu-
tionality from the pdc package as well as various other ate for closed-source software — for example, whether
clusteringapproaches,whichisveryusefulfromausers’ it is well-tested or bugs have been fixed. Giving more
perspective; however, we noticed that researchers now weighttoopenlicensesalignswellwiththeoriginalar-
citeTSclustinsteadofpdc. ticle’semphasisonopenscience. Therefore,wepropose
to penalize software if it does not adhere to an open-
ID6: Dateofmostrecentsubstantiveupdate source license (those approved in a review process by
the Open Source Initiative), for example, by allowing
Both ID 5 and 6 are difficult to ascertain because it
themonlyhalfofthetotalachievablepoints.
is not always clear when updates are considered ‘sub-
stantive’ or software ‘fully functional’. To assess active
ID17: ReusabilityIndicator
maintenance as an aspect of rigor, we propose to pro-
vide a simple check box, in which the author indicates This is one of only two criteria used in the pre-
whether a scientific software package is actively main- screeningphaseoftheproposalandthereforeisofcen-
tained (e.g., the software has a regular release cycle or tralimportance. Itisalsoimportantbecauseitassesses
an update within the last six months). In addition, au- aspects of rigor in software development: documenta-
thorshaveachancetoexplainwhytheiractivemainte- tion, active maintenance, and testing. However, by in-
nancemaybedifferentfromtheseguidelines. corporating the size of the user base, it confounds us-
ability (as an aspect of rigor) with usage (as an aspect
ID14: LinesofCode of impact). In addition, the criteria for the different
proposed categories are not clearly defined. For exam-
We discourage the lines of code (LOC) metric to
ple, the difference between “fairly extensive” and “ex-
measure effort. LOC highly depends on programming
tensive” documentation is unclear. As a result, this in-
language, mastery, and personal programming style.
dicator is more of a “gut-feeling” indicator, roughly as-
In particular, many LOC may simply mean that a re-
sessing the “size” of the software project. Instead, in
searcher writes inefficient and repetitive code, one of
thefollowingweproposetoassessrigorandimpactin-
the great sins of programming. On the contrary, a fea-
dependently as primary aspects of a software contribu-
ture of good software is modularity because it enables
tion.
reusing functions both inside and outside the project,
resultinginfewerLOC.
AssessingRigor
We propose to use the following aspects as equally
weighted indicators of rigor instead of the proposed
===== PAGE 3/4 =====
3
broaderre-usabilityindicator(item17inTable3ofthe at leastone (and up tothree) research projects thatdi-
proposal). rectly benefited from their software contributions. In
case of recently published research software, the merit
Tests statementcanbeusedalternativelytodescribeexpected
benefits to the field or potential use-cases of the soft-
Tests are essential to discover incorrect functional-
ware. We believe this to be a fair assessment of the
ity, investigate code scalability and reveal poor design
actualimpactthespecificcontributionoftheindividual
choices. Thereareavarietyofusefultests,suchasunit
researcherhad.
testsofsubcomponentsortestsofsoftwarefunctional-
ity at a larger scale (e.g., see the testthat package in
Summary
R, Wickham, 2011). It is possible to quantify aspects
ofsoftwaretesting,forexample,byassessingcodecov- In sum, we are thankful to Gärtner et al. (2022) for
erage,definedasthepercentageofcodelinesexecuted highlighting the importance of research software con-
duringtesting. However,webelievethatweshouldgive tributions as scientifically valuable products. We be-
pointsforsoftwarethatpromisesthatmajorfunctional- lieve the current proposal should aim to better reflect
ityiscoveredbytests. Thosetestsshouldbeautomated the distinction between rigor and impact for software,
oratleastopen-sourceandreproducible. similar to the guidelines proposed to evaluate journal
articles. Tothisend,wesuggestamorefine-grainedas-
Documentation sessment of rigor, and put emphasis on the merit state-
ment, in which software authors should argue in how
Just like for tests, there are different types of docu-
far their project impacted other scientific endeavors.
mentation. For example, tutorials showcase software
Last, we hope to arrive at an evaluation scheme that
usage with examples, and there is application pro-
incentivizes the development of open-source research
gramming interface (API) documentation for individ-
software. Note that the requirements of a given aca-
ualfunctionsandclassestoenablereusingfunctionsin
demic position should guide the weighting of research
other software packages. We propose to identify rele-
software when evaluating and selecting candidates. In
vantcategoriesofdocumentationforresearchsoftware,
somecases,researchsoftwaredevelopmentmaybecen-
e.g., installation instructions, tutorials, API, and com-
traltoapositionand,therefore,arequirement(suchas
munityguidelines(alsoseehttps://joss.readthedocs.io/
when hiring professors of statistics or research meth-
en/latest/review_checklist.html), and score the pres-
ods), but in other cases, we hope that research soft-
enceofeachofthemseparately.
ware development activities at least are considered as
researchoutputcomparabletopublishedpapers.
Maintenance
Maintaining a software package is often more work AuthorContact
than writing it. This should be reflected in the as-
Correspondence concerning this article should be
sessment procedure. We propose to score two aspects
addressed to Andreas M. Brandmaier, Rüdesheimer
of maintenance separately, maintaining the code base
Str. 50, 14197 Berlin. E-mail: andreas.brandmaier@
(such as active bug fixing and documenting changes in
medicalschool-berlin.de
logs) and maintaining the community (such as provid-
ing the possibility to report bugs, feature requests, or
ConflictofInterestandFunding
supportrequestsviaticketsormailinglists).
Wehavenoconflictofinteresttodeclare. Therewas
MeasuringImpact nospecificfundingforthisresearch.
Total citation metrics, number of users, downloads
AuthorContributions
per month, GitHub stars and similar may provide a
coarse measure for the impact of a software package, The authors made the following contributions. An-
even though it is important to note the shortcomings dreas M. Brandmaier : Conceptualization, Writing -
wedescribedabove. Original Draft Preparation, Writing - Review & Edit-
Webelievethatthesuggestedmeritstatementismost ing,Supervision;MaximilianErnst: Conceptualization,
useful to assess impact of research software and that Writing - Original Draft Preparation, Writing - Review
this should be the primary statement for committee & Editing; Aaron Peikert : Conceptualization, Writing -
memberstoevaluateiftheyarelessconcernedwiththe OriginalDraftPreparation,Writing-Review&Editing.
technical aspects of research software development. In
our view, researchers should be requested to indicate
===== PAGE 4/4 =====
4
OpenSciencePractices Gärtner, A., Leising, D., & Schönbrodt, F. (2022). Re-
sponsible research assessment II: A specific pro-
This article is a commentary and is not eligible for
posal for hiring and promotion in psychology
the Open Science badges. The entire editorial process,
[PsychArchives]. https://doi.org/10.23668/
including the open reviews, is published in the online
psycharchives.8162
supplement. All source code to reproduce this article
Johnson, S. G. (2014). The NLopt nonlinear-
canbefoundhere.
optimization package. https://github.com/
stevengj/nlopt
References
Montero,P.,&Vilar,J.A.(2014).TSclust:AnRpackage
Aust, F., & Barth, M. (2022). papaja: Prepare repro- for time series clustering. Journal of Statistical
ducibleAPAjournalarticleswithRMarkdown[R Software, 62(1), 1–43. http://www.jstatsoft.
package version 0.1.1]. https://github.com/ org/v62/i01/
crsh/papaja Peikert,A.,VanLissa,C.J.,&Brandmaier,A.M.(2021).
Bates, D., Mächler, M., Bolker, B., & Walker, S. (2015). Reproducible research in R: A tutorial on how
Fittinglinearmixed-effectsmodelsusinglme4. to do the same thing more than once. Psych,
Journal of Statistical Software, 67(1), 1–48. 3(4),836–867.
https://doi.org/10.18637/jss.v067.i01 Schönbrodt, F., Gärtner, A., Frank, M., Gollwitzer, M.,
Baxter, R., Hong, N. C., Gorissen, D., Hetherington, J., Ihle,M.,Mischkowski,D., Phan,L.V.,Schmitt,
&Todorov,I.(2012).Theresearchsoftwareen- M.,Scheel,A.M.,Schubert,A.-L.,Steinberg,U.,
gineer.DigitalResearchConference,Oxford,1–3. & Leising, D. (2022). Responsible research as-
Brandmaier, A. M. (2015). pdc: An R package for sessment I: Implementing DORA for hiring and
complexity-based clustering of time series. promotioninpsychology[PsychArchives].https:
Journal of Statistical Software, 67(5), 1–23. //doi.org/10.23668/psycharchives.8162
https://doi.org/10.18637/jss.v067.i05 Wickham, H. (2011). Testthat: Get started with test-
Climate Code Foundation. (2011). Science ing. The R Journal, 3, 5–10. https://journal.r-
code manifesto. http : / / web . archive . project.org/archive/2011-1/RJournal_2011-
org / web / 20201112032938 / http : / / 1_Wickham.pdf
sciencecodemanifesto.org/