
===== PAGE 1/3 =====
Opendata:NotApplicable Editedby:DanielLakens
Meta-Psychology,2024,vol8,MP.2023.3734 Openmaterials:NotApplicable Reviewedby:HolgerBrandt,DanielLakens
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2023.3734 Openandreproducibleanalysis:NotApplicable Analysisreproducedby:NotApplicable
Articletype:Commentary Openreviewsandeditorialprocess:Yes AllsupplementaryfilescanbeaccessedatOSF:
PublishedundertheCC-BY4.0license Preregistration:No https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/27NF6
Responsible Research Assessment requires structural more than
procedural reforms.
Gidon T. Frischkorn1
1DepartmentofPsychology,UniversityofZurich
In their target articles, Schönbrodt et al. (2022) and Gärtner et al. (2022) propose
new metrics and their practical implementation to improve responsible research as-
sessment. Generally, Iwelcometheinclusionofopenscienceandscientificrigorinto
evaluating job candidates. However, the proposed reform mainly focuses on the first
stage of selecting candidates who then continue towards a second stage of in-depth
evaluation of research quality. Yet, this second selection stage is underdeveloped but
likelymorecriticalconcerningresponsibleresearchassessmentandhiringdecisions. I
arguethatanadequateassessmentofresearchqualityatthissecondstagerequiresthe
representationofspecificknowledgeinthesubfieldofadisciplinethatthecandidate
shouldbehiredforbythehiringcommittee. Thisisrarelyachievedgiventhecurrent
structuralorganizationofdepartments, especiallyinGerman-speakingcountries, and
potentiallyexplainstherelianceonsuboptimalindicatorssuchash-indexandJournal
Impactfactor. Therefore, Iarguethatresponsibleresearchassessmentrequiresstruc-
turalreformtoensurethatinstitutionshaveseveralresearchersinpermanentpositions
withspecificknowledgeindifferentsubfieldstoprovideanadequateandresponsible
assessmentofresearchqualitybyhiringcommitteesatallevaluationstages.
Keywords: ResearchAssessment;StructuralReform;HiringCommittees
Schönbrodt et al. (2022) acknowledge that “the as- positionisadvertisedfor.
sessmentofscientificqualitywillalwaysremainachal- TheproposalbySchönbrodtetal.(2022)anditsim-
lenge with imperfect solutions” (p. 3). Their proposal plementation outlined by Gärtner et al. (2022) focuses
attemptstofacethischallengebyintroducingreformed mainly on the initial evaluation of job applicants at a
metrics and criteria for the evaluation of candidates to first stage of evaluation and outlines potential criteria
“safeguard minimal standards of scientific rigor”. Gen- to identify candidates that meet a minimum threshold
erally,includingtheevaluationofscientificrigorinhir- of methodological rigor in their academic work. As al-
ing decisions is desirable. However, as outlined by ready indicated in their proposal (see Figure 2 on p.
Dames et al. (2023), any metric, no matter if its cita- 6; Schönbrodt et al., 2022), likely a large proportion
tion count or a score for the level of scientific rigor, is of candidates will already or rather sooner than later
insufficient for fully capturing scientific quality or its meet this minimal threshold, thus leaving most candi-
pre-requisites. Thus, it is critical to conduct a com- dates for a more comprehensive in-depth evaluation at
prehensive qualitative evaluation of a candidate’s sci- the second stage of evaluation. For a tenured position
entific contributions during a second evaluation phase. this means that the hiring committee needs to decide
AlthoughSchönbrodtetal.(2022)recognizetheimpor- who of at least 30 – more likely well above 50 – appli-
tance of such an in-depth evaluation of candidates in a cants remaining after the first evaluation stage should
second evaluation phase, its procedure remains under- beinvitedtoaninterview. Thisfurtherunderscoresthe
developed. Given the complexity of assessing scientific significanceofthesecondevaluationstageduringwhich
qualityandtheheterogeneityofscientificworkindiffer- the hiring committee is responsible for identifying the
ent subfields of psychology, the individual researchers mostviablecandidatesforagivenposition.
serving on hiring committees and their knowledge of At the second stage of evaluation, Schönbrodt et al.
the respective subfield as well as their commitment to (2022) advise against the usage of metrics altogether
responsible research assessment will be most relevant. and propose that it should primarily focus on an “in-
Thus, not only the evaluation procedure but also the depthdiscussionabouthowinnovativeandmeaningful
composition of hiring committees will need to be re- the research” of the different candidates is. This is a
formed to ensure sufficient expertise in the subfield a step into the right direction, but it is also a lofty and
===== PAGE 2/3 =====
2
labordemandinggoal. Additionally,toadequatelyeval- to maintain their independence in hiring decisions.
uatethesignificanceandpotentialinnovationofanap- Therefore,theexpertiseforaspecificsubfieldcannotbe
plicant’s work within a specific subfield of psychology entirely outsourced to experts from other institutions.
(or any other discipline), it is crucial to possess spe- To sufficiently represent the necessary expertise repre-
cialized knowledge of the current state of science in sented by scientists who are committed to the devel-
that respective subfield. For example, cognitive or so- opment of the institute, any institute needs to have in-
cial psychologists might not be ideally suited to com- house expertise in each subfield beyond the professor
prehensively evaluate the quality of research in clini- who has left and is to be replaced. This can only be
cal or educational psychology, and vice versa.1 There- achieved by structural changes. Specifically, any sub-
fore,theadequateassessmentofthequalityofresearch field should not be represented only by a single long-
in any subfield of psychology requires sufficient repre- termposition,butitshouldratherbedistributedacross
sentation of researchers within this subfield in hiring several researchers. The more an institute has multi-
committees. Given the current state of structural or- ple tenured scientists (e.g., lecturers, assistant, or full
ganization of long-term researcher positions, this spe- professors) in the different subfields of psychology, the
cific knowledge is rarely represented, and most insti- more it will be able to provide expertise for the critical
tutions will not be able to fulfill this requirement with second stage of evaluation in hiring committees itself.
researchersformtheirowninstitution. Yet, the current profile of single professorships repre-
Currently,hiringcommitteesforpermanentpositions sentingeachsubfield-preventsinstitutionsfrombuild-
primarily consist of professors with long-term commit- ing a sustainable basis of expertise in each subfield of
ments to the respective institute. In most departments psychologythatisurgentlyneededforamoreadequate
inGerman-speakingcountries,thereisonlyonetenured assessment of research quality at the stage of narrow-
professorship for each subfield. When a person leaves ing down many adequate candidates to the small pool
that position and needs to be replaced, the expertise ofcandidatesthatgetinvitedtojobtalks.
for the respective subfield is therefore no longer repre- The need to improve current assessment procedures
sentedatthatinstitution. Thus, hiringcommitteeslack alone may not justify such a significant change in insti-
specific expertise in the field for which the position is tutional structures. Yet, at this point, the requirements
open, except for the inclusion of typically one external forresponsibleresearchassessmentconvergewithother
expertfromtherespectivesubfield. Asaresult, despite importantargumentsforstructuralreform(Rahaletal.,
an in-depth review of the few ultimately shortlisted set 2023; Tiokhin et al., 2021): Moving towards depart-
ofapplicants,theselectionofthissmallnumberofcan- ments with several independent tenured scientists rep-
didates is conducted without sufficient expertise in the resenting each sub-discipline has the advantage of cre-
fieldforwhichthepositionistobefilled.2 ating more tenured or tenure-track positions in science
The consequence of this situation is that the critical overall and offering some degree of job security at an
second stage of evaluation is often also based on the earlier career stage. This will likely contribute con-
evaluation of insufficiently valid metrics and subjective siderably to improving research quality. In addition,
evaluations of research impact, such as the journal the such a structural change would provide departments
researchhasbeenpublishedin(Abele-Brehm&Bühner, withmoreflexibilitytodevelopareasofspecializationin
2016). Ironically, Schönbrodt et al. (2022) aimed to which they can build up a critical mass of independent
shift the focus away from exactly these metrics during researcherswithsimilarexpertiseandinterests. This,in
research assessment. Whereas researchers in specific turn, can foster fruitful collaborations within the insti-
subfields of psychology are likely able to put this infor- tution.
mationintocontext(foradiscussionofpotentialbene-
1Inheterogeneoussubfieldsthismightevencountfordif-
fits,seeDamesetal.,2023),forresearchersoutsidethe
ferent areas of research. For example, a researcher focusing
subfielditmightbedifficulttoseparatehighqualityre-
onlanguagecomprehensionmightbechallengedbyevaluat-
searchpublishedinlowerimpactjournalsfromlessim-
ingtheworkofaresearcherinperceptionordecisionmaking,
pressiveworkthathasbeenpublishedinahigh-prestige
althoughbothmightcountascognitivepsychologist.
journal, for whatever reason that might be. No mat- 2Iacknowledgethattheevaluationofresearchqualitywill
terhowdedicatedthemembersofthehiringcommittee not be the only relevant criterion for hiring decisions at this
might be, an adequate and in-depth evaluation of the second stage. The hiring committee will likely also focus on
qualityofresearchrelevanttotherespectivepositionat the fit of different candidates to the institute and the profile
this stage will always require sufficient expertise in the thecommitteeislookingfor.
subfieldthepositionisadvertisedfor.
It is reasonable to assume that institutions will want
===== PAGE 3/3 =====
3
AuthorContact Dames, H., Musfeld, P., Popov, V., Oberauer, K., &
Frischkorn, G. T. (2023). Responsible Research
Gidon T. Frischkorn; Address: Binzmühlestrasse
Assessment Should Prioritize Theory Develop-
14/22, CH-8050 Zürich, Switzerland; Mail: gi-
ment and Testing Over Ticking Open Science
don.frischkorn@psychologie.uzh.ch; ORCiD: 0000-
Boxes.https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/ad74m
0002-5055-9764.
Gärtner, A., Leising, D., & Schönbrodt, F. (2022). Re-
sponsible Research Assessment II: A specific pro-
ConflictofInterestandFunding
posal for hiring and promotion in psychology.
Theauthordeclaresnoconflictofinterest. https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/5yexm
Rahal,R.-M.,Fiedler,S.,Adetula,A.,Berntsson,R.P.-A.,
AuthorContributions
Dirnagl, U., Feld, G. B., Fiebach, C. J., Himi,
GidonT.Frischkorn: Conceptualization,Writing. S.A.,Horner,A.J.,Lonsdorf,T.B.,Schönbrodt,
F., Silan, M. A. A., Wenzler, M., & Azevedo,
Acknowledgements F. (2023). Quality research needs good work-
ing conditions. Nature Human Behaviour, 1–4.
I would like to thank Hannah Dames, Philipp Mus-
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-022-01508-2
feld,VencislavPopov,andKlausOberauerfortheinitial
Schönbrodt, F., Gärtner, A., Frank, M., Gollwitzer, M.,
discussionofthetwotargetarticles,aswellasfeedback
Ihle,M.,Mischkowski,D., Phan,L.V.,Schmitt,
andcommentsonthiscommentary.
M.,Scheel,A.M.,Schubert,A.-L.,Steinberg,U.,
& Leising, D. (2022). Responsible Research As-
OpenSciencePractices
sessment I: Implementing DORA for hiring and
This article is theoretical and was not eligible for promotion in psychology. https://doi.org/10.
Open Science badges. The entire editorial process, in- 31234/osf.io/rgh5b
cluding the open reviews, are published in the online Tiokhin, L., Panchanathan, K., Smaldino, P. E., & Lak-
supplement. ens, D. (2021). Shifting the level of selection in
science.https://doi.org/10.31222/osf.io/juwck
References
Abele-Brehm, A. E., & Bühner, M. (2016). Wer soll
die Professur bekommen? Psychologische Rund-
schau, 67(4), 250–261. https://doi.org/10.
1026/0033-3042/a000335