
===== PAGE 1/4 =====
Opendata:NotApplicable Editedby:DanielLakens
Meta-Psychology,2024,vol8,MP.2023.3763 Openmaterials:NotApplicable Reviewedby:MoinSyed,HannahDames
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2023.3763 Openandreproducibleanalysis:NotApplicable Analysisreproducedby:NotApplicable
Articletype:Commentary Openreviewsandeditorialprocess:Yes AllsupplementaryfilescanbeaccessedatOSF:
PublishedundertheCC-BY4.0license Preregistration:No https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/27NF6
Indicators for teaching assessment
Miriam Hansen1, Julia Beitner1, Holger Horz1, and Martin Schultze1
1Goethe-UniversityFrankfurt,Germany
ThiscommentaryonSchönbrodtetal.(2022)andGärtneretal.(2022)aimsatcom-
plementingtheideasregardinganimplementationofDORAforthedomainofteach-
ing. As there is neither a comprehensive assessment system based on empirical data
nor a competence model for teaching competencies available, yet, we describe some
pragmatic ideas for indicators of good teaching and formulate desiderates for future
researchprogramsandvalidation.
Keywords: teachingquality,indicators,constructivealignment
Differencesresearch–teaching
Schönbrodt et al. (2022) and Gärtner et al. (2022) In contrast to the indicators available for the assess-
have written two target papers (TP1 and TP2, respec- ment of research quality which both target papers uti-
tively) to advance an implementation of DORA regard- lize, the assessment of teaching cannot rely on quality
ing a more quality-based research assessment. We wel- control to be carried out in prior steps to the same ex-
come these proposals and would like our commentary tent(e.g.,bypeerreview). Inthecaseofsuccessfullyac-
to complement them with thoughts on meaningful as- quired third-party funding and published manuscripts,
sessment of teaching. As both target papers, we focus theassessmentofqualitywasperformedbyexpertsand
onthesituationofhiringandpromotioninpsychology. aggregates of their appraisals are used as indicators in
To date, there is no comprehensive assessment sys- hiring and promotion. Such a system has not emerged
tem based on empirical data for the area of teaching forteaching. Usingmerelistingsofcoursestaughtdoes
orteachingcompetencies. Itwouldbedesirabletofirst notcontainanyinformationabouttheirquality,thusnot
develop a competence model for the area of university providinginsightintotheacademicvalorofcandidates.
teaching,toadaptthisinturninadifferentiatedmanner As such, it is merely an indicator of the characteristics
fordifferentdisciplinesandcontexts,andthentodefine of the positions previously held by a candidate. With
criteria for the assessment of individual teaching com- regard to the lack of expert evaluation, even the re-
petence with reference to this model. However, since sultsofstudentcourseevaluations,whicharefrequently
hiringprocessesneedtobeimprovedrathersoonerthan listedasevidence,cannotbeconsideredasubstitutedue
later and this is an undertaking that can neither be re- to numerous possibilities of bias (Kornell & Hausman,
alizedinashorttimenorbyindividualactors,wehave 2016; Zabaleta, 2007). Therefore, the consideration of
focused in our following commentary on pragmatic in- indicatorsfor"activitiesinteaching"alwaysrequiresan
dicatorsfortheassessmentofteaching. evaluation of their quality as well – analogous to the
Thesecanbeusedasanintermediatestep,astheyare concreteexemplaryattemptbyGärtneretal.(2022)in
intendedtohelpsystematizetheassessmentofteaching TP2. However,auniformschemeforsuchanevaluation
intheshortterm,basedontheinformationthatisoften might be much more difficult to develop for the field
already available or very easy to provide in application of teaching, since local conditions and subject cultures
andhiringprocesses. have an important influence on the design of teaching
First, we describe how the problem of implementing evenwithinpsychology.
validmeasuresofteachingqualitydiffersfromthefacet Currently,therearenoestablished,quantifiablemet-
ofresearch. Thereafter,weproposepragmaticideasfor ricsorevenindicators(cf. TP1;Wilsdonetal.,2015)for
indicatorsofgoodteachingasfirststepstowardsamore assessingoutputinteaching,suchastheH-index. How-
systematic and quality-based teaching assessment. Fi- ever, there are widely established practices for assess-
nally,somedesideratesarespecifiedforfutureresearch ing teaching quality, e.g., in the context of hiring pro-
programs on higher education teaching quality and on cesses for permanent positions, that are equally ques-
thevalidationofourpragmaticindicators. tionable in terms of usefulness and quality: Usually,
results of student teaching evaluations are referred to
===== PAGE 2/4 =====
2
as only evidence of teaching quality. Sometimes this is built websites. Because these often do not undergo an
supplementedbyashortteachingconcept,occasionally editorial process involving external feedback, the qual-
also as part of a more comprehensive teaching portfo- ity of these must be assessed individually during this
lio, which then includes evidence of higher education phase. In terms of more “traditional” teaching materi-
didactic qualification or teaching awards. In principle, als, most courses are accompanied by online materials
it is also possible and applied at some universities to (often provided via a platform such as Moodle). These
ask for a teaching lecture or teaching samples as part materialsallowinsightintostructure,depthofcontent,
of the job interview procedure for a permanent posi- use of diverse didactic methods, and the provision of
tion (Meizlish & Kaplan, 2008). While these allow for additional in-depth information for a course taught in
qualityassessmentbypeersandexperts, theyareoften the past. This information may be supplemented by a
of limited standardization. Additionally, they are too writtenstatementabouttheideasunderlyingthedesign
broadinscopewithregardstocontentwhilealsobeing ofthecourse.
toonarrowintheactualsamplethatisgenerated(e.g., A final area of previous work is additional didac-
a20-minutesamplelecturecannotappropriatelydepict ticqualification, oftenrepresentedbyparticipationand
competencies in activating teaching over the course of certification of post-graduate academic development
anentiresemester). programs. Withinthelastdecades,suchprogramshave
While we believe that indicators for teaching qual- beenwidelyimplementedinmanyhighereducationin-
ity currently used in hiring and promotion in psychol- stitutions around the world (International Consortium
ogyarenotappropriate,thereareenoughpossibledata for Educational Development (ICED), 2014) and such
sourcesforassessingteachingperformanceandcomple- certifications are easy to assess and use as indicators.
mentary ideas. Thus, we propose possible indicators However, it should be kept in mind that the scope of
below and describe our thoughts for an assessment of qualification offered may vary depending on the loca-
teaching competence based on these data sources and tion.
indicators. Itisimportanttonotethatthesesuggestionswepro-
vide here should not be limited to traditional courses
Descriptionofpossibleindicators at universities, but should also include workshops and
otherformsofteaching. Workshopsareoftentaughton
Phase1: Screeningofpreviouswork
avoluntarybasisandaimedatteachingPhDstudents–
Inlinewithwhatiscalled“negativeselection”inTP1 thereforeinformationabouttheirqualitymaymeaning-
(p. 6,Figure2),weproposeaninitialscreeningofpre- fully supplement the picture generated by information
vious work related to teaching. Of the possible data aboutteachingundergraduates.
sources, published textbooks are perhaps most in line
with the indicators proposed for the assessment of re- Phase2: In-depthanalysisofteachingquality
search qualifications. They undergo previous quality
In line with “positive selection” of TP1 (p. 6, Figure
controlandhavereadilyquantifiableimpact(e.g., cita-
2), we also propose a second phase that inspects the
tions,salesnumbers). Forthemostpart,thisisalsotrue
teachingqualityinadditiontoquantitativeindicators.
for chapter contributions to textbooks. Further, pub-
To assess quality of teaching, we propose to first de-
lishedresearchonownteaching(followingtheso-called
fine different aspects of teaching that should be as-
“scholarship of teaching and learning” approach, e.g.,
sessed. As a comprehensive model of higher educa-
Hutchings et al., 2011) can also count as publications
tion teaching competences is missing, we suggest as a
that inform about the merits in teaching. Additionally,
starting point to use the subfacets of pedagogical/psy-
asisdoneforresearch,thirdpartyfundingforteaching
chologicalknowledge(Baumert&Kunter,2013). Since
projects should be used as an indicator of the willing-
this model originated in the school context, it will cer-
nessandabilitytoactivelydevelopnewapproachesfor
tainly be necessary to make additions to the subfacets
teachinginhigheracademia. Athirdsourceofinforma-
for higher education. For example, knowledge of con-
tion, much less easy to quantify than the previous two,
versationandsupervisionmaybecrucialforconsulting
areopeneducationalresources(OER),whichhavebeen
ofstudents,butalsoadvisingtheses.
identifiedasakeycontributortoUNESCO’sSustainable
Further, we propose to make use of the concept of
Development Goals (UNESCO, 2019) and are bound to
constructive alignment (Biggs, 1996) that postulates
be of increasing importance in modern approaches to
good teaching should start from the definition of in-
teaching. These may range from material that is of
tended learning outcomes which in turn should be
textbookstyleandqualitytomoreexperimentalandin-
aligned to the teaching and learning activities and to
teractivematerialssuchasShinyAppsorentirecustom-
theassessment.
===== PAGE 3/4 =====
3
The candidates that were positively assessed in ConflictofInterestandFunding
phase 1 can be invited to provide a detailed teaching
The authors have no conflicts of interest or funding
concept for a previously taught course or a new one.
todisclose.
Candidates should then elaborate on teaching objec-
tives, didactic approach, content structure, examina-
AuthorContributions
tion form and questions. To complement the picture,
candidates can present a teaching lecture or a teach- MH, HH and MS conceptualized the commentary.
ing sample and – more important – an in-depth dis- MH,JBandMSwrotetheinitialdraftofthepaper,and
cussionandreflectionoftheteachingqualityindefined HH provided feedback on the first version. All authors
subfacets. Situational interview questions can be used, contributed to the commentary and approved the sub-
for example "Using XY as an example, outline a) how mittedversion.
you design teaching and exams and b) the extent to
which you align teaching objectives, teaching/learning OpenSciencePractices
arrangements,andexams."
Thisarticleisacommentaryandassuchhadnodata
ormaterialstoshare,anditwasnotpre-registered. The
Closingremarks
entire editorial process, including the open reviews, is
In this commentary, we outlined the difficulties in publishedintheonlinesupplement.
assessing teaching quality for hiring and promotion in
psychology in relation to research quality. In addition, References
we propose a two-phase design which hiring commit-
Baumert, J., & Kunter, M. (2013). The coactiv model
tees could implement easily to improve the hiring pro-
of teachers’ professional competence. Cognitive
cess. Similar to TP1 and TP2, phase 1 focuses more on
activationinthemathematicsclassroomandpro-
thequantitativeaspectsofpreviouswork,whilephase2
fessionalcompetenceofteachers:Resultsfromthe
allowsanin-depthevaluationofteachingquality. Given
COACTIVproject,25–48.
that no model of higher education teaching compe-
Biggs,J.(1996).Enhancingteachingthroughconstruc-
tencesexistsyet,weproposeseveralpossibleindicators,
tive alignment. Higher education, 32(3), 347–
which can be used for assessing teaching quality in the
364.https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00138871
meantimeandwhichweconsidertobeanimprovement
Gärtner,A.,Leising,D.,&Schönbrodt,F.D.(2022).Re-
in hiring and promotion compared to the status quo.
sponsible research assessment ii: A specific pro-
However, we would like to stress that these indicators
posal for hiring and promotion in psychology.
need to be empirically evaluated and assessed in terms
https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/5yexm
ofhowwelltheyactuallyreflectthequalityofteaching.
Hutchings, P., Huber, M. T., & Ciccone, A. (2011).
In addition, the predictive validity of these indicators
The scholarship of teaching and learning re-
about future teaching quality needs to be researched.
considered: Institutional integration and impact
We urge researchers in this field to take up the task of
(Vol.21).JohnWiley&Sons.
developingascientificmodelofteachingcompetencies,
International Consortium for Educational Development
sothattheacademichiringprocessescanbefurtherim-
(ICED). (2014). The preparation of university
proved. Nevertheless, we consider this exchange and
teachers internationally. http : / / icedonline .
dialogue a promising sign for initiating actual change
net / wp - content / uploads / 2011 / 08 /
andanimprovementintheassessmentofcandidatesin
The - Preparation - of - University - Teachers -
psychology.
Internationally.pdf
Kornell,N.,&Hausman,H.(2016).Dothebestteachers
AuthorContact
get the best ratings? Frontiers in psychology, 7,
Correspondence concerning this article 570. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2016.
should be addressed to Miriam Hansen, email: 00570
hansen@paed.psych.uni-frankfurt.de ORCID of au- Meizlish, D., & Kaplan, M. (2008). Valuing and evalu-
thors: MiriamHansen0000-0003-1290-7630 atingteachinginacademichiring:Amultidisci-
JuliaBeitner0000-0002-2539-7011 plinary,cross-institutionalstudy.TheJournalof
HolgerHorz0000-0002-5173-0252 HigherEducation,79(5),489–512.https://doi.
MartinSchultze0000-0003-1925-2403 org/10.1080/00221546.2008.11772114
===== PAGE 4/4 =====
4
Schönbrodt,F.D.,Gärtner,A.,Frank,M.,Gollwitzer,M., Wilsdon, J., Allen, L., Belfiore, E., Campbell, P., Curry,
Ihle,M.,Mischkowski,D., Phan,L.V.,Schmitt, S., Hill, S., Jones, R., Kain, R., Kerridge, S.,
M., Scheel, A. M., Schubert, A.-L., Steinberg, Thelwall, M., Tinkler, J., Viney, I., Wouters, P.,
U., & Leising, D. (2022). Responsible research Hill, J., & Johnson, B. (2015). The metric tide:
assessment i: Implementing dora for hiring and Report of the independent review of the role of
promotion in psychology. https://doi.org/10. metricsinresearchassessmentandmanagement.
31234/osf.io/rgh5b https://doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.1.4929.1363
UNESCO.(2019).Recommendationonopeneducational Zabaleta,F.(2007).Theuseandmisuseofstudenteval-
resources (oer). https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ uations of teaching. Teaching in higher educa-
ark:/48223/pf0000373755/PDF/373755eng. tion, 12(1), 55–76. https://doi.org/10.1080/
pdf.multi.page=3 13562510601102131