
===== PAGE 1/14 =====
Opendata:NotApplicable
Meta-Psychology,2024,vol8,MP.2023.4021 Openmaterials:Yes Editedby:RickardCarlsson
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2023.4021 Opencode:NotApplicable Reviewedby:GiladFeldman,ErinM.Buchanan
Articletype:OriginalArticle Openandreproducibleanalysis:NotApplicable Analysisreproducedby:NotApplicable
PublishedundertheCC-BY4.0license Openreviewsandeditorialprocess:Yes AllsupplementaryfilescanbeaccessedatOSF:
Preregistration:No https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/K9EBM
ReproduceMe:
Lessons from a pilot project on computational reproducibility
Daniel H. Baker1, Mareike Berg1, Kirralise J. Hansford1,
Bartholomew P.A. Quinn1, Federico G. Segala1, and Erin L. Warden-English1
1DepartmentofPsychology,UniversityofYork,York,UK
Ifascientificpaperiscomputationallyreproducible,theanalysesitreportscanbere-
peatedindependentlybyothers. Atthepresenttimemostpapersarenotreproducible.
However, thetoolstoenablecomputationalreproducibilityarenowwidelyavailable,
using free and open source software. We conducted a pilot study in which we of-
fered‘reproducibilityasaservice’withinaUKpsychologydepartmentforaperiodof
6months. Ourrationalewasthatmostresearcherslackeitherthetimeorexpertiseto
maketheirownworkreproducible,butmightbewillingtoallowthistobedonebyan
independentteam. TenpaperswereconvertedintoreproducibleformatusingRmark-
down,suchthatallanalyseswereconductedbyasinglescriptthatcoulddownloadraw
datafromonlineplatformsasrequired,generatefigures,andproduceapdfofthefinal
manuscript. Forsomestudiesthisinvolvedreproducinganalysesoriginallyconducted
using commercial software. The project was an overall success, with strong support
fromthecontributingauthorswhosawclearbenefitfromthiswork,includinggreater
transparencyandopenness,andeaseofuseforthereader.Herewedescribeourframe-
workforreproducibility,summarisethespecificlessonslearnedduringtheproject,and
discuss the future of computational reproducibility. Our view is that computationally
reproducible manuscripts embody many of the core principles of open science, and
shouldbecomethedefaultformatforscientificcommunication.
Keywords: computationalreproducibility;markdown;CI/CD;openscience
Background fidence in the analytic process, allows it to be checked
and verified (perhaps as part of a formal audit), and
In the early days of scientific inquiry, the results of
should reduce errors and preclude some types of aca-
experiments and observations were recorded on paper,
demic misconduct. Sharing of code and data makes
andcalculationsandanalyseswereperformedbyhand.
analyses future-proof, encourages secondary data anal-
Journal articles aimed to provide a summary of these
ysis, and spreads good practice across a research field.
findings for other scientists, who implicitly trusted that
Integrating code and data into a single self-contained
theauthor(s)hadcommunicatedafairandaccurateac-
repositorycanalsominimisedependenciesonlocalfiles
count of their results. The widespread use of comput-
anddirectorystructures,reducingtechnicalbarriersfor
ersinthelate20th centuryupdatedmanyoftheseprac-
re-use. Ultimately, reproducibility increases confidence
tices. However most analyses were still performed on
inthescientificmethodandisacornerstoneofmodern
an individual researcher’s computer, often using closed
open research practice. However there are some barri-
commercial software, and code and data were rarely
ers to widespread adoption of these approaches. Criti-
available for scrutiny. In recent decades this has begun
cally,generatingreproduciblemanuscriptsrequiressub-
to change, and sharing of code and data is now com-
stantial technical ability and time, which might not be
monplace. Furthermore, the tools and infrastructure
available for all researchers. In addition, reproducible
are available to produce empirical papers that are fully
analyses should ideally use free and open source soft-
computationallyreproducible: alldataanalysesarecal-
ware(FOSS)thatdoesnotrequirecommerciallicenses,
culated from the raw data, and a formatted version of
andcanbedownloadedbyanyonewithaninternetcon-
thefinalpaper(e.g. apdf), includingallfigures, tables
nection. However many researchers still use commer-
andstatisticalresults,isautomaticallygenerated.
cially licensed analysis software (often with their insti-
Computational reproducibility has multiple benefits.
tutionprovidingthelicense)thatinmanycasesinvolve
Theanalysispipelineisfullytransparenttoreaders,re-
graphical user interfaces that make scripting and au-
viewers, and editors of a paper. This encourages con-
===== PAGE 2/14 =====
2
tomation difficult or impossible. Finally, even for pa- Aframeworkforcomputationalreproducibility
persthatareclaimedtobereproducible,thisisrarelya
Our guiding principle when converting papers into
‘frictionless’process(Crüwelletal.,2023;Hardwickeet
a reproducible format was to keep everything as sim-
al., 2021; Obels et al., 2020), and often becomes more
ple as possible for the end user. Wherever practical,
challengingovertimeasdataandsoftwarebecomeun-
we preferred to create a single script that contained
availableorobsolete.
all of the manuscript text and code, rather than re-
quiring multiple separate files that need to be run for
Aimsandobjectives
different parts of an analysis. Our experience (and
We obtained funding to conduct a pilot project that of others, see Crüwell et al., 2023; Hardwicke
(called the ‘ReproduceMe’ project) that aimed to make et al., 2021) is that complex code repositories often
10 empirical papers in psychology and neuroscience constitute a barrier to reproducibility, as it is difficult
fully computationally reproducible during a 6-month for the end user to work out which scripts need to be
period (February to July 2023). Although we had seen run, and in what order. Having a single master docu-
examplesofreproduciblemanuscriptsinthepast(apa- ment that can load in data files, packages, and other
per by Rouder and Haaf (2018) sparked our initial en- resources as required, greatly simplified the structure
thusiasm) these were rarely for empirical studies, per- of analysis code in most cases. We used R markdown
haps owing to the complexity and ‘messiness’ of real (https://rmarkdown.rstudio.com/) for this project, be-
data. Before the pilot, the first author had developed cause most members of the project team were famil-
someofthesetechniquesbypublishingtwopapersthat iar with R, and we were aware that many of our col-
werefullyreproducible–onelargelyinvolvingstatistics leagues use it for data analysis. However alterna-
and simulation (Baker, 2021), and the other reporting tivesareavailableforarangeofprogrammingenviron-
novel empirical data (Baker et al., 2021). Our key ob- ments, including Jupyter notebooks (https://jupyter.
jectiveswere: org/), Quarto (https://quarto.org/), and MyST (https:
//mystmd.org/).
1. To take 10 manuscripts that were in a non-
In keeping with this principle, we developed proce-
reproducible format, and convert these into fully
durestoautomatepackageinstallationanddatadown-
reproducibledocuments
load, removing this burden from the end user. Here
theintentionwasthatonlythemastermarkdownscript
2. Toincludesomestudiesinwhichtheoriginalanal-
would be required, and this would be able to obtain
yses used commercial software, and reproduce
any additional files and install any software packages
theseanalysesusingFOSSsuchasRandpython
it needed to run the analysis. A quirk of package in-
3. To cover a wide range of study designs and sub- stallation in the R programming language is that code
disciplines within psychology and human neuro- to install packages (i.e. calls to the install.packages
science function) needs to be run only once on a given sys-
tem, after which the package is present locally and
4. To develop training materials on using tools such
does not need to be downloaded again. We used some
as markdown to make papers reproducible, as
custom code to check which packages were installed
well as producing standardised onboarding and
already, and only download those that were missing
feedbackforms
(see example in section 3.13 of the training materi-
als linked in Appendix A). Data files were automati-
5. To further develop our methods to include fea-
cally downloaded frompublic repositories on theOpen
tures such as automatic downloading of data,
Science Framework website (https://osf.io) using the
preservation of the computational environment,
osfr (Wolen et al., 2020) package (see also the pip-
andautomatedexecutiononremoteplatforms
installable osfclient repository for a similar toolbox in
The pilot achieved all of these objectives within the python; https://github.com/osfclient/osfclient). Again,
fundingperiod,andwithinourbudgetof£10,000. The wewrotecodetocheckifthefileswereavailablelocally
funds were primarily used to pay for analyst time, at andonlydownloadthemwhentheyweremissing. This
a rate of around £17/hr (588 hours total), as well as allowsthecodetorunrobustly,butavoidsunnecessary
for some small items of IT equipment. The training downloads.
materialsareavailableathttps://github.com/bakerdh/ Somestudiesinvolvelargedatafilesorcomputation-
ReproduceMe, and example onboarding and feedback allyintensiveanalyses. Itmightbethecasethatnotall
formsaregiveninAppendicesBandC. users would wish to (or be able to) run the full analy-
sis from scratch. We therefore found it helpful to have
===== PAGE 3/14 =====
3
one or more ‘flag’ variables (usually called processdata) resourceswereavailable. Wealsoencounteredanissue
at the start of a script to specify the level of analysis preventing versioned Rocker images running on recent
required. Exactly how this worked differed across pa- Apple hardware (systems with an ARM rather than an
pers,butthegeneralprinciplewasthataflagvalueof0 AMDprocessorarchitecture),whichwehopewillbere-
would build the paper using pre-computed results and solvedinthefuture.
pre-generated figures. Values above 0 would conduct
differing amounts of analysis, with the highest value Step-by-stepprocess
specifyingthatthefullanalysisshouldberunusingthe
Ourprocessbeganwhenastudyauthormadecontact
raw data. Analyses involving multiple stages usually
and volunteered their paper to be made reproducible.
savedtheresultsofeachstagetointermediatedatafiles,
Thistypicallyhappenedoveremail,andwewouldthen
which could also be downloaded from the OSF reposi-
organise an initial in-person meeting between one or
toryifrequired. Forexample,ananalysisrequiring 8GB
moreauthors,andoneormoremembersoftheanalyst
of raw data files, and taking over 6 hours to analyse
team. Atthatmeeting,theanalyst(s)wouldoutlinethe
from scratch, can instead be run using the processed
reproducibilityprocess,andasktheauthor(s)theques-
datafile(<1MB)inamatterofseconds. Thisalsodra-
tions about their study summarised in the onboarding
matically facilitated our code development, as it meant
form in Appendix B. Assuming that everyone involved
thatcomplexanalysesdidnotneedtoberepeatedeach
agreedthattheworkwasfeasibleandwouldaddvalue,
timewewantedtobuildandcheckthefinaldocument.
wewouldthenagreeanapproximatetimescaleforcom-
We note that R markdown also offers a ‘caching’ func-
pletion(usuallywithintwoweeks).
tion that is conceptually similar, but would still require
Following the onboarding meeting, the authors
the analyses to be run from scratch on a given system.
would provide all required materials. Usually this in-
Oursolutioninsteadmeansthattheprocesseddatafiles
cludedawordprocessingfileofthemanuscripttext,any
could be downloaded locally if required, without the
data files, and any existing analysis code. The analysts
full analysis (which can take many hours) needing to
mettoscopeoutthejobrequirements,anddivideupthe
berun.
work. In some cases a single analyst did the majority
Modern programming environments such as R and
of the conversion to markdown format, in other cases
python are actively developed and updated. Over time
multiple analysts worked on different parts of the doc-
these updates can break analysis code and prevent it
ument. Files were stored on a server so that everyone
from running. One solution is to ‘freeze’ the compu-
had access to the latest version, though often analysts
tational environment used for an analysis, so that the
worked on local copies and then uploaded these to the
same software version is always used (see Peikert &
server.
Brandmaier, 2021; Wiebels & Moreau, 2021). Cur-
Conversiontomarkdownformatbeganbycreatinga
rentlythemoststraightforwardwaytodothisistouse
templatemarkdowndocument,andcopyingintheplain
a ‘containerised’ computing environment, such as that
textfromthemanuscript. Wealsoconvertedanyequa-
provided by the Docker project (https://www.docker.
tions and special symbols into markdown/LATEX syntax,
com/). Docker ‘images’ specify a basic Linux operating
and replaced all references with BIBTEX handles linking
system, to which ‘layers’ of additional software can be
to records in a bibliography file. Several manuscripts
added. The container can then be run as a virtual ma-
involvedanalysisthathadoriginallybeenconductedin
chineonanycomputinghardware,includinglocaldesk-
R, so we copied the original code into ‘chunks’ of code
top computers, high-performance computing facilities,
embeddedinthemarkdownfile. Othermanuscriptsre-
and cloud-based services. We used the Rocker images
quired translation of the analysis from other software
(https://rocker-project.org/), as these add a versioned
(such as SPSS or Stata) into R; for these we generated
R installation, which also freezes the package versions
the R code ourselves, by using the equivalent functions
ataspecificdate. Containerisedenvironmentshavefur-
in R, and inserted it into the markdown file. In both
theradvantages,forexampletheydonotinterferewith
cases,wethenreplacedallnumericalvaluesinthetext
software installed locally on a machine, meaning that
with the appropriate variables calculated by the analy-
anend-usercanhavemultipleindependentimagesrun-
siscode,suchthatthecorrectvalueswouldbeinserted
ningdifferentsoftwareversions.
when the code was executed. This was the most tech-
Finally, we aimed for analyses to be platform invari-
nically challenging aspect of the work, often requiring
ant, and tested each script on multiple operating sys-
detailed formatting of numerical values, and their in-
tems, including Windows, Linux and Mac OS. This oc-
sertionintotables. Whereappropriatewealsoincluded
casionally necessitated minor modifications, for exam-
code to generate figures in pdf format, and inserted
ple to ensure that the required fonts and other system
these into the final manuscript along with the figure
===== PAGE 4/14 =====
4
captions. We performed detailed comparisons between ing errors or transcription issues (such as the wrong
the submitted manuscript and the pdf file created by number being copied into a manuscript from an SPSS
the markdown script, and resolved any discrepancies or R output). Occasionally there were situations where
between the two as far as possible (see below for ex- an unorthodox statistical test was reported (e.g. an
amples). ANOVA with only two levels, instead of a t-test), that
Once the conversion process was complete, we then we thought reviewers of the paper might object to. In
created a Docker image with the required packages, these cases we fed the suggestion to use a more stan-
and uploaded this along with the markdown code to dard approach back to the authors. We feel that iden-
a GitHub repository. Small data files (<100MB) were tifying such errors is an important benefit of offering
included in the repository, and larger data sets were a service to make work reproducible, and stands apart
storedontheOpenScienceFrameworkrepository. The from related approaches such as post-publication sta-
markdown file included code to automatically down- tistical auditing, which might be viewed as implicitly
load the data files, and any other required resources, if questioning the authors’ credibility or competence (see
they were not present locally on the computer running e.g. Fiske, 2016). Error checking is most useful if it
thecode. Wealsoincludedthescriptsandresourcefiles takesplacebeforeamanuscripthasbeensubmittedfor
for a GitHub Actions pipeline (described below) to au- review(andcertainlybeforepublication).
tomatically execute the code each time the repository We discovered some useful general (i.e. non-R)
was updated, and ensured that the pdf was generated resources for converting bibliographies to the BIBTEX
correctly. format used in markdown documents. In particu-
The penultimate step was to test the execution of lar, we found the Reference Extractor tool by Rintze
each paper on multiple ‘clean’ systems. We did this by Zelle(https://github.com/rmzelle/ref-extractor/)help-
downloading the markdown file from GitHub to com- ful for manuscripts that had used Zotero to gen-
puters running Windows, Mac OS and Linux. We then erate the references list, and the AnyStyle tool by
executed the script and checked that the final pdf was Sylvester Keil (https://github.com/inukshuk/anystyle)
created correctly. The GitHub Actions workflow addi- useful for plaintext bibliographies. However for
tionally ensured that the analysis reproduced within a both of these websites it was still necessary to
Docker container, running remotely on a Linux server. manually enter field codes for each citation in the
Finally, the analyst team would complete the feedback markdown file (see e.g. https://rstudio.github.io/
form in Appendix C, and provide this to the authors, visual-markdown-editing/citations.html), which was
alongwithlinkstotheonlinematerials. somewhatlabourintensive.
Perhaps the most exciting development was that
Whatwentwell we learned to implement automatic execution of
manuscriptcodeusingGitHubActions,aso-calledCon-
Oneoftheclearestsuccessesfromtheprojectwasthe
tinuous Integration and Continuous Delivery (CI/CD)
strong buy-in and commitment from the authors of pa-
platform. By including specific files in a GitHub reposi-
perssubmittedforprocessing. Ourcontributingauthors
tory, it can be set to automatically launch a Docker en-
wereincompleteagreementwiththeethosofcomputa-
vironmentonaremoteserver,andexecutespecificcode
tionalreproducibility,andwereexceptionallyopenand
items, each time the repository is updated. The results
collegiateinallinteractions. Severalauthorsexpressed
(i.e. a pdf) are then posted back into the main repos-
their intention to make their future work reproducible,
itory. This has several major advantages over running
and in one case, the lead author even did much of the
code locally. First, it places minimal requirements on
conversion to markdown format themselves after see-
theenduser-nocodeordataneedstobedownloaded,
ing how we had processed their first experiment. Most
and no software needs to be installed. Edits can even
members of the project team have also started using
be made through the GitHub web interface using de-
markdown routinely in their own work. We think this
vices on which programming languages cannot be in-
will help to spread good practice across the discipline,
stalled (e.g. mobile devices such as iPads), with the
asmoreexamplesofreproduciblepapersbecomeavail-
results becoming available shortly afterwards. Second,
able.
becausethecoderunsremotelyonaserver,theenviron-
In some contexts, identifying errors in an analysis
ment is completely standardised, and does not interact
mightbeconsideredanegativeoutcome. Howeverdur-
withanylocallyinstalledsoftwareorpackageversions.
ingourreproducibilitywork,discoveringerrorsandin-
Third,thefullhistoryisretained,includingthelogsand
consistencieswasgenerallypositive,becauseitallowed
console output for each build of the code. Finally, it
the study authors to check and, if necessary, correct
is possible to request more powerful multi-core proces-
any mistakes. In most cases these were minor round-
===== PAGE 5/14 =====
5
sors, with additional memory and storage capacity, for are not available for recent Apple Mac computers that
complexanalyses(thoughthismayincurcharges-cur- use an ARM chip (currently the M1 and M2 proces-
rentlyexecutingsingle-coreActionsjobsisfreeforpub- sors) - at time of writing (mid-2023) the latest build
lic repositories). After investigating several platforms is available for this architecture, but specific R versions
for online deployment of manuscript code, GitHub Ac- are not. Running in emulation mode does not appear
tionsprovedtobethemostelegantandstraightforward to be possible. We hope that this situation will change
solution currently available, with many of our work- asthenewprocessorarchitecturebecomesmorewidely
flowsproducingapdfinaround10-15minutes. used. Finally, we attempted to use the Binder system
(https://mybinder.org/) to host interactive versions of
Whatdidn’tgowell amanuscriptbasedonaDockerimage. Thiswaspossi-
bleforverysimplemanuscripts,butforpapersrequiring
In most cases, we were able to exactly reproduce
largenumbersofRpackagestobeinstalledorlargedata
analyses from commercial software such as SPSS and
files it became very slow to start, and was impractical
Stata using R. For example, to reproduce an SPSS t-
forourpurposes.
test in R, we used the t.test function, and then verified
We tested the manuscript build process on multiple
that the results were the same as those produced by
operating systems (Windows, Mac and Linux). Whilst
SPSS. However some analyses did not reproduce per-
this was almost always a smooth process, we did expe-
fectly. These tended to involve more complex meth-
rience occasional issues. One quite surprising discov-
ods, such as multiple imputation (which includes a
ery was that the widely-used Times New Roman font is
stochastic component) and compiler average causal ef-
not available by default in the Linux operating system
fects (CACE) analyses (Imbens & Angrist, 1994). We
(because the font is owned by Microsoft). The font
think that the implementations of these methods must
was required to render some text in Russian (Cyrillic
differ between software packages, as although the ex-
script), so we needed to code an exception that se-
act numbers were not identical, the results did repli-
lected an alternative font (Nimbus Roman) when the
cate qualitatively (i.e. significant effects remained sig-
script was run on a Linux system. The LuaLatex en-
nificant). We also note that the default method in R
gine (https://www.luatex.org/) was also required for
forperformingfactorialANOVAusestheType1sumsof
correctrendering. Additionally,tousesomeRpackages
squares calculation (in which successive predictors are
weencounteredoccasionalsystem-leveldependencyis-
added sequentially, much like in multiple regression),
sues, particularly when using Docker containers - in
whereasothersoftwaresuchasSPSSreportstheType3
most cases it was possible to add the required libraries
sumsofsquares(inwhichallpredictorsareconsidered
andpackagestotheDockerfile,howeverthistooksome
simultaneously). In order to reproduce Type 3 analy-
timetoresolve.
ses, it was necessary to use additional packages, such
There is an occasional glitch in the osfr package
astheezpackage(https://cran.r-project.org/package=
(Wolen et al., 2020), which we used for download-
ez), or the car (companion to applied regression; Fox
ing data stored on the Open Science Framework web-
&Weisberg,2019)package(https://cran.r-project.org/
site (see e.g. https://github.com/ropensci/osfr/issues/
package=car). We also discovered a quirk of the R im-
142). Forrepositorieswithlargenumbersoffiles,some-
plementation of the Wilcoxon rank sum test, such that
timesspecificindividualfilesareomittedfromthenode
the order in which the variables are entered can affect
listing when using the osf_ls_files function. It is not
theteststatistic(i.e. wilcox.test(A,B)(cid:44)wilcox.test(B,A)).
entirely clear why this occurs, but it does seem to be
This caused some confusion in reproducing the SPSS
consistent across time and computer for a given repos-
results, although the p-values were the same for both
itory, and so is unlikely to be an intermittent server er-
orderings.
ror. One solution might be to include a hard-coded list
Some issues were encountered during our early
of file identifiers rather than directly index the reposi-
attempts at preserving the computational environ-
tory. Alternatively, large numbers of small files can be
ment. We initially used the renv package (https:
contained in a zip or other archive, and decompressed
//cran.r-project.org/package=renv) to record package
afterdownload. Howeverthesesolutionsareratherin-
versions. However because we were developing the
elegant,andwehopethattheissueisresolvedinfuture
manuscript code across multiple systems, all with dif-
versionsofthesoftware.
ferent package versions, the ‘snapshot’ directories be-
WehadoccasionaldifficultieswithcertainRpackage
cameconfusingandunwieldy. Wethereforeadvisethat
versions when running the code on an individual ma-
renv should only be used once the final version of a
chine. If a user already had one version of a package
manuscript is available, and captured on a single com-
installed and the code required a different version, it
puter. WealsodiscoveredthatversionedRockerimages
===== PAGE 6/14 =====
6
would not run, requiring the user to uninstall a pre- sure. The paper was due to be submitted to a jour-
vious package and reinstall a specific version. These nal special issue, and we had around 10 days to cre-
issues can all be avoided by using Docker containers, ate the markdown version. This was greatly aided by
which preserve and isolate the computational environ- the fact that the original R code was extremely well
ment from other software on the host computer. We structured and commented, making it straightforward
provideinstructionsinatextfilewithinthe‘docker’sub- to extract the relevant results. However the original
directoryofeachGitHubrepositorythoughweacknowl- codeincludedseveralmixedeffectsmodelsthatdidnot
edge that not everyone is able to use Docker. We think properly converge, and took a long time to run. As
that the GitHub Actions solution may help increase ac- these were not reported in the manuscript, we com-
cessibility in this instance, as the code is executed re- mented out these lines of code, but they remained in
motely on a server, avoiding any local system restric- place for interested readers. The reproducible version
tions. of the manuscript is available at: https://github.com/
Finally,wehadhopedtocompletethereproducibility AMTdeBruin/Bilingual-switching-ageing
processonatleastonepaperprimarilyusingpythonfor The study by Mak et al. (2023) was interesting be-
analysis. Howevernosuitablepapersweresubmittedso cause it was a Stage 2 registered report, which already
thiswasnotpossible. had in-principle acceptance at the journal Royal Soci-
ety Open Science. The study concerned the effects of
Notesonindividualpapers sleep on false memories in the classic Deese-Roediger-
McDermottparadigm,andinvolvedalargeonlinesam-
Thefirstpaperweconvertedwasarecentlypublished
ple (N=488). The manuscript was written in a some-
study by Meese and Baker (2023). It was chosen be-
what more structured way than typical papers in psy-
cause the analysis code was already written in R, and
chology. The analysis had been completed using R,
thedatafileswererelativelysmall. Thepaperdescribes
andwasrelativelystraightforwardtoconvertintomark-
a psychophysical study on size adaptation, and reports
down format, despite being very sophisticated, includ-
both inferential statistics (mostly repeated measures
ing both frequentist and Bayesian methods, as well as
ANOVAs) and computational modelling. The original
supplementary simulations. Some of the analyses took
analysis code was spread across several different files,
alongtimetorun(around6hours),andsoweinserted
whichwecollatedintoasinglemarkdowndocumentin
level flags into the code so that the user could choose
differentcodechunks. Therewassomeminorconfusion
whether to execute the full analysis, or load in a pre-
aroundfigurenumbering,andworkingoutwhichpieces
computed results file. This saved substantial time dur-
of code were required for each analysis, but ultimately
ing development. The final reproducible manuscript is
a reproducible manuscript was created with no major
availableat: https://github.com/bakerdh/sleepDRM
issues. Theworktookaround64programmer-hours,as
The paper by Baxter and Hobson (2024) was also a
being our first paper there was a substantial overhead
Stage2registeredreport,onthetopicoffaceprocessing
for most team members in learning the basics of mark-
inautism. Mostoftheanalysishadbeenconductedus-
down. Thefinishedreproduciblemanuscriptisavailable
ingSPSS,andinvolvedaseriesofstepwiselinearregres-
at: https://github.com/bakerdh/SizeAdaptation
sions. Although functions to perform stepwise regres-
Our second paper was a manuscript by Grigoryan et
sionareavailableinR(i.e. thestepAICfunctionfromthe
al.(2024)thathadnotyetbeensubmittedtoajournal.
MASS package; Venables & Ripley, 2002), these report
ThepaperreportsanonlinestudyinvestigatingRussian
different statistics from the standard SPSS implemen-
citizens’ feelings about Russia’s invasion of Ukraine in
tation. Reproducing the analyses in the paper there-
2022. AgainthecodehadbeenwritteninR,anddidnot
fore required separate calculation of each linear model
involve large data files. Analyses were primarily linear
(i.e. each step), followed by model comparison using
regressions, reported in tables (we learned some use-
the anova function from the base stats package. This
fulfeaturesofthekableExtrapackagewhentypesetting
fullyreproducedtheanalysesreportedinthepaper,and
these). Progress was substantially faster than for the
canbeseeninthereproduciblemanuscriptavailableat:
first paper, taking around 24 programmer-hours. Some
https://github.com/bakerdh/EmotionFaceAutism
minortechnicalissuestodowithfontsneededtobere-
Brennan et al. (2024) report the results of six ex-
solved so that the manuscript would build properly on
periments using a range of techniques, to test spe-
all operating systems. The finished manuscript is avail-
cific hypotheses about dehumanization and character
ableat: https://github.com/gitgrigolus/political_action
traits. Most of the analyses were conducted in SPSS,
A manuscript by de Bruin et al. (2023), reporting
and these reproduced exactly in R. The figures had
a psycholinguistic study on language switching, was
been generated in R, and involved some ingenious so-
noteworthy because it was converted under time pres-
===== PAGE 7/14 =====
7
lutionstothelimitsoftheggplot2package. Despitebe- der of the analysis had been written using R, and so
ing a substantial paper, we were able to complete the was straightforward to convert into markdown format.
work relatively quickly with no major issues. The fi- Oneminordifficultyconcernedaugmentinggraphscre-
nal markdown file is available at: https://github.com/ atedusingtheggplot2packagewithadditionaltextand
robraonain/DualModel-Criminals other components (such as arrows) - in the original
A study by Lee et al. (2023) compared ‘mind- version of the paper this had been done using exter-
mindedness’ between British and South Korean moth- nal software. Our eventual solution for this was to
ers(mind-mindednessistheextenttowhichcaregivers create a blank pdf document, and use the base plot-
consider the mental states of infants). The analy- ting functions to add the required features, followed
ses were originally conducted in SPSS, and primarily by the grid.arrange function from the gridExtra pack-
used MANCOVA (multivariate analysis of covariance). age (https://cran.r-project.org/package=gridExtra) to
We were able to reproduce the results in R, though superimpose the graphs over the top. The markdown
we did need to use the Anova and Manova functions files are available at: https://github.com/KJHansford/
from the car package to specify the Type 3 sums of AuditoryResizing
squares values that are typically returned by SPSS (see The final study, by Segala et al. (2023), investi-
the “What Didn’t Go Well” section above). We also gated binocular combination of light signals and in-
founditquitechallengingtoextracttheresultsofthese volved analysis of several diverse data types. These in-
tests. Although the functions were able to print the cluded EEG data, pupillometry data, and psychophysi-
results to the command window, it was more difficult cal data, spread across four experiments, and all anal-
to save them to a variable for automatic insertion into ysedusingR.Therawdatafortheentirestudyrequired
the manuscript text. We used the capture.output func- around 48GB of storage space, and took many hours
tion from the base R utils package to save the results to analyse from scratch. We therefore included a pro-
to a string, and then extracted the appropriate val- cessdata flag with four possible values, so that users
ues. This was substantially more complicated than ex- could choose the extent of the analysis required. We
tracting the results of most statistical tests. The final also added an option to delete the raw data for each
manuscriptisavailableat: https://github.com/yl2944/ participant after processing, to save storage space on
parental-mentalization-across-cultures- capacity limited systems. We think these features will
We processed one paper, by Larkin et al. (2024), be useful for other studies involving large amounts of
where much of the analysis was performed in Stata raw data, such as neuroimaging studies. The analysis
(with some additional analyses conducted in SPSS). involved Bayesian computational modelling using Stan
The paper described a randomised controlled trial of (Carpenter et al., 2017), which took approximately 24
a smartphone app intervention intended to increase hours to run from scratch. We added a further op-
mind-mindednessinnewmothers. TheStatascriptwas tionflagtodeterminewhetherthemodellingshouldbe
provided,whichmadeitpossibletoreproducetheanal- conducted, or the results loaded from a pre-generated
yses in R. Most of the straightforward statistical tests, file. OnerestrictionoftheGitHubActionsbuildpipeline
such as correlations, regressions and t-tests, replicated is that analyses must complete within a 6 hour time
exactly. However there were some more sophisticated window. This means that running the full pipeline
analyses,involvingmultipleimputationandCACEanal- from scratch was not possible within GitHub, and in-
ysis, where the implementation appeared to differ be- stead the code would need to be downloaded and run
tween Stata and R. Our markdown script can there- locally. The repository for this study is available at:
fore be considered a qualitative replication, in that the https://github.com/bakerdh/PupillometryEEG
main conclusions were unaffected (i.e. effects that
were significant in the Stata analysis remained so in Thefutureofcomputationalreproducibility
the R analysis), despite differences in the values cal-
Increasingnumbersofjournalsarenowrequiringpa-
culated. The reproducible manuscript is available at:
pers to share analysis code (Abbasi, 2023), and many
https://github.com/bakerdh/testbabymind
already mandate sharing data. However simply shar-
The paper by Hansford et al. (2024) explored multi-
ing code and data does not guarantee computational
sensorymodulationofillusoryfingerresizing. Theorig-
reproducibility (Crüwell et al., 2023; Hardwicke et al.,
inalanalysishadbeenpartlywritteninMatlab, andin-
2021), and very few journals currently (in 2023) in-
volved using a simple algorithm to determine the posi-
clude reproducibility checks as part of the review pro-
tionoftheindexfingerinstillimagesofthehand. This
cess (Meta-Psychology being a rare exception). Making
code was translated line-by-line into R, and was able
anentiremanuscriptreproducibleexceedsmostcurrent
to exactly reproduce the original results. The remain-
journal requirements, and makes verification of repro-
===== PAGE 8/14 =====
8
ducibility much more straightforward. A manuscript ticipant). An alternative solution might be to conduct
written in markdown is self-evidently reproducible, be- the group-level analyses on preprocessed data, reduc-
causethemarkdownfilespecifiestheanalyses,andhow ing the time and storage requirements. Alternatively,
theoutputsarepresentedinthemanuscript. Ifthecode deployment on high performance computing facilities
has been executed using a cloud-based service such as or cloud platforms would permit the analysis of many
GitHub Actions, there is also a fully documented audit large data sets in parallel. We look forward to future
trailofexactlywhathasbeendone(includingstorageof technicaldevelopmentsinthisdirection.
the server logs for the computer that ran the analysis). Another barrier to reproducibility is that many soft-
Wethinkthatself-evidentlyreproduciblemanuscriptsof ware packages require a commercial license, and/or
this type should render explicit reproducibility checks cannot be scripted or automated. A substantial pro-
either extremely straightforward, or perhaps even un- portionofscientificresearchusescommercialprogram-
necessary. They will also greatly facilitate the process mingplatformssuchasMatlabandMathematica,often
of formal statistical audit of manuscripts (see e.g. Nui- relying on specialist toolboxes that are only available
jten&Wicherts,2024),thoughwenotethatouraimin in those languages. In some cases it may be possible
thisprojectwastoreproducetheanalysesconductedby to translate code into more open languages (as we did
each study’s authors, rather than to provide commen- for the Hansford et al. study), and we note again that
tary on whether we thought this analysis was appro- artificialintelligencetoolsshowincreasingutilityinthis
priate. We consider that to be the responsibility of the area. Inourpilotstudywewereabletosuccessfullyre-
journalreviewingandeditorialprocess. produce analyses that were originally conducted using
Despite the many benefits of reproducible commercialstatisticalpackagessuchasSPSSandStata,
manuscripts,therewillalwaysbesometypesofanalysis byrunningequivalentanalysesinR.Furthermore,are-
that are inherently unsuitable for making reproducible cent development with some GUI-based statistics pack-
fromtherawdata. Forexample,studiesusingprimarily ages such as JASP (https://jasp-stats.org/) and Jamovi
qualitative methods, and those that require manual (https://www.jamovi.org/) is that they allow analyses
coding or processing cannot be easily replaced by to be exported as R syntax (or will do in the near fu-
automatedmethods. Thismightincludehumanratings ture), which opens the door to automation and repro-
of video recordings, or manual segmentation of MRI ducibility. We hope that over time more researchers
scans, for example. In such situations, a pragmatic realise the benefits of FOSS, and move their analy-
solution would be to take the results from the manual sis pipelines away from commercial software. We are
stages,andusethisasthedataonwhichareproducible aware that GitHub itself is a commercial entity (cur-
analysis is based. However, rapid progress is being rently owned by Microsoft), that might restrict its free
made in using artificial intelligence tools, including functionalityatsomepointinthefuture,makingitless
deeplearning,toautomaticallycodecomplexdatasuch usefulforhostingrepositorieswithoutcharge.
as images and movies (see e.g. DeepLabCut; Mathis Our pilot project was funded for 6 months, and a
et al., 2018). It is therefore likely that increasingly natural question is how we could continue this work
accurate automation might replace human labour in beyond the end of that period. One option is to seek
someareasofdataanalysis,withtheaddedbenefitthat further grant funding, so that ‘reproducibility as a ser-
theseanalyseswillthenbecomemorereproducible. vice’ can be provided at no cost to a paper’s authors.
We did not process any papers that used fMRI dur- However without very substantial funding this would
ingthispilotproject. TheanalysismethodsforMRIare necessarily remain limited in reach, most likely to our
relativelycomplex,andthereareoftendatasharingre- own department. Another option would be to charge a
strictionsonMRIimages,primarilybecauseparticipants fee for each paper that is processed. We ran an infor-
can in principle be identified from their scan data. We mal poll on social media that indicated relatively few
note that the fMRI community is now embracing stan- respondentshadthefinancialresourcestopayforsuch
dardised data formats (i.e. BIDS; Gorgolewski et al., a service. Over time this may change, and making pa-
2016) and analysis pipelines (i.e. fMRIprep; Esteban et pers reproducible could be costed into grant propos-
al., 2019), which will aid substantially in reproducibil- als if a commercial service were available. Alterna-
ity. Howeveritmaynotcurrentlybefeasibletousethe tive routes to sustainability might include direct sup-
pipelineweproposeheretoanalyselargeMRIdatasets port from academic institutions (Universities are in-
from scratch. In particular the GitHub Actions work- creasingly assessed on open research practices), chari-
flows have a time limit of 6 hours, and most MRI pre- ties, or national interest groups such as the UK repro-
processing requires substantially longer (i.e. FreeSurfer ducibility network (and international equivalents). Of-
reconstructiontypicallytakesaround12hoursperpar- fering training courses to disseminate these methods
===== PAGE 9/14 =====
9
mayalsoproveuseful. Afinalpossibilityissupportfrom Supported by an Enhancing Research Culture award
journal publishers, who should have a vested interest fromResearchEngland(viatheUniversityofYork).
in quality control of their outputs, and in many cases
have sufficient financial resources to make investments AuthorContributions
inhiringtechnicallycapablestaff.
DHB:Conceptualization,Datacuration,Formalanal-
The pilot project made ten papers reproducible. In
ysis, Funding acquisition, Investigation, Methodology,
doingso,wehopethattheauthorsofthosepapershave
Project administration, Resources, Software, Supervi-
experienced the benefits of reproducibility, and might
sion, Validation, Visualization, Writing - original draft,
aimtomakemoreoftheirfutureworkreproducibleina
andWriting-review&editing. MB:Conceptualization,
similarway. Oftenseeinganexampleofsomethingthat
Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Method-
is familiar helps us to put new concepts into a mean-
ology, Resources, Software, Validation, Visualization,
ingful framework, and we suspect this to be the case
andWriting-review&editing. KJH:Conceptualization,
for markdown scripting. Seeing how the analyses and
Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Method-
reporting conventions in a particular sub-field can be
ology, Resources, Software, Validation, Visualization,
madereproducibleshouldthereforeserveasatemplate
and Writing - review & editing. BPAQ: Conceptual-
for future studies. It is also the case that all members
ization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation,
of the project team have acquired extensive skills and
Methodology, Resources, Software, Validation, Visual-
experience in creating reproducible documents, and in
ization,andWriting-review&editing. FGS:Conceptu-
most cases have begun to apply this to our own re-
alization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation,
search. In this way we expect that good practice will
Methodology, Resources, Software, Validation, Visual-
spread throughout the discipline, gradually changing
ization, and Writing - review & editing. ELW-E: Con-
research culture and norms around computational re-
ceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Investi-
producibility. We believe that communication of scien-
gation, Methodology, Resources, Software, Validation,
tific results should be as open and transparent as pos-
Visualization,andWriting-review&editing.
sible, and propose that computationally reproducible
manuscriptsarethe‘goldstandard’inrealisingthisgoal.
OpenSciencePractices
Thetoolstoproducethemarenowfreelyavailable,and
we hope that the training materials we developed dur-
ingthisproject(seeAppendixA)willhelpotherstoac-
quirethenecessaryskillstomaketheirownworkrepro-
ducibleinthisway.
This article earned the Open Materials badge for
making the materials openly available. This is a narra-
AuthorContact
tive paper and as such was not reproduced nor eligible
Corresponding author, Daniel H. Baker, email: forotherbadges. Theentireeditorialprocess,including
daniel.baker@york.ac.uk theopenreviews,ispublishedintheonlinesupplement.
ORCIDIDs:
DHB:0000-0002-0161-443X References
KJH:0000-0002-5738-6843
Abbasi, K. (2023). A commitment to act on data shar-
BPAQ:0000-0001-8595-4433
ing. BMJ, p1609. https://doi.org/10.1136/
FGS:0000-0002-4982-8023
bmj.p1609
ELW-E:0000-0002-8926-4672
Baker,D.H.(2021).Statisticalanalysisofperiodicdata
inneuroscience.Neurons,Behavior,Dataanaly-
Acknowledgments
sis,andTheory,5(3),1–18.https://doi.org/10.
We thank all of the study authors who contributed 51628/001c.27680
their work to our pilot study. We also wish to thank Baker,D.H.,Vilidaite,G.,&Wade,A.R.(2021).Steady-
Dr Lincoln Colling for showing us the Github Actions state measures of visual suppression. PLOS
workflow. Computational Biology, 17(10), e1009507.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009507
ConflictofInterestandFunding Baxter,N.,&Hobson,H.(2024).Theroleofemotional
factors in face processing abilities in autism
The authors declare no current conflicts of interest,
spectrum conditions. Research in Autism Spec-
but reserve the right to offer the services described in
trum Disorders, 115, 102400. https://doi.org/
the manuscript on a commercial basis in the future.
10.1016/j.rasd.2024.102400
===== PAGE 10/14 =====
10
Brennan,R.A.,Enock,F.E.,&Over,H.(2024).Attribu- Grigoryan, L., Ponizovskiy, V., Weißflog, M. I., Osin, E.,
tionofundesirablecharactertraits,ratherthan & Lickel, B. (2024). Guilt, shame, and antiwar
trait-based dehumanization, predicts punish- actioninanauthoritariancountryatwar.Polit-
mentdecisions.RSocOpenSci,11(7),240087. ical Psychology, pops.12985. https://doi.org/
https://doi.org/10.1098/rsos.240087 10.1111/pops.12985
Carpenter, B., Gelman, A., Hoffman, M. D., Lee, D., Hansford, K. J., Baker, D. H., McKenzie, K. J., & Pre-
Goodrich, B., Betancourt, M., Brubaker, M., ston,C.E.(2024).Multisensoryprocessingand
Guo, J., Li, P., & Riddell, A. (2017). Stan: A proprioceptive plasticity during resizing illu-
Probabilistic Programming Language. Journal sions. Experimental Brain Research, 242, 451–
of Statistical Software, 76(1). https://doi.org/ 462. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00221-023-
10.18637/jss.v076.i01 06759-7
Crüwell,S.,Apthorp,D.,Baker,B.J.,Colling,L.,Elson, Hardwicke,T.E.,Bohn,M.,MacDonald,K.,Hembacher,
M., Geiger, S. J., Lobentanzer, S., Monéger, J., E., Nuijten, M. B., Peloquin, B. N., deMayo,
Patterson, A., Schwarzkopf, D. S., Zaneva, M., B. E., Long, B., Yoon, E. J., & Frank, M. C.
& Brown, N. J. L. (2023). What’s in a Badge? (2021). Analytic reproducibility in articles re-
A Computational Reproducibility Investigation ceivingopendatabadgesatthejournalPsycho-
of the Open Data Badge Policy in One Issue logical Science : An observational study. Royal
of Psychological Science. Psychological Science, SocietyOpenScience,8(1),201494.https://doi.
34(4), 512–522. https://doi.org/10.1177/ org/10.1098/rsos.201494
09567976221140828 Imbens, G. W., & Angrist, J. D. (1994). Identification
de Bruin, A., Kressel, H., & Hemmings, D. (2023). and Estimation of Local Average Treatment Ef-
A comparison of language control while fects. Econometrica, 62(2), 467. https://doi.
switching within versus between languages org/10.2307/2951620
in younger and older adults. Sci Rep, 13(1), Larkin, F., Oostenbroek, J., Lee, Y., Hayward, E., Fer-
16740. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023- nandez, A., Wang, Y., Mitchell, A., Li, L. Y.,
43886-1 & Meins, E. (2024). A smartphone app effec-
Esteban, O., Markiewicz, C. J., Blair, R. W., Moodie, tively facilitates mothers mind-mindedness: A
C. A., Isik, A. I., Erramuzpe, A., Kent, J. D., randomized controlled trial. Child Dev, 95(3),
Goncalves, M., DuPre, E., Snyder, M., Oya, H., 831–844.https://doi.org/10.1111/cdev.14039
Ghosh, S. S., Wright, J., Durnez, J., Poldrack, Lee,Y.J.,Meins,E.,&Larkin,F.(2023).ParentalMen-
R. A., & Gorgolewski, K. J. (2019). fMRIPrep: talization Across Cultures: Mind-mindedness
A robust preprocessing pipeline for functional and Parental Reflective Functioning in British
MRI. Nature Methods, 16(1), 111–116. https: and South Korean Mothers. PsyArXiv. https://
//doi.org/10.1038/s41592-018-0235-4 doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/qx9mh
Fiske, S. (2016). A call to change science’s culture of Mak, M. H. C., O’Hagan, A., Horner, A. J., & Gaskell,
shaming. Observer, 29(9), 5–11. https://www. M. G. (2023). A registered report testing the
psychologicalscience.org/observer/a-call-to- effect of sleep on Deese-Roediger-McDermott
change-sciences-culture-of-shaming false memory: Greater lure and veridical recall
Fox, J., & Weisberg, S. (2019). An R Companion to Ap- but fewer intrusions after sleep. Royal Society
plied Regression (Third Edition). Sage. https: OpenScience,10(12),220595.https://doi.org/
//socialsciences.mcmaster.ca/jfox/Books/ 10.1098/rsos.220595
Companion/ Mathis, A., Mamidanna, P., Cury, K. M., Abe, T.,
Gorgolewski, K. J., Auer, T., Calhoun, V. D., Crad- Murthy, V. N., Mathis, M. W., & Bethge, M.
dock, R. C., Das, S., Duff, E. P., Flandin, G., (2018). DeepLabCut: Markerless pose estima-
Ghosh, S. S., Glatard, T., Halchenko, Y. O., tionofuser-definedbodypartswithdeeplearn-
Handwerker, D. A., Hanke, M., Keator, D., Li, ing. Nature Neuroscience, 21(9), 1281–1289.
X., Michael, Z., Maumet, C., Nichols, B. N., https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-018-0209-y
Nichols, T. E., Pellman, J., ... Poldrack, R. A. Meese, T. S., & Baker, D. H. (2023). Object Image Size
(2016). The brain imaging data structure, a IsaFundamentalCodingDimensioninHuman
format for organizing and describing outputs Vision: New Insights and Model. Neuroscience,
of neuroimaging experiments. Scientific Data, 514, 79–91. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
3(1), 160044. https://doi.org/10.1038/sdata. neuroscience.2023.01.025
2016.44
===== PAGE 11/14 =====
11
Nuijten, M. B., & Wicherts, J. M. (2024). Implement-
ing statcheck during peer review is related to
a steep decline in statistical-reporting inconsis-
tencies. Advances in Methods and Practices in
Psychological Science, 7(2). https://doi.org/
10.1177/25152459241258945
Obels, P., Lakens, D., Coles, N. A., Gottfried, J., &
Green, S. A. (2020). Analysis of Open Data
and Computational Reproducibility in Regis-
tered Reports in Psychology. Advances in Meth-
ods and Practices in Psychological Science, 3(2),
229–237. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 /
2515245920918872
Peikert,A.,&Brandmaier,A.M.(2021).AReproducible
DataAnalysisWorkflow.QuantitativeandCom-
putational Methods in Behavioral Sciences, 1,
e3763.https://doi.org/10.5964/qcmb.3763
Rouder,J.N.,&Haaf,J.M.(2018).Power,Dominance,
andConstraint:ANoteontheAppealofDiffer-
entDesignTraditions.AdvancesinMethodsand
Practices in Psychological Science, 1(1), 19–26.
https://doi.org/10.1177/2515245917745058
Segala, F. G., Bruno, A., Martin, J. T., Aung, M. T.,
Wade, A. R., & Baker, D. H. (2023). Differ-
ent rules for binocular combination of lumi-
nance flicker in cortical and subcortical path-
ways. eLife, 12, RP87048. https://doi.org/10.
7554/eLife.87048
Venables,W.,&Ripley,B.(2002).ModernAppliedStatis-
tics with S (Fourth Edition). Springer. https://
www.stats.ox.ac.uk/pub/MASS4/
Wiebels, K., & Moreau, D. (2021). Leveraging Contain-
ers for Reproducible Psychological Research.
Advances in Methods and Practices in Psycholog-
ical Science, 4(2), 25152459211017853. https:
//doi.org/10.1177/25152459211017853
Wolen, A., Hartgerink, C., Hafen, R., Richards, B.,
Soderberg, C., & York, T. (2020). Osfr: An R
InterfacetotheOpenScienceFramework.Jour-
nalofOpenSourceSoftware,5(46),2071.https:
//doi.org/10.21105/joss.02071
===== PAGE 12/14 =====
12
Appendices
AppendixA
Thetrainingmaterialsproducedaspartofthisprojectareavailableat: https://github.com/bakerdh/ReproduceMe
AppendixB
Template Onboarding form, which was completed at or after the initial meeting between authors and the project
team.
ReproduceMe Initial Scoping form
Date of initial meeting:
Contact author name:
Contact author email:
Contact author GitHub:
Contact author OSF:
Paper title:
Brief overview of paper:
Target journal (if known):
Current status:
Not yet submitted
Preprint posted
In review
Stage 1 RR acceptance
Accepted/published
Manuscript written using:
MS word
Google docs
Open office
Overleaf
LaTex
R markdown
Other (please specify)
Analysis conducted using (tick all that apply):
R
SPSS
SAS
Stata
Matlab
Python
Julia
===== PAGE 13/14 =====
13
JASP
Jamovi
Other (please list)
Are figures generated automatically, or assembled manually?
Data format:
CSV
XLSX
SPSS
.mat
.RData
Python
NIFTI
Other (please specify)
Approximate total data size:
0 - 100MB
100MB - 1GB
1GB - 50GB
>50GB
If data/code are already shared online, please provide the URL(s):
Do the data need to be modified (i.e. de-anonymised) before sharing?
Are there any restrictions on data sharing?
Can we convert data to a more open format if appropriate?
Materials provided:
Desired level of computational reproducibility:
1 - Sharing of scripts and data online with manual download
2 - Automated download and analysis
3 - Full analysis pipeline (makes a pdf of the paper)
4 - Reproducible environment
Additional comments or requests:
===== PAGE 14/14 =====
14
AppendixC
TemplatefortheFeedbackform,providedtoauthorswhenworkhadfinished.
ReproduceMe Final Report form
Contact author name:
Paper title:
Date work completed:
Approximate time taken (hours):
Completed by (initials):
Location of files:
Level of computational reproducibility achieved:
1 - Sharing of scripts and data online with manual download
2 - Automated download and analysis
3 - Full analysis pipeline (makes a pdf of the paper)
4 - Reproducible environment
Operating systems tested on:
Windows
Mac
Linux
Description of any serious issues encountered during the process:
Description of any minor issues encountered during the process:
Other comments, suggestions and feedback: