
===== PAGE 1/21 =====
Meta-Psychology,2024,vol8,MP.2023.4039 Opendata:Yes Editedby:RickardCarlsson
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2023.4039 Openmaterials:Yes Reviewedby:vandenAkker,O.,Topor,M.,Rahal,R.
Articletype:OriginalArticle Openandreproducibleanalysis:Yes Analysisreproducedby:LucijaBatinovi´c
PublishedundertheCC-BY4.0license Openreviewsandeditorialprocess:Yes AllsupplementaryfilescanbeaccessedatOSF:
Preregistration:Yes https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/3QARW
Testing the Usability of the Psychological Research
Preregistration-Quantitative (PRP-QUANT) Template
Lisa Spitzer1, Michael Bosnjak2, and Stefanie Mueller1
1LeibnizInstituteforPsychology(ZPID)
2TrierUniversity
The Psychological Research Preregistration-Quantitative (PRP-QUANT) Template pro-
vides researchers with a comprehensive list of elements to consider when planning
a psychological study. We assessed its usability and researchers’ intention to use it.
We conducted a usability test (study 1) and surveyed researchers who submitted or
reviewed a preregistration created with the template (study 2, authors: N = 19, re-
viewers: N = 29) regarding their impression of the template. For the usability test,
werecruitedparticipantsviathemailinglistsoftheGermanPsychologicalSociety,the
American Psychological Association, and the British Psychological Society, and social
media. Participantsansweredselectedtemplateandwebprobingitemsandprovided
anoverallrating(N=88).BasedontheUnifiedTheoryofAcceptanceandUseofTech-
nology (UTAUT), we expected that the intention to use the template is influenced by
performanceexpectancy(moderatedbyage),effortexpectancy(moderatedbyageand
experience),andsocialinfluence(moderatedbyage,experience,andvoluntariness,N
=60). Theresults suggest thatthePRP-QUANTTemplate issuitablefordifferent re-
searchareaswithinpsychology,isevaluatedaseffective,andperceivedpositively. Per-
formance expectancy and all predictors combined significantly predicted researchers’
intention to use the template. A plain language summary in English and German is
availableinTextS1inthesupplementalmaterial.
Keywords: meta-research,openscience,preregistration,reproducibility,replicability
Introduction deviations are often not sufficiently disclosed, see Van
Den Akker, Bakker, et al., 2023). A recent study also
In recent years, there has been a growing call for
showedthatuncertaintyaboutwhichaspectsneededto
methodsandprocedurestoincreasethetransparencyof
beincludedinthepreregistrationwasbothaconcernof
research(e.g.,seeMunafòetal.,2017),oneofthembe-
researchers who had not yet preregistered, and a prob-
ingstudypreregistration(Noseketal.,2018),inwhich
lemexperiencedbyresearcherswithpreregistrationex-
researchers document and publish their study plan be-
perience. Accordingly, better education about prereg-
fore data have been collected or examined. Preregis-
istration was one of the most common suggestions to
trations are time-stamped and published with an inde-
increasemotivationandreduceobstaclesofpreregistra-
pendent party (e.g., a repository) so that they can be
tion(SpitzerandMueller,2023).
accessed by others (possibly after an embargo period).
Preregistration templates can help overcome uncer-
This way, preregistration aims to provide transparent
tainty by listing important elements that researchers
documentationofstudyprocedures,clearidentification
should address in their preregistration (e.g., hypothe-
of deviations from preregistered plans, and a clear dis-
ses, study design, data acquisition, and data analysis
tinctionbetweenconfirmatoryandexploratoryresearch
plan). Nowadays, a variety of templates are available,
(Parsonsetal.,2022).
differing in scope and targeted research type. Besides
Studies suggest that preregistration can help reduce
more universal templates, there are templates specif-
questionableresearchpracticesandtherateoffalsepos-
ically focusing on social psychology (van ’t Veer and
itive findings (Kaplan and Irvin, 2015; Swaen et al.,
Giner-Sorolla,2016),fMRIstudies(Beyeretal.,2021),
2001)and,amongotheropensciencetechniques,might
replicationstudies(Brandtetal.,2014),cognitivemod-
increasethereplicationrateofresearch(Protzkoetal.,
els(CrüwellandEvans, 2021),orsecondarydataanal-
2020). However, despite its benefits, there is also ev-
yses (Van den Akker et al., 2021). This wide range of
idence that questions the effectiveness of current pre-
options may lead to fragmentation and potential con-
registration (e.g., as much flexibility remains open and
===== PAGE 2/21 =====
2
fusion among researchers as to which template should more emphasis on learnability and flexibility. As the
be used. Selecting the right template is no trivial deci- PRP-QUANTTemplateisintendedtocoverawiderange
sionandcanbeparticularlychallengingforpreregistra- ofdifferentpsychologicalsub-disciplines,andtherefore
tionbeginners. Acommonstandard,suchasauniversal the issues of learnability and flexibility are particularly
template that covers most of the research areas in psy- relevantforassessingthetemplate’susabilitywithinall
chology, provides an easy starting point and facilitates of psychology, the aspects defined by Shackel (2009)
comparabilitybetweenpreregistrations. wereusedasthebasisforthisresearch. Sincenotrain-
To develop such a standard for psychology and re- ing was carried out in our study, the understandability
inforce the importance of preregistration, members ofthetemplatewasusedasanapproximationforlearn-
of the American Psychological Association (APA), the ability.
British Psychological Society (BPS), the German Psy- Specifically,wewereinterestedinthefollowingques-
chological Society (DGPs), the Center for Open Sci- tions:
ence(COS,https://www.cos.io/),andtheLeibnizInsti- A) Learnability: Do authors from the various sub-
tute for Psychology (ZPID, https://leibniz-psychology. disciplines of psychology understand how to fill in the
org/en/)formedaJointPsychologicalSocietiesPrereg- differentitemsofthetemplate? Dotheyunderstandthe
istration Task Force. Together, they developed the Psy- itemsinthesameway?
chological Research Preregistration-Quantitative (PRP- B) Flexibility: Does the template capture the main
QUANT)Template(Bosnjaketal.,2022),acomprehen- points across sub-disciplines, as indicated by re-
sive template that aids the preregistration of quantita- searchersfromdifferentsub-disciplines?
tivestudiesinpsychology. C) Effectiveness: Are the items specific enough (i.e.,
are researcher degrees of freedom minimized)? Are
TestingtheUsabilityofthePRP-QUANTTemplate items answered as expected (i.e., is the information re-
questedintheitemprovidedbyresearchersinresponse
Since preregistration of research in psychology is
toit)?
mainly voluntary, it is essential to provide a good us-
D) Attitude: Are users satisfied with using the tem-
ability to enhance acceptance. There is currently little
plate? Arecosts(e.g.,tiredness,personaleffort)accept-
empirical evaluation of preregistration templates (for
able? Can the goals of the template (i.e., a detailed
an example, see Bakker et al., 2020; Heirene et al.,
mapping of the preregistered study) be achieved with
2021; Van Den Akker, Van Assen, et al., 2023), how-
a reasonable amount of effort? Would authors recom-
ever,itisreasonabletonotsimplyassumeusabilitybut
mend/usethetemplate?
totestitempirically. Thus,inlinewiththePRP-QUANT
To assess the usability of the PRP-QUANT Template,
Template’s goal of becoming increasingly adapted to
we conducted an online study in which we asked psy-
theneedsofthepsychologicalresearchcommunity(see
chological researchers to think about one of their stud-
Bosnjak et al., 2022), the first aim of our studies was
iesandcreateapreregistrationforthatstudyusingthe
to evaluate its usability and identify areas for improve-
template (see study 1: simulation trial and intention to
ment.
use). Participants did not actually submit their prereg-
Various definitions of usability exist, largely sharing
istration. Alongside the template items, several web
the same underlying concepts, but highlighting differ-
probing questions were presented. We wanted to as-
ent aspects. A popular definition comes from the Inter-
sess the overall perceived usability (based on the crite-
nationalOrganizationforStandardization(ISO),which
ria outlined above), as well as participants’ comments
measures usability along the dimensions of effective-
andsuggestionsforimprovingindividualitems.
ness, efficiency, and satisfaction with regard to specific
In addition, we conducted a survey among re-
users, objectives and contexts (International Organiza-
searchers who responded to a call for online studies
tion for Standardization, 2018). Another definition is
by submitting a preregistration created with the PRP-
provided by Shackel (2009), who defines usability as
QUANT Template (see study 2: survey of preregistra-
“the capability to be used by humans easily and effec-
tion authors and reviewers). Responding to this call, re-
tively” (p. 340). According to Shackel (2009), four
searchersappliedwiththeirpreregistrationsforfunding
aspects of usability should be considered: learnability
for their data collection from ZPID’s service PsychLab
(i.e.,beingusablewithanappropriateamountoftrain-
ONLINE. PsychLab aims to encourage preregistration
ing), flexibility (i.e., allowing adaptation in different
by offering the incentive of free-of-charge data collec-
tasks and environments), effectiveness (i.e., achieving
tion for high-quality preregistrations, which addresses
arequiredlevelofperformance),andattitude(i.e.,sat-
another current obstacle to preregistration, i.e., insuffi-
isfaction, considering human costs like tiredness or ef-
cient incentives (Spitzer and Mueller, 2023). The sub-
fort). ThesepartlyalignwiththeISOstandardbutplace
===== PAGE 3/21 =====
3
mittedpreregistrationswereevaluatedbyexternalpeer- importanceonsocialinfluencesandaffiliation.
reviewers. After the peer-reviews were completed, the 7) Experience (operationalized as the academic ex-
authorsofpreregistrations(i.e.,theapplicants)andthe perience, i.e., participants’ academic group) negatively
reviewers were surveyed about using the PRP-QUANT moderates the effect of effort expectancy on intention,
Templateforwritingandreviewing,respectively. aspriorexperiencewouldserveasafacilitatorforusing
thenewsystem.
Assessing the Intention to Use the PRP-QUANT Tem- 8) Experience negatively moderates the effect of so-
plate cialinfluenceonintention,sinceithasbeenshownthat
the salience of social influences decreases with experi-
In addition to exploring the usability of the prereg-
ence.
istration template, we also wanted to find out whether
9)Voluntariness(i.e.,theextenttowhichresearchers
psychological researchers plan to use the template in
feeltheycandecidewhetherornottopreregister)neg-
thefuturetocreatetheirpreregistrations. Toinvestigate
atively moderates the effect of social influence on in-
this,thetheoreticalframeworkoftheUnifiedTheoryof
tention, as social influence is less important in settings
Acceptance and Use of Technology (UTAUT; Venkatesh
where the decision to use the system is completely vol-
etal.,2003,2016)wasused. Thistheorypostulatesthat
untary.
performance expectancy (i.e., the belief that using the
system will help achieve performance gains), effort ex-
Study1: SimulationTrialandIntentiontoUse
pectancy (i.e., the degree of ease associated with using
the system), and social influence (i.e., the perception In study 1, we examined the usability of the PRP-
that important others believe one should use the new QUANTTemplatebyaskingpsychologicalresearchersto
system)predictpeople’sintentiontouseanewsystem. thinkofoneoftheirstudiesandcompleteselectedparts
AccordingtotheUTAUT,intention,combinedwithfacil- of the template. We also presented web probing ques-
itatingconditions(i.e.,thebeliefthatanorganizational tionsandexaminedtheresearchers’intentiontousethe
andtechnicalinfrastructureexistswhichsupportsusing templateinthefuture.
thesystem),isapredictorofactualbehavior. Therefore,
it is of interest to investigate the intention to use the Methods
template in more detail, as this might be an estimator
This study was preregistered (https://doi.org/10.
ofhowlikelypsychologicalresearcherswilluseitinthe
23668/psycharchives.4636). It was conducted as pre-
futuretocreatetheirpreregistrations.
registered, except for the deviations summarized and
ToexaminetheintentiontousethePRP-QUANTTem-
justified in the section Deviations From the Preregistra-
plate, we asked the participants of study 1 to answer
tion.
various UTAUT items (see study 1: simulation trial and
intentiontouse). Then,wecomputedamoderatedmul- Participants
tiple regression model. Based on the UTAUT and the
Participants were invited via the mailing
effects described by Venkatesh et al. (2003), we had
lists of all research-oriented APA (https://www.
the following predictions, which are also displayed in
apadivisions.org/), BPS (https://www.bps.org.uk/
Figure1:
member-networks), and DGPs (https://www.dgps.de/
1)Performanceexpectancyisapositivepredictorfor
fachgruppen) divisions. A reminder was sent a few
theintentiontousethetemplate.
weeks after the initial invitation. Furthermore, the
2)Effortexpectancyisapositivepredictorforthein-
survey was advertised on social media (Facebook and
tentiontousethetemplate.
Twitter). Participantswerenotcompensated.
3) Social influence is a positive predictor for the in-
Of the 2668 persons that clicked on the study link,
tentiontousethetemplate.
314 provided informed consent and started the main
4) Age negatively moderates the effect of perfor-
bodyofthestudy. Nineparticipantswhoindicatedthat
mance expectancy on intention, as it has been shown
they were not researchers or that their research did
that extrinsic rewards may be more important for
not fall within the scope of psychology were screened
youngerpersons.
out at the beginning of the study since we specifically
5) Age positively moderates the effect of effort ex-
aimedtocollectdatafrompsychologicalresearchers. Of
pectancy on intention, since older persons have more
theremainingparticipants,88subsequentlyworkedon
difficulties in processing complex stimuli and attention
the template items and were thus included in the de-
allocation.
scriptive reports, as this was the core part of the study
6)Agepositivelymoderatestheeffectofsocialinflu-
enceonintention,sinceolderpersonsmightplacemore
===== PAGE 4/21 =====
4
Figure1
HypothesesbasedontheUTAUT(Venkateshetal.,2003,2016)
(34.09%male,57.95%female,2.27%other,5.68%pre- N=88).
ferred not to answer; Mean = 37.19; 86.36% from Ofallparticipantsincludedinthedescriptivereports,
age
Europe,11.36%fromNorthAmerica,2.27%didnotre- 60 answered all items relevant for the UTAUT model
spond; 13.64% native English speakers). We were able and were therefore included in the hypotheses tests
to collect data from all targeted academic groups, that (36.67% male, 56.67% female, 3.33% other, 3.33%
is, 32.95% of participants were PhD students, 37.5% preferred not to answer; Mean = 36.12; 33.33%
age
were postdocs, 26.14% were professors, 2.27% indi- PhD students, 41.67% postdocs, and 25% professors;
cated“other”,and1.14%didnotrespond. Additionally, 88.33%fromEurope, 10%fromNorthAmerica, 1.67%
alltheconsideredresearchareaswerepresent,withex- didnotrespond;13.33%nativeEnglishspeakers).
perimental/cognitive, educational, and social psychol- Data were collected between March 1, 2021, and
ogybeingthemostprominent(seeTableS1inthesup- April 24, 2021. As preregistered, data collection was
plementalmaterial). Morethanhalfoftheparticipants stopped one month after the initial invitation was sent
indicatedhavingpreregisteredbefore(56.82%). Ofthe to the last contacted division. Originally, a sample size
participants with preregistration experience (n =50), of N = 89 was targeted to be able to detect effects of
16% had preregistered one study, 14% had preregis- R2 = 25% with α = β = .05 for the UTAUT regression
tered two studies, 16% three studies, 8% four studies, model including 12 predictors, which was determined
12%fivestudies,and34%morethanfivestudies. byanaprioripoweranalysis(seepreregistration: https:
For answering the template and web probing items, //doi.org/10.23668/psycharchives.4636). This sample
participantswererandomlyassignedtooneoffourcon- size was not reached within the set timeframe, but the
ditions. Depending on their condition, they were re- effect for the overall model was quite large (R2
adjusted
quested to fill out only a subsection of the template: = 42.79%) and could thus also be detected with the
1) title and introduction, 2) overall methods, sampling achievedsamplesize. However,sinceonlyoneofthein-
procedure,anddatacollection,3)overallmethods,con- dividualpredictorswassignificant,weconductedasen-
ditions, and design, or 4) analysis plans. This aimed to sitivity analysis to determine how informative the tests
reduce the burden placed on each participant. Twenty- of the individual predictors were (see Figure 2). The
three participants were in condition 1, 29 in condition upper bound of the curve (f2 = 0.149) represents the
2, 19 in condition 3, and 17 in condition 4 (overall: effectsizeofoursignificantpredictor(performanceex-
===== PAGE 5/21 =====
5
pectancy),forwhichahighpowerof90%wasachieved. sessed using various rating items that were displayed
However, when inspecting the power for the predictor afterparticipantshadfinishedworkingonthetemplate.
with the second-highest beta value (social influence x These items inquired about, for example, participants’
age, f2 = 0.066), power drops to 62.4%. To reach a satisfactionwithusingthetemplate(attitude),howwell
power of 80%, the effect size would have needed to theyunderstoodit(learnability),orhowwellitcovered
be at least f2 = 0.106. The results for the individual themostimportantaspectsoftheirresearch(flexibility).
predictorsshouldthereforebeinterpretedwithcaution. The items used for the usability test were open text
input items, single- or multiple-choice items, and rat-
MaterialandMeasures
ing items with varying scales (see online materials:
https://doi.org/10.23668/psycharchives.12959).
The online survey was created using the software
TomeasuretheUTAUTvariables,thefollowingscales
SoSciSurvey(Leiner,2019)andwassuppliedviawww.
wereassessed: aperformanceexpectancyscale(i.e.,five
soscisurvey.de. ItwaspresentedinEnglish. Inlinewith
items measuring participants’ expected performance
the two aims of this project, the study items focused
when using the template), an effort expectancy scale
on assessing the usability of the PRP-QUANT Template
(i.e.,fiveitemsinquiringabouttheexpectedeffortwhen
and measuring the UTAUT variables (see online mate-
using the template, where higher scores were associ-
rials for a complete list of items: https://doi.org/10.
atedwithlowerexpectedeffort),asocialinfluencesscale
23668/psycharchives.12959).
(i.e., a scale of five items examining the perceived so-
As a first measure of usability, the template’s effec-
cialpressuretousepreregistration),andavoluntariness
tiveness was inspected. For this purpose, participants
scale (i.e., perceived control over the behavior). The
wereaskedtoanswertheitemsofthePRP-QUANTTem-
intention to use the template (dependent variable) was
plate as if they were preparing a real preregistration,
measuredwithonevariable,aswereageandexperience
thinking about a study they were currently planning
(operationalized as the participants’ academic group).
or conducting (or, if no current project was available,
In addition, facilitating conditions (i.e., a scale of five
a previous study). They first provided a brief descrip-
items) were measured. The latter scale was not part of
tion of their study and answered items about its status
our hypotheses tests, as it is assumed to influence peo-
and whether they planned to preregister it. They were
ple’s actual behavior, not their intention (Venkatesh et
then asked to complete the individual template items.
al., 2003). However, this scale was still assessed since
Effectiveness was measured by coding participants’ re-
it might provide insights into factors that might help
sponses to the template items in terms of their fit with
fosterthepracticeofpreregistration. TheUTAUTscales
what was asked in the item (see section Data Analysis
were measured on a seven-point rating scale with 1 =
and Pre-Processing) and by having participants rate the
Disagreeto7=Agree(Venkateshetal.,2003).
perceivedimportanceofallitems.
AllUTAUTitemswereadaptedfromVenkateshetal.
To gain a deeper insight into the participants’ inter-
(2003). The other items were developed based on face
actionwiththetemplateitems,aswellascollectpartic-
validityandrevisedinconsultationwiththemembersof
ipants’ suggestions for improvements for all items, sev-
the Preregistration Task Force that developed the PRP-
eral web probing questions were displayed alongside
QUANT Template (Bosnjak et al., 2022). Additionally,
the template items (derived from Behr et al., 2017),
before data collection, a pre-test was conducted with
probing for category-selection (e.g., for items such as
four participants (two PhD students, one postdoc, and
T11“Codeavailability”whichrequiredselectinganop-
one professor), and its results were used to further im-
tion, participants were asked to elaborate why they se-
prove the items (e.g., by increasing their comprehensi-
lected the respective category), comprehension (e.g.,
bility).
asking participants for the meaning of terms or para-
phrasing, requesting participants to rate how well they
Procedure
understood the item, or to differentiate template items
from related items), or elaboration (e.g., asking partic- Participants received the study link via their respec-
ipants for examples). Some of the web probing items tive society’s mailing list or social media (see section
were displayed for all template items (i.e., rating the Participants). Afterthewelcomepage,participantinfor-
perceived importance of the item and an open-ended mation was presented, and participants were required
question asking what participants would add, change, to provide informed consent to proceed. They were in-
or remove about the item), while others were specific formed of the study objectives (i.e., evaluation of the
toindividualitems. PRP-QUANTTemplate).
Meanwhile,participants’attitudesregardingthetem- At the beginning of the study, the participants pro-
plate, as well as learnability and flexibility, were as- vided information about their sociodemographic data
===== PAGE 6/21 =====
6
Figure2
Sensitivitycurvesforhypothesistestsofindividualpredictors
Note. ConductedwithG*Power(Fauletal.,2007,2009).
and general use of preregistration. The study then provide other reasons via open text input). This ques-
focused successively on the usability of the template tionitselfwasnotmandatory.
and measurement of the UTAUT items. Some items On average, it took participants approximately 31
of the study were only shown to participants who had minutestocompletethestudy(SD=12min,range=54
preregistered before (see online materials: https://doi. min, times adjusted for interruptions). The procedure
org/10.23668/psycharchives.12959). Before any PRP- was approved by the ethics committee of Trier Uni-
QUANTTemplateorwebprobingitemsweredisplayed, versity, Germany (approval number: 27/2020). An
all participants were shown the entire template. They example screen recording of condition 1 of the pro-
openedthetemplateinatableformatinanewbrowser cedure and a PDF of the questionnaire for all condi-
tabbyclickingonalinkprovidedinthestudyandwere tions are available online (https://doi.org/10.23668/
asked to look at the entire template to obtain a gen- psycharchives.12959).
eral impression. A control question regarding the con-
DataAnalysisandPre-Processing
tentofatemplateitemhadtobeansweredcorrectlyto
proceed. Participants were asked to keep the template We used R (Version 4.2.2, R Core Team, 2021) and
open in the additional tab so that they could refer to it the R-packages corrplot (version 0.92, Wei and Simko,
throughoutthestudy. 2021), lm.beta (version 1.7-2, Behrendt, 2014), olsrr
Noitemsofthestudyweremandatorybesidesthefil- (version 0.5.3, Hebbali, 2020), psych (version 2.2.9,
ter question at the beginning, which inquired whether Revelle, 2021), RColorBrewer(version1.1-3, Neuwirth,
the participants worked in psychological research (see 2022), readxl (version 1.4.2, Wickham and Bryan,
section Participants). However, for participants’ study 2022), Rmisc (version 1.5.1, Hope, 2022), tidyverse
descriptionsandtheUTAUTquestionnaire,participants (version 2.0.0, Wickham et al., 2019), and writexl
whodidnotrespondwereaskedtoconfirmtheirchoice (version 1.4.2, Ooms, 2021) for all analyses. All
toensurethatgapswerenotcreatedinadvertently. Ad- analysis scripts and anonymized data (including meta-
ditionally,ifparticipantsdidnotrespondtothetemplate dataaboutvariablesandvalues)arepubliclyaccessible
items,theywereaskedtoprovideareasonforthis(i.e., online (data: https://doi.org/10.23668/psycharchives.
whether they thought the item was optional, made a 12915; code: https://doi.org/10.23668/psycharchives.
mistake, did not know what to answer, did not like the 14244).
item,iftheitemdidnotfittheirresearch,ortheycould Datawerepre-processedbyrecodingresponsesfrom
===== PAGE 7/21 =====
7
multiple-choice questions (originally: 1 = not selected When asked for definitions, explanations, or exam-
and 2 = selected; new: 0 = not selected and 1 = se- ples, a different coding was implemented. For defini-
lected)andturningsingle-choiceitemsintofactors. The tions, it was coded if the term was correctly described
polarity of negatively poled scale items was reversed. in the response (= 1) or not (= 0), and for examples
AllUTAUTitemsaswellassomeotheritemsoftheweb it was coded if the examples fit the requested term (=
probingandoverallevaluationwererecodedfrom“1to 1) or not (= 0). All coded, anonymized comments
7”to“-3to3”,yieldingamiddlecategorywhichhasab- are published alongside the data (https://doi.org/10.
solutemeaning(i.e.,0=neutralopinion,neitheragree- 23668/psycharchives.12915).
mentnordisagreement). Asspecifiedinthepreregistra- Quality check of UTAUT scale items. For the items
tion,emptydataandnonsenseresponses(e.g.,random of the UTAUT scales and the overall evaluation, floor
key pressing) were excluded (i.e., 24 of 397 responses and ceiling effects were inspected, that is, items for
for the template items; 27 of 206 responses for the which≥90%ofparticipantsselectedthelowestorhigh-
“Whatwouldyouadd,change,orremove...?”items;1 est category. No floor or ceiling effects were found for
of 131 responses for the open text input items; and 12 the overall sample, nor the sample used for the UTAUT
of268responsesgiventothewebprobingitems). analyses. Furthermore,consideringonlythedataofpar-
Codingofopentextinput. Participants’responsesto ticipants included in the hypotheses tests, the reliabil-
thetemplateitemsandotheropentextinputitemswere ity of the UTAUT scales was inspected. The reliability
coded for the analysis. Three coders were involved in analysesshowedhightoexcellentreliabilityfortheper-
this process, but coding was split between coders item- formance expectancy (α = .87) and effort expectancy
wisesothatonlyoneindividualcodedallresponsesfor scales (α = .9), adequate reliability for the social influ-
oneitem. ence scale (α = .76), and moderate reliability for the
Fortheparticipants’responsestothetemplateitems, voluntarinessscale(α=.62).
it was coded if the given response matched what was
DeviationsFromthePreregistration
requested in the item (0 = not applicable, 1 = fits
poorly, 2 = fits moderately, 3 = fits well, -9 = non-
All deviations from the preregistered plan are dis-
sense answer). For this, a coding scheme was used,
played in Table 1 below. For each deviation, a justifi-
which was developed and published prior to data col-
cationisprovided.
lection alongside the preregistration (https://doi.org/
10.23668/psycharchives.4636). To improve the pre- Results
specified coding scheme and represent as many poten-
UsabilityofthePRP-QUANTTemplate
tial responses as possible, the template responses of
25% of participants per condition were randomly se- Satisfaction, Perceived Effectiveness, Fit to Re-
lectedandcoded,whilethecodingschemewasrevised search Area, and Comprehensiveness. Participants’
in the process (e.g., the coding categories 0 = not ap- responsesconcerningtheoverallevaluationofthetem-
plicableand-9=nonsenseanswerwereadded). Subse- plate are displayed in Figure 3. On average, they were
quently,theimprovedcodingschemewasappliedtothe rather satisfied with using the template (Mean = 0.72,
remaining datasets. The final coding scheme is avail- Median = 1, SD = 1.54, IQR = 2, range = 6, on
able online (https://doi.org/10.23668/psycharchives. a scale from -3 = very dissatisfied to 3 = very satis-
12959). fied, see Figure 3A). They rated it as being effective
Next, open web probing questions and other open forhelpingthemcreateapreregistration(Mean = 1.18,
text input items were evaluated by coding common Median = 1, SD = 1.41, IQR = 1.25, range = 6, on
themes. Responses were shuffled and the coder read a scale from -3 = very ineffective to 3 = very effective,
the first 10% of the shuffled responses. They identified see Figure 3B). Compared to their favorite preregistra-
common themes mentioned by the participants, which tion template, the PRP-QUANT Template convinced the
werethentransferredtonewcolumnsinacodingsheet. participants to about the same extent (Mean = 0.04,
Then, it was coded for all other responses if the theme Median = 0, SD = 1.51, IQR = 2, range = 6, on a
was mentioned (= 1) or not mentioned (= 0). If new scalefrom-3=lessto3=more,seeFigure3C).When
relevanttopicsappearedtothecoderthattheyhadnot asked how likely they would use the template in the
codedbefore,thesewereaddedascategoriesasthecod- futuretocreatetheirpreregistrations,participantsindi-
ingcontinuedandwerecodedlater. Fortheitem“What cated an average probability of 61.47% (Median = 68,
would you add, change, or remove about the item?”, SD = 28.51, IQR = 33.75, range = 100). Addition-
commonthemeswerecategorizedinto1)thingstoadd, ally, they indicated an average probability of 64.67%
2)thingstochange,and3)thingstoremove.
===== PAGE 8/21 =====
8
Table1
Deviationsfromthepreregistration
Section Descriptionandjustification
Recruitment Reminder emails were sent later than anticipated (not after one week, but after
fiveweeksfortheDGPs,andtwoandahalfweeksfortheBPS).FortheAPA,no
reminderwassent,insteadthestudywasalsoadvertisedintheirnewsletter.
Participants Originally,itwasplannedtoincludeallparticipantsthatstartedthemainbodyof
the study in the descriptive reports. However, since many participants dropped
outbeforestartingtoworkonthetemplateitems,andthesearethecorepartof
thestudy,wedecidedtoreportalldescriptivereportsforthissub-sample(n=88).
Pre-processing Inadditiontothepreregisteredpre-processingsteps,furtherqualitycheckswere
conducted,butdidnotresultinanymodificationsiniteminclusion. Specifically,
reliabilityaswellasfloorandceilingeffectswereinspected(i.e., itwaschecked
for items of the UTAUT scales and overall evaluation, if ≥ 90% of participants
answeredthelowest/highestcategory). Reliabilityanalysesshowedmoderateto
excellent reliability, no items needed to be excluded. No floor or ceiling effects
werefound.
UTAUT Sincetheassumptiontestsshowedahighmulticollinearityduetotheinteraction
terms,forthehypothesestesttheUTAUTscaleswerecenteredinsteadofrecoding
themfrom“1to7”to“-3to3”.
IntheUTAUTsample,forthe“academicgroup”variable,theoption“other”was
excluded (n = 1) because it holds no information for the regression model (het-
erogeneousgroup).
For the scales, instead of displaying means and standard deviations, these were
displayed in a plot showing the mean and confidence interval, for easier inspec-
tion.
It was not clearly defined a priori that one-sided tests would be used for the
regression weights, however, since directional hypotheses were tested, this was
implemented. Thishadnoimpactontheresults.
Codingofopencomments Forthewebprobing,itwasoriginallyplannedtocodecommonthemesforques-
tionsofthetype“howisthisitemdifferentfromanotheritem”. However,itmakes
moresensetocodewhetherthereporteddifferenceswereperceivedcorrectly(=
1)orincorrectly(=0).
(Median = 72, SD = 30.25, IQR = 40, range = 100) for Whenaskedtoratethetemplate’soverallbalancebe-
recommendingthetemplatetoacolleague. tween comprehensiveness and parsimony, they rated it
ThePRP-QUANTTemplatefitquitewelltothepartic- as rather comprehensive (Mean = 0.68, Median = 1,
ipants’ research areas (Mean = 1.22, Median = 2, SD = SD=1.08, IQR=1,range=6,onascalefrom-3=too
1.38, IQR = 1.25, range = 5, on a scale from -3 = not parsimoniousto3=toocomprehensive, seeFigure3G).
at all to 3 = very well, see Figure 3D) and covered the Moreover, the assessment of the template’s complexity
most important aspects of their studies (Mean = 1.65, variedwidely(seeFigure3H),butonaverage,thepar-
Median = 2, SD = 1.34, IQR = 2, range = 5, on a scale ticipantsdidnotfinditunnecessarilycomplex(Mean =
from -3 = not at all to 3 = very well, see Figure 3E). −0.08, Median = 0, SD = 1.99, IQR = 3, range = 6,
Additionally, the participants understood the template on a scale from -3 = disagree to 3 = agree). Instead,
well (Mean = 1.58, Median = 2, SD = 1.11, IQR = 1, they found it moderately easy to use (Mean = 0.35,
range = 5, on a scale from -3 = not at all to 3 = very Median=0.5,SD=1.71, IQR=3,range=6,onascale
well,seeFigure3F). from-3=disagreeto3=agree,seeFigure3I),although
===== PAGE 9/21 =====
9
Figure3
Ratingofoverallsatisfaction,perceivedeffectiveness,fittoresearcharea,andcomprehensivenessinpercent
A. Howsatisfiedareyouwiththeuseofthetemplate?
very dissatisfied very satisfied
B. How effective would you rate this template in helping you to create a preregistration?
veryineffective veryeffective
C. Comparedtoyourfavoritetemplate(whichyouspecifiedatthebeginningofthestudy),did
this template convince you less, equally or even more?
less more
D. Howwelldoesthetemplatefityourresearcharea?
not at all very well
E. Regarding most of your studies, does the template cover the most important aspects?
notatall verywell
F. Consideringthewholetemplate(alsotheitemsthatyoudidnotneedtoanswer),howwell
did you understand the template?
not at all very well
G. How would you rate the overall balance between comprehensiveness and parsimony?
too parsimonious too comprehensive
H. I found the template unnecessarily complex.
disagree agree
I. I thought the template was easy to use.
disagree agree
Note. All items were rated on a seven-point scale. Percentages are based on all responses to each item (A: N = 62;
B:N=63;C:N=50;D–I:N=63). Onlypercentagesabove5%arelabelled.
itshouldbenotedthat30%ofparticipantsstillreported Participants’ Suggestions for Improving the Tem-
alowerlevelofeaseofuse. plate. Participants were invited to provide open text
===== PAGE 10/21 =====
10
input suggestions to improve the template. Only the indicated that the item was not applicable to the par-
themes mentioned more than once are included here, ticipants’ studies, and 6.05% were nonsense answers.
butallcodedcommentscanbeinspectedonline(https: Figure4providesanoverviewoftheresponsefitforall
//doi.org/10.23668/psycharchives.12915). Of the 37 template items presented that required an open-ended
participants who responded to this item, 13.51% com- response from participants. Inspecting the plot reveals
plimented the comprehensiveness of the template and thatforsomeitems,answerswereprimarilywell-fitting
found it to be a good guide for preregistration begin- (e.g.,itemT8“ConflictofInterestStatement”,M2“Use
ners and early career researchers. However, 32.43% of pre-existing data”), and that most items showed a
pointed out that the template was very long and spe- moderate to good response fit. However, a higher pro-
cific and that it might be beneficial to reduce its com- portion of poor answers were given for the items M13
plexity. Correspondingly, 10.81% suggested providing “Study Materials”, M14 “Study Procedures”, AP3 “Data
a shorter basic template, where you specify the study preprocessing”,AP5“Descriptivestatistics”,AP6“Statis-
type at the beginning and then get more specific items ticalmodels”andAP7“Inferencecriteria”(i.e.,≥20%of
matching your study type. Additionally, 10.81% of the responseswerecodedas“poor”). Themeans, standard
participants indicated that some items seemed redun- deviations, medians, and ranges for each item’s fit are
dant and that it would be helpful if the instructions displayedinTableS2inthesupplementalmaterial.
provided additional information to clarify their differ- Whenever participants did not answer the template
ences. The participants also provided suggestions for items, they were prompted to provide reasons for do-
the practical implementation of the template: for ex- ing so (see section Procedure). Of the 44 responses to
ample, 8.11% suggested offering it in different formats these prompts, 50% indicated that the participants did
(which is currently already the case, see https://doi. not know what to answer, 11.36% of the participants
org/10.23668/psycharchives.4584)andtoprovidepre- saidthatitwasamistake, 6.82%thoughttheitemwas
defined options which can be adjusted if you deviate optional, 4.55% did not like the item, 2.27% said that
fromthem. Another5.41%wishedforexampleanswers it did not apply to their research, and 25% gave other
that could be used as support when filling in the ques- reasons,mostofwhichalignedwiththegivenoptions.
tionnaire. Furthermore, 16.22% of the participants in- Template Items Perceived as Important for Pre-
dicatedthat,whilethetemplatefitsbestwithconfirma- registration. Participants felt that most of the items
tory and experimental studies, items for other research in the PRP-QUANT Template were important for pre-
types might be added. Paying attention to interdisci- registering their studies (see Figure 5). The items
plinarity was also suggested by participants in the gen- rated most important were AP6 “Statistical models”,
eral comment section at the end of the study (8.7% of M12 “Measured variables, manipulated variables, co-
23responses), whilemostresponseswerepraisetothe variates”,M14“StudyProcedures”,M10“Typeofstudy
template (34.78%) or more general comments about and study design”, M13 “Study Materials”, and M1
preregistrationorthestudy. “Timepointofregistration”(i.e.,theirmeanwasabove
IndividualTemplateItemsandWebProbing. Next, 2 on a scale from -3 = not important at all to 3 = very
theparticipants’responsesandcommentsregardingthe important). Most other items were also rated as im-
individual template items were inspected. Overall, 88 portant (i.e., their mean was above 0, for most items
participants worked on the template items (see sec- above 1). The item I4 “Exploratory research ques-
tion Participants), whose responses were consequently tions”wasratedasneitherimportantnorunimportant.
used for the analysis of the individual template items Still, most participants felt that including exploratory
and web probing questions. Of these, 21.59% had just research questions and analyses in the preregistration
started planning the study, 35.23% had planned the wasappropriate(i.e.,forresearchquestions,56.25%in-
studyindetail,13.64%werecurrentlyconductingtheir dicated“definitelyyes”or“maybeyes”,and57.14%did
study, 28.41% had already completed their study, and so for analyses). The items AP4 “Reliability analysis”,
1.14% did not indicate their study status. Moreover, T12 “Optional: Standard lab practices”, and AP5 “De-
29.55%plannedtopreregistertheirstudy,19.32%were scriptivestatistics”wereratedasrelativelyunimportant
currently working on the preregistration, 21.59% had (i.e.,theirmeanwasbelow0). Thismakessenseinthat
alreadypreregistered,28.41%didnot(planto)prereg- reliabilityanalysesarenotapplicabletoallstudies,pro-
isterthestudy,and1.14%didnotindicatethepreregis- vidingstandardlabpracticesisoptional(andonlythree
trationstatus. of the 20 participants who answered even had a stan-
OverallGoodFitofResponses. Ofallresponsespro- dard lab practices document), and descriptive statistics
vided for the template items, 48.61% fit well with the havenodirectimpactonhypothesestesting.
item, 27.96% fit moderately, 11.34% fit poorly, 6.05% Participants’ Suggestions for Individual Items and
===== PAGE 11/21 =====
11
Figure4
Fitoftheparticipants’responsestothePRP-QUANTTemplateitems
Web Probing. For each template item that the partic- distinguish items from others. These are presented in
ipants worked on, they were asked what they would detailinTextS2inthesupplementalmaterial.
add, change, or remove. The participants offered a
Significant Prediction of Intention by Performance
variety of comments and suggestions, which are sum-
ExpectancyandAllPredictorsCombined
marized in Table S3 in the supplemental material. Ad-
ditionally, participants responded to several other web
To investigate participants’ intention to use the PRP-
probing items (see online materials for a complete list:
QUANT Template in the future, the UTAUT items were
https://doi.org/10.23668/psycharchives.12959) which
analyzed. For each participant, the mean scores were
queried,forexample,whytheyhadselectedananswer,
computed for all UTAUT scales (i.e., performance ex-
whether they correctly understood the concepts under-
pectancy,effortexpectancy,socialinfluence,facilitating
lying the items and which were unclear, how they per-
conditions, and voluntariness). The means and confi-
ceived the link between items, and whether they could
denceintervalsforallscalesaredisplayedinFigure6.
===== PAGE 12/21 =====
12
Figure5
ImportanceratingofPRP-QUANTTemplateitems
We expected that the intention to use the template academic group), 6) the score on the social influence
in the future is predicted by performance expectancy scale, 7) social influence × age, 8) social influence ×
(moderated by age), effort expectancy (moderated by experience,9)socialinfluence×voluntariness,10)age,
age and experience, i.e., academic group), and social 11)experience,and12)voluntariness. Thesignificance
influence(moderatedbyage,experience,i.e.,academic of the overall model, as well as of individual predic-
group, and voluntariness of use, see Figure 1). To tors and moderating effects, was evaluated at α = .05.
test these hypotheses, a moderated multiple regression Because of our directional hypotheses, the regression
modelwascomputed, whichisamethodthathasbeen weightsweretestedinaone-tailedfashion.
frequently used to test the UTAUT (see Williams et al., Before computing the moderated regression model,
2015). its assumptions were tested: linearity, uncorrelated
Behavioral intention (i.e., the answer to the item predictors, independence and normality of residuals,
“How likely would you use the template in the future and homogeneity of variance. The assumption tests
to create your preregistrations?”) was included as the showedhighmulticollinearityamongthepredictors, as
dependent variable. The following predictors were in- judged based on the variance inflation factors (VIF >
cluded in the model: 1) the score on the performance 10 for seven predictor/interaction terms). Because of
expectancy scale, 2) performance expectancy × age, 3) this, all predictors except for experience (nominal vari-
the score on the effort expectancy scale, 4) effort ex- able) were centered, which drastically reduced multi-
pectancy×age,5)effortexpectancy×experience(i.e., collinearity(VIF<10forallexceptonepredictor).
===== PAGE 13/21 =====
13
Figure6
UTAUTScales
Note. Scales ranged from 1 = Disagree to 7 = Agree and were recoded to “-3 to 3” (however, these were centered
for the hypotheses tests, see below). The parameters were calculated based on the sample used for the UTAUT
hypotheses tests (i.e., participants who responded to all items used in these analyses, N = 60). Error bars indicate
95% confidence intervals. Higher effort expectancy scores are associated with lower expected effort. Facilitating
conditionswereconsidereddescriptivelybutwerenotincludedinthehypothesestests.
As expected, the predictors of the UTAUT combined experienceswiththetemplateandprocesseswithinthe
were able to significantly predict researchers’ inten- call. Thus, while some of the items of study 2 related
tion to use the PRP-QUANT Template in the future, to other aspects of usability measured in study 1, they
F(15,44) = 3.94, p < .001, R2 = 42.79%. How- mostly focused on participants’ attitudes regarding the
adjusted
ever, of the individual predictors, only performance template.
expectancy was a significant predictor for intention,
t(44)=2.28, p =.014,β=.36. Theinteractionof Methods
one−sided
performanceexpectancyandage,aswellasallotheref-
Thisstudywasnotpreregisteredasitwasconducted
fects,werenotsignificant(allps >.05). Asasen-
one−sided on a short notice. It does not include hypotheses tests.
sitivityanalysis,were-rantheanalysesusingtheprereg-
Instead,wereportthesurveyresultsdescriptively.
istered model with un-centered predictors. Here, per-
formance expectancy was non-significant, t(44) = 1.58, Participants
p =.06,β=.87.
one−sided
Twenty-eight preregistrations reached the review
stage of the call, which covered a variety of different
Study2: SurveyofPreregistrationAuthorsand
research areas (i.e., social, organizational, personality,
Reviewers
clinical, experimental, and developmental psychology,
In study 2, we surveyed psychological researchers psychology of climate change, media and technology,
who had used the PRP-QUANT Template to create a neuropsychology, meta-science, and misinformation).
preregistrationandsubmitteditwhenapplyingforfree- After this stage, all submitting authors (i.e., mostly the
of-charge data collection in ZPID’s call for online stud- first author) were invited to participate in the author
ies. In addition, call reviewers were asked how they survey. Nineteenauthorsparticipatedinthisstudy. Data
felt about reviewing preregistrations based on the PRP- were collected between May 16, 2022, and May 29,
QUANT Template. Instead of being constructed based 2022. After the initial invitation, two reminders were
on theoretical considerations, these surveys were de- senttoallpotentialparticipants.
signedtoprovideaquickexplorationoftheparticipants’
===== PAGE 14/21 =====
14
Meanwhile, the 44 researchers who reviewed an ac- participantsweregiventheopportunitytoexpresstheir
cepted proposal were invited to participate in the re- opinions in several open text input items (e.g., “Any-
viewer survey. Twenty-nine participated. Their data thing else you would like to add about the template?
werecollectedbetweenMarch11,2022,andMarch26, Pleasecommenthere”). Anoverviewoftheitemsinthe
2022, with one reminder sent to them. Participants of author and reviewer surveys is available online (https:
bothsurveyswerenotcompensated. //doi.org/10.23668/psycharchives.12959).
MaterialandMeasures Procedure
Both surveys were created using Google Forms Thesurveystookapproximatelyfiveminutestocom-
(https://docs.google.com/forms). The author survey plete. Participantswereinvitedviapersonalemail,and
consistedof21itemsandthereviewersurveyconsisted data were collected anonymously. The processing of
of 17 items. There were five different sections of items data was explained in writing at the beginning of the
in the author survey: 1) items about the participants’ survey. Thesurveywasconductedafterthedecisionfor
previous and future use of preregistration and Psych- oragainstfundingoftheparticipants’studieshadbeen
Lab,2)itemsregardingtheirexperienceswithusingthe made.
structured template compared to a continuous format In both surveys, participants successively completed
(i.e., a normal report) and 3) their experiences dur- the different item sections (for authors: use of prereg-
ingthereviewprocess,4)questionsabouttheirgeneral istration and PsychLab, comparison of structured tem-
opinionofpreregistration,and5)additionalcomments. plate versus continuous text, review process, general
Theshorterreviewersurveyhadthreedifferentsections opinion of preregistration, and additional comments;
of items: 1) items asking participants to compare their for reviewers: comparison of structured template ver-
experiences with reviewing this structured format ver- sus continuous text, comparison of reviewing prereg-
sus a continuous text, 2) questions concerning their istrations versus complete manuscripts, and additional
generalimpressionofreviewingpreregistrationsinstead comments),whichwereeachdisplayedonanewpage.
offullmanuscripts,and3)additionalcomments. Some Noneoftheitemsweremandatory.
of the items related more generally to the call’s pro-
DataAnalysisandPre-Processing
cesses and participants’ general impression of prereg-
istration, however, we only present those responses re-
Again, R (Version 4.2.2, R Core Team, 2021) was
latedtotheusabilityofthetemplateinthisarticle.
used for the analysis. Data of the rating items were
Ofthevariousaspectsofusabilitymeasuredinstudy
pre-processed similarly to study 1, that is, they were
1 (Shackel, 2009), attitudes were the focus of study 2.
recoded from “1 to 7” to “-3 to 3” to facilitate inter-
Authorswereaskedwhethertheyfeltthatthestructure
pretation. Scales that deviated from this format were
ofthetemplatefacilitatedcreatingtheirpreregistration,
notrecoded(thesearelabelledaccordinglybelow). For
whetheritmadethemthinkofdetailsthatwereimpor-
allratingitems, themean, median, standarddeviation,
tantforplanningtheirstudy(whichcanalsobeseenas
interquartile range, and range were calculated. Per-
anindicatorofflexibility),whetherthetemplatehelped
centageswerecomputedtoexaminepreregistrationex-
themincludeallrelevantinformation,andwhetherthey
perience and intention. Open-ended comments were
feltthattheitemsshouldbereduced. Similarly,review-
manually reviewed and summarized. As for study 1,
ers were asked whether they felt that the structure of
all data and analysis scripts are available online (data:
the template facilitated their evaluation, helped them
https://doi.org/10.23668/psycharchives.12915; code:
find the information more easily, focus their attention
https://doi.org/10.23668/psycharchives.14244).
on the relevant sections, and assess the completeness
of the information, or whether, in contrast, the tem- Results
platehinderedtheirreadingfloworcontainedtoomany
AuthorResponses
elements irrelevant to the review. Participants were
also asked whether they would have preferred to pre- Ofallauthorswhoparticipatedinthesurvey,31.58%
pare/reviewtheproposalinthisstructuredpreregistra- had preregistered for the first time (i.e., 68.42% had
tion format or in a normal report format. As a further previous preregistration experience). Overall, 94.74%
aspect,learnabilitywasmeasuredbyaskingtheauthors ofparticipantsintendedtopreregisterinthefuture(i.e.,
iftheyhaddifficultyunderstandingwhattheyweresup- theirscoreswereabove3.5onascalefrom0=veryun-
posedtofillinforsomeitems. likelyto7=verylikely),ofwhich73.68%selectedvery
Most items were 7-point rating items with 1 = likely.
strongly disagree and 7 = strongly agree. In addition,
===== PAGE 15/21 =====
15
Overall, the authors rated the PRP-QUANT Template foundthetemplategenerallyhelpfulandprovidedsome
favorably. They mostly agreed that it facilitated creat- suggestionsforimprovements. Forexample,itwassug-
ing their preregistration (Mean = 1.63, Median = 2, gestedtoaddanitemaboutscientificandthematicrel-
SD = 1.01, IQR = 1, range = 3), that it made them evance,orthepossibilityofincludingscriptsandresults
think of details that were important for planning their from data analysis (e.g., power analyses). This is al-
study (Mean = 1.79, Median = 2, SD = 0.92, IQR = 1, ready possible by using the PRP-QUANT Template in R
range = 3), and that it helped them include all rele- Markdown or JupyterLab. Furthermore, it was com-
vantinformation(Mean = 2.06, Median = 2,SD = 0.87, mented that the template could be more concise, and
IQR=0.75,range=3). Theymostlydisagreedwiththe that the items A2 “Objectives and Research questions”
statements that the template items should be reduced and I2 “Objectives and Research question(s)” seemed
(Mean = −0.47, Median = −1, SD = 1.84, IQR = 3, redundant (however, since A2 is part of the abstract,
range = 6), that they (i.e., the authors) had difficulty these items ask for different depths of information).
understanding what they were supposed to fill in on One person recommended dividing the template into
some items (Mean = −1.16, Median = −2, SD = 1.83, twosectionstofacilitatereviewing: Authorscouldelab-
IQR = 3.5, range = 5), and that they would have pre- orate in the first section everything relevant to review-
ferred to write the proposal in a normal report for- ingandthengivealltherelevanttechnicalinformation
mat (continuous text) rather than a structured format inthesecondsection.
(Mean = −1.37, Median = −2, SD = 1.64, IQR = 2,
range=5). Discussion
In the open comments, most participants expressed
We conducted two studies to evaluate the usabil-
satisfaction with using the template. Some suggestions
ity of the PRP-QUANT Template and identify areas for
for improvements were made, each voiced by one par-
improvement. Furthermore, we wanted to find out
ticipant, respectively. For example, it was suggested to
whether psychological researchers plan to use the tem-
provide a front page with a link to all different subsec-
plate in the future to create their preregistrations and
tionstomakeiteasierforauthorsandreviewerstonavi-
examinewhichvariablesmightbeimportantforthisin-
gatethedocument,shortenthetemplateandreducere-
tentionformation.
dundancies, revise the structure of the Word template,
andquerytheabstractinoneitemratherthansubdivid-
Usability of the Template Rated High, With Sugges-
ingit.
tionsforImprovements
ReviewerFeedback We assessed the usability of the PRP-QUANT Tem-
plate in study 1 by conducting a simulation trial in
Reviewers also perceived various advantages of the
which we asked psychological researchers to think of
PRP-QUANT Template. They described that the struc-
tureofthetemplatefacilitatedtheirevaluation(Mean= one of their studies to complete selected parts of the
1.07, Median = 1, SD = 1.25, IQR = 2, range = 4), template, and in study 2 by surveying authors and re-
that it helped them find the information (Mean = 1.03, viewers of preregistrations that were part of a call for
Median = 1, SD = 1.4, IQR = 2, range = 4), that the online studies. For this evaluation, we referred to the
four aspects of usability defined by Shackel (2009):
structureofthetemplatehelpedthemfocustheiratten-
tionontherelevantsections(Mean=1.21, Median=1, learnability,flexibility,effectiveness,andattitude.
SD=1.29,IQR=2,range=5),andthatithelpedthem In both study 1 and study 2, participants indicated
evaluate the completeness of the information (Mean = that they understood the template well and that it cov-
1.14, Median = 2, SD = 1.46, IQR = 2, range = 5). Cor- ered the most important aspects of their studies. This
suggests that both the learnability and flexibility of the
respondingly, they would not have preferred to review
template are adequate and that the template seems to
the proposal in a normal report format of continuous
text rather than in a structured format (Mean = −0.83, capturethemainpointsofvarioussub-disciplines. Still,
Median = −1, SD = 1.56, IQR = 2, range = 5), they did itseemsworthwhiletosimplifythetemplatetoenhance
the perceived ease of use. For example, some partici-
not feel that the layout of the template hindered their
reading flow (Mean = −0.9, Median = −1, SD = 1.8, pants struggled to understand complex terms and dif-
IQR = 3, range = 5), or that the template contained ferentiate between similar items, which could be im-
proved,forinstance,byprovidingexamples. TableS3in
toomanyelementsirrelevanttoreviewingtheproposal
(Mean = −1.1, Median = −2, SD = 1.59, IQR = 2, thesupplementalmaterialprovidesanoverviewofsug-
range=5). gestionstoimprovethevarioustemplateitems,sampled
fromourparticipants.
Intheopentextfield,reviewerscommentedthatthey
===== PAGE 16/21 =====
16
Moreover, various indicators point to the effective- on our usability test, the feedback received during the
ness of the PRP-QUANT Template. More than three- hackathon, and this additional study, an updated ver-
quartersofparticipants’responsestothetemplateitems sion of the template will be published in PsychArchives
matchedtherequestedinformationmoderatelyorwell, inthefuture.
with nearly half of the responses fitting well. Partic-
ipants also felt that most of the template items were Prediction of Intention Primarily Through Expected
important for preregistering their studies, with the PerformanceGains
most highly rated items being AP6 “Statistical mod-
Besides evaluating the usability of the PRP-QUANT
els”, M12 “Measured variables, manipulated variables,
Template, study 1 examined researchers’ intention to
covariates”, M14 “Study Procedures”, M10 “Type of
useitinthefuture,aswellaspossibleinfluencesonthat
study and study design”, M13 “Study Materials”, and
intention. BasedontheUTAUT(Venkateshetal.,2003,
M1 “Time point of registration”. Nevertheless, there
2016), we expected that the intention to use the tem-
was a higher proportion of poor answers for the items
plate is influenced by performance expectancy (moder-
M13 “Study Materials”, M14 “Study Procedures” AP3
ated by age), effort expectancy (moderated by age and
“Data preprocessing”, AP5 “Descriptive statistics”, AP6
experience), and social influence (moderated by age,
“Statisticalmodels”andAP7“Inferencecriteria”. These
experience,andvoluntarinessofuse).
itemscouldbeprimecandidatesforrevision. However,
Ourresultsshowthatparticipants’averageintention
it must be noted that these are also items that require
to use the template in the future to create their pre-
very elaborate responses. Since study 1 imposed quite
registrations was rather high (61.47%). Descriptively,
high demands on the participants while no compensa-
all UTAUT variables indicated a positive perception of
tion was given, it may be assumed that this could be
the template, that is, all scale means were above zero,
the lower end of the scale of possible response quality.
wherezeroindicatedaneutralopinionandpositiveval-
Nevertheless, the participants had various suggestions
ues indicated a positive opinion. This suggests that
on how these and other items could be improved (see
participants tended to believe that using the template
Table S3), which could be included in a new version of
would help them attain gains in performance (perfor-
thetemplate.
manceexpectancy)andthatthetemplatewouldbeeasy
Participants’ attitudes towards the PRP-QUANT Tem-
touse(effortexpectancy). Additionally, participantsfelt
plate were also rather positive and they indicated an
that, while preregistration is voluntary (voluntariness),
average probability of over 60% that they would use it
others would approve of them preregistering (social in-
in the future to create their preregistrations or recom-
fluence) and that organizational and technical infras-
mend it to a colleague. However, while the template
tructures exist that support the preregistration process
was not considered unnecessarily complex on average,
(facilitatingconditions).
there was still a high proportion of participants who
As hypothesized, all predictors of the UTAUT com-
found it rather complex and commented on its length
bined were able to significantly predict researchers’ in-
on several occasions. Accordingly, many of the partic-
tention to use the PRP-QUANT Template in the future.
ipants’ suggestions were aimed at requesting the infor-
However,oftheindividualpredictors,onlyperformance
mationinamorecondensedform,whichcouldpossibly
expectancy significantly predicted intention. This sug-
beconsideredinanewversionofthetemplate.
geststhattheexpectationthatthetemplatewillbeuse-
Insummary,althoughbeingbasedonrelativelysmall
ful for one’s own research has the strongest influence
samples,ourresultssuggestagoodusabilityofthePRP-
onwhetherresearchersplantouseit. Highlightingthis
QUANTTemplateandpointtoanumberofpossiblefur-
benefit could therefore help raise researchers’ aware-
therimprovements. Thenextstepistoimplementthese
ness and adoption of the template in the future. For
in a new version of the template. For this purpose,
example,anexplanatorytextcouldbepresentedalong-
we organized the hackathon “Community Revision of
side a new version of the template, emphasizing that it
thePsychologicalResearchPreregistration-Quantitative
is worth investing the effort in this detailed template,
(PRP-QUANT) Template” at the SIPS 2023 conference
as it enables precise planning and helps decrease the
(June 2023, Padova, Italy) where the template was re-
workloadduringthelaterstagesofthestudy(i.e.,anal-
vised based on our study findings and the hackathon
ysisandreporting).
participants’suggestions. Additionally,wearecurrently
conductingastudytoinvestigatethePRP-QUANTTem- Limitations
plate’s ability to restrict researcher degrees of free-
dom (Spitzer and Mueller, 2024), which received in- Theimplementationofstudy1hadsomelimitations.
principle-acceptance by PCI RR (Lakens, 2024). Based Responding to the template represented a considerable
amount of effort for the participants, for which they
===== PAGE 17/21 =====
17
were not compensated. It may be assumed that the ple size. In addition, there was multicollinearity in our
quality of the responses reported here represents the model, which we could improve by centering, but not
lower bound, as researchers would likely put much eliminatecompletely.
more effort into creating their actual preregistrations. Lastly, on a more general note, there has been some
This suggests that the fit of the answers might be even challengetothevalidityoftheUTAUTinarecentmeta-
better in a real deployment of the template. In the fu- analysis (Blut et al., 2021). Nevertheless, the robust-
ture, this could be tested by examining the preregistra- nessoftheUTAUTanditsmaineffectshasbeenrepeat-
tionsoftheauthorswesurveyedinstudy2,astheycre- edly validated by research (e.g., see Jadil et al., 2021;
ated their preregistrations to apply for a high external Khechine et al., 2016; Venkatesh et al., 2016). The au-
incentive and therefore likely spent more time on their thors of the meta-analysis argue that there is not one
preregistrations. However,thisdoesnotunderminethe specification of UTAUT that applies to all contexts, but
participants’ suggestions for improvements that can be thattheabilityofthetheorytopredicttheuseofanew
usedtorevisethetemplate. system is context dependent. Besides low power, this
The format and method of responding to the items might have also contributed to some of the predictors
in study 1 were also constrained. We presented par- notbeingsignificantinourmodel.
ticipants with the PRP-QUANT Template in a table for-
mat and queried the template items one after another FutureResearch
in our online questionnaire, where participants could
Our studies examined the usability of the PRP-
not skip back and forth. Again, it can be assumed that
QUANTTemplateand identifieditsstrengthsandareas
satisfaction with the template would probably be even
for improvement. These can now be used to create an
higher if researchers could freely choose between all
empiricallyfoundedrevision.
availableformats(e.g.,table,text,onlineform,RMark-
Inthefuture,usabilitystudiesshouldbeusedtocon-
down, and Jupyter Notebook) and be able to switch
tinuallyadaptthetemplatetotheneedsofthecommu-
flexibly between items. In addition, if they were using
nity. Other templates could also benefit from such us-
the template to preregister a study outside the present
abilityassessments. Forthispurpose,ourstudycouldbe
usability test, they would probably invest much more
repeated for new versions of the PRP-QUANT Template
timeandwouldnothavetocompleterespondingtothe
or other templates. Their results could then be used to
itemsinonesession,whichwouldlikelyfurtherimprove
gradually revise the templates, similar to our approach
theiropinionofthetemplateandthequalityoftheirre-
ofconductingacommunityrevisionhackathon.
sponses. Inlinewiththisassumption,thetemplatewas
Additionally,studiescouldnotonlyfocusonthetem-
evaluatedverypositivelyinstudy2,bothbyauthorsand
plates themselves, but also on preregistrations created
reviewers.
with the respective templates, following the approach
In addition to the limitations of our chosen format,
of Bakker et al. (2020), Heirene et al. (2021), or van
our studies faced some sample restrictions. Although
den Akker, Bakker, et al. (2023). This would allow an
participants were drawn from diverse sub-disciplines
empirical investigation of the effectiveness of the tem-
within psychology, we deliberately excluded fields out-
platesinreducingresearchers’degreesoffreedom.
sideofpsychologyduetothefocusednatureofthePRP-
QUANT Template, which specifically aids in preregis-
Conclusion
tering quantitative studies in psychology. Furthermore,
givenourrecruitmentstrategythroughthemailinglists In two studies, we identified both strengths and ar-
of the APA, BPS, DGPs, and social media, our partic- eas for improvement in the PRP-QUANT Template. We
ipants came from North America and Europe. Thus, obtained insights into learnability, flexibility, effective-
ourresultsmaynotbegeneralizabletoresearchersfrom ness, and attitudes, as well as participants’ comments
othercountries. Additionally,itshouldbenotedthatthe and suggestions regarding the template. These can
groupsizeperconditionwasrelativelysmall. However, now serve as the basis for an empirically informed re-
thisdoesalsonotlimittheusefulnessoftheparticipants’ vision. Moreover, we demonstrated that performance
suggestionsforrevisingthetemplate. expectancy, as well as all variables of the UTAUT com-
Regardingourhypothesestests,itmustalsobenoted bined,significantlypredictedpsychologicalresearchers’
thatouraprioripoweranalysiswascalculatedwithre- intentiontousethetemplateinthefuture. Overall,par-
specttotheoverallmodel,nottheindividualpredictors. ticipantswerelikelytousethetemplateorrecommend
It could be that other predictors besides performance it to a colleague, which indicates that the template is
expectancyareimportantforpredictingtheintentionto beingwellreceived.
usethetemplatebutwerenotdetectablewithoursam-
===== PAGE 18/21 =====
18
AuthorNote financialinterestintheresultsofthepresentedstudies.
Wereceivednofundingforthesestudies.
We have presented the results of these studies at the
SIPS 2023 conference (June 2023, Padova, Italy) as
EthicalApproval
part of the hackathon “Community Revision of the Psy-
chological Research Preregistration-Quantitative (PRP- APA ethical standards were followed in the conduct
QUANT) Template”. Based on our study findings and ofourstudies. Study1wasapprovedbytheethicscom-
thefeedbackreceivedduringthehackathon,anupdated mittee of Trier University, Germany (approval number:
versionofthetemplatewaspublishedinPsychArchives 27/2020), and participants provided informed consent
https://doi.org/10.23668/psycharchives.15193. beforestartingthemainbodyofthestudy.
Study 2 involved a brief anonymous survey con-
AuthorContact ductedamongparticipantsofourservicePsychLab. The
processingofdatawasexplainedinwritingatthebegin-
LisaSpitzer: 0000-0002-4925-7291
ning of the survey. The survey took about five minutes
MichaelBosnjak: 0000-0002-1431-8461
to complete and was conducted after the decision for
StefanieMueller: 0000-0002-3611-6190
oragainstfundingoftheparticipants’studieshadbeen
made. Formalethicalapprovalwasnotobtained.
Corresponding author: Lisa Spitzer, ls@leibniz-
psychology.org
SupplementalMaterial
AuthorContributions Asupplementalmaterialfile(PDF)isprovided,which
includesthefollowing:
Lisa Spitzer: conceptualization, data curation (study
Text S1. Plain language summary. A plain lan-
1), formal analysis, investigation, methodology, soft-
guage summary is provided to increase the accessibil-
ware, visualization, writing – original draft; Michael
ity of these research findings to a wider audience. It is
Bosnjak: conceptualization, methodology, supervision,
availableinEnglishandGerman.
writing – review & editing; Stefanie Mueller: con-
TableS1. Researchareas. Researchtopicsindicated
ceptualization, data curation (study 2), investigation,
bythesampleofstudy1aredisplayedinatable.
methodology,software,projectadministration,supervi-
Table S2. Overview of template response fit. This
sion,writing–review&editing.
table shows the fit of responses given to the template
itemsinstudy1.
Acknowledgments
Table S3. What would participants add, change,
WewouldliketothankthemembersoftheJointPsy- or remove about the template items. A table sum-
chological Societies Preregistration Task Force for their marises all comments on what participants would add,
feedbackontheitemsofstudy1,ourstudentassistants change,orremoveaboutthetemplateitems.
forcoding,andT.DauberandJ.Pauquetforproofread- Text S2. Web probing. Theresultsofthewebprob-
ing. ingitemsarereportedhere.
DataAccessibilityStatement OpenSciencePractices
All anonymized data (including meta-data about
variablesandvaluesandcodedcommentsforthequal-
itative analyses) as well as all analysis scripts and ex-
perimental materials are publicly accessible in the dig-
This article earned the Preregistration+, Open Data,
ital research repository PsychArchives: Data: https://
Open Materials, and Open Code badge for preregister-
doi.org/10.23668/psycharchives.12915. Code: https:
ing the hypothesis and analysis before data collection,
//doi.org/10.23668/psycharchives.14244. Experimen-
and for making the data, materials, and code openly
tal materials: https://doi.org/10.23668/psycharchives.
available. It has been verified that the analysis repro-
12959.
ducedtheresultspresentedinthearticle. Theentireed-
itorialprocess,includingtheopenreviews,ispublished
ConflictofInterestandFunding
intheonlinesupplement.
All authors declare no conflicts of interest. Michael
Bosnjak and Stefanie Mueller were authors of the task-
forcethatcreatedthePRP-QUANTTemplatebuthaveno
===== PAGE 19/21 =====
19
References Faul,F.,Erdfelder,E.,Buchner,A.,&Lang,A.-G.(2009).
Statistical power analyses using G*Power 3.1:
Bakker, M., Veldkamp, C. L. S., van Assen, M. A. L. M.,
Tests for correlation and regression analyses.
Crompvoets, E. A. V., Ong, H. H., Nosek,
Behavior Research Methods, 41(4), 1149–1160.
B. A., Soderberg, C. K., Mellor, D., & Wicherts,
https://doi.org/10.3758/BRM.41.4.1149
J. M. (2020). Ensuring the quality and speci-
Faul,F.,Erdfelder,E.,Lang,A.-G.,&Buchner,A.(2007).
ficityofpreregistrations.PLOSBiology,18(12),
G*Power 3: A flexible statistical power anal-
e3000937. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
ysis program for the social, behavioral, and
pbio.3000937
biomedical sciences. Behavior Research Meth-
Behr, D., Meitinger, K., Braun, M., & Kaczmirek, L.
ods,39(2),175–191.https://doi.org/10.3758/
(2017). Web probing – implementing probing
BF03193146
techniques from cognitive interviewing in web
Hebbali, A. (2020). Olsrr: Tools for building ols regres-
surveys with the goal to assess the validity of
sion models [R package version 0.5.3]. https:
survey questions. Mannheim, GESIS – Leibniz-
//CRAN.R-project.org/package=olsrr
Institute for the Social Sciences (GESIS – Survey
Heirene, R., LaPlante, D., Louderback, E. R., Keen,
Guidelines). https://doi.org/https://doi.org/
B., Bakker, M., Serafimovska, A., & Gainsbury,
10.15465/gesis-sg_en_023
S.M.(2021).Preregistrationspecificity&adher-
Behrendt, S. (2014). Lm.beta: Add standardized regres-
ence: A review of preregistered gambling stud-
sion coefficients to linear-model-objects [R pack-
ies & cross-disciplinary comparison (preprint).
age version 1.7-2]. https://CRAN.R-project.
PsyArXiv. https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/
org/package=lm.beta
nj4es
Beyer, F., Flannery, J., Gau, R., Janssen, L., Schaare,
Hope,R.M.(2022).Rmisc:Ryanmiscellaneous[Rpack-
L., Hartmann, H., Nilsonne, G., Martin, S.,
age version 1.5.1]. https://CRAN.R-project.
Khalil, A., Lipp, I., Puhlmann, L., Heinrichs,
org/package=Rmisc
H., Mohamed, A., Herholz, P., Sicorello, M., &
InternationalOrganizationforStandardization.(2018).
Panagoulas, E. (2021). A fMRI pre-registration
ISO 9241-11:2018: Ergonomics of human-
template. PsychArchives. https://doi.org/10.
system interaction — Part 11: Usability: Defi-
23668/PSYCHARCHIVES.5121
nitions and concepts. https://www.iso.org/
Blut, M., Chong, A., Tsiga, Z., & Venkatesh, V. (2021).
standard/63500.html
Meta-Analysis of the Unified Theory of Accep-
Jadil, Y., Rana, N. P., & Dwivedi, Y. K. (2021). A meta-
tance and Use of Technology (UTAUT): Chal-
analysis of the UTAUT model in the mobile
lenging its Validity and Charting a Research
bankingliterature:Themoderatingroleofsam-
Agenda in the Red Ocean. Journal of the As-
ple size and culture. Journal of Business Re-
sociation for Information Systems, Forthcoming.
search, 132, 354–372. https://doi.org/10.
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3834872
1016/j.jbusres.2021.04.052
Bosnjak, M., Fiebach, C. J., Mellor, D., Mueller, S.,
Kaplan, R. M., & Irvin, V. L. (2015). Likelihood of
O’Connor, D. B., Oswald, F. L., & Sokol, R. I.
Null Effects of Large NHLBI Clinical Trials
(2022).Atemplateforpreregistrationofquan-
Has Increased over Time. PLoS ONE, 10(8),
titative research in psychology: Report of the
e0132382. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
jointpsychologicalsocietiespreregistrationtask
pone.0132382
force. American Psychologist, 77(4), 602–615.
Khechine, H., Lakhal, S., & Ndjambou, P. (2016).
https://doi.org/10.1037/amp0000879
A meta-analysis of the UTAUT model: Eleven
Brandt, M. J., IJzerman, H., Dijksterhuis, A., Farach,
years later: A meta-analysis of the UTAUT
F.J.,Geller,J.,Giner-Sorolla,R.,Grange,J.A.,
model: Eleven years later. Canadian Journal of
Perugini, M., Spies, J. R., & van ’t Veer, A.
Administrative Sciences / Revue Canadienne des
(2014). The Replication Recipe: What makes
Sciences de l’Administration, 33(2), 138–152.
for a convincing replication? Journal of Exper-
https://doi.org/10.1002/cjas.1381
imental Social Psychology, 50, 217–224. https:
Lakens, D. (2024). Examining the restrictiveness of the
//doi.org/10.1016/j.jesp.2013.10.005
PRP-QUANT Template. Peer Community in Reg-
Crüwell, S., & Evans, N. J. (2021). Preregistration in
istered Reports. https://doi.org/https://rr.
diversecontexts:Apreregistrationtemplatefor
peercommunityin.org/articles/rec?id=480
theapplicationofcognitivemodels.RoyalSoci-
Leiner,D.J.(2019).SoSciSurvey[Computersoftware].
ety Open Science, 8(10), 210155. https://doi.
https://www.soscisurvey.de/
org/10.1098/rsos.210155
===== PAGE 20/21 =====
20
Munafò, M. R., Nosek, B. A., Bishop, D. V. M., Button, preregistrationinpsychologicalresearch.PLOS
K. S., Chambers, C. D., Percie du Sert, N., Si- ONE, 18(3), e0281086. https://doi.org/10.
monsohn, U., Wagenmakers, E.-J., Ware, J. J., 1371/journal.pone.0281086
& Ioannidis, J. P. A. (2017). A manifesto for Spitzer, L., & Mueller, S. (2024). Stage 1 Regis-
reproduciblescience.NatureHumanBehaviour, tered Report: Restriction of researcher de-
1(1), 0021. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562- grees of freedom through the Psychologi-
016-0021 calResearchPreregistration-Quantitative(PRP-
Neuwirth,E.(2022).Rcolorbrewer:Colorbrewerpalettes QUANT) Template. https://doi.org/https://
[R package version 1.1-3]. https://CRAN.R- doi.org/10.23668/PSYCHARCHIVES.14119
project.org/package=RColorBrewer Swaen, G. G., Teggeler, O., & van Amelsvoort, L. G.
Nosek, B. A., Ebersole, C. R., DeHaven, A. C., & Mel- (2001). False positive outcomes and design
lor, D. T. (2018). The preregistration revolu- characteristics in occupational cancer epidemi-
tion.ProceedingsoftheNationalAcademyofSci- ology studies. International journal of epidemi-
ences of the United States of America, 115(11), ology, 30(5), 948–954. https://doi.org/10.
2600–2606. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas. 1093/ije/30.5.948
1708274114 Van Den Akker, O. R., Bakker, M., Van Assen,
Ooms, J. (2021). Writexl: Export data frames to excel M.A.L.M.,Pennington,C.R.,Verweij,L.,Elsh-
’xlsx’ format [R package version 1.4.2]. https: erif, M. M., Claesen, A., Gaillard, S. D. M., Ye-
//CRAN.R-project.org/package=writexl ung, S. K., Frankenberger, J.-L., Krautter, K.,
Parsons, S., Azevedo, F., Elsherif, M. M., Guay, S., Cockcroft, J. P., Kreuer, K. S., Evans, T. R.,
Shahim, O. N., Govaart, G. H., Norris, E., Heppel, F., Schoch, S. F., Korbmacher, M., Ya-
O’Mahony, A., Parker, A. J., Todorovic, A., mada, Y., Albayrak-Aydemir, N., ... Wicherts,
Pennington, C. R., Garcia-Pelegrin, E., Lazi´c, J.M.(2023).Theeffectivenessofpreregistration
A., Robertson, O., Middleton, S. L., Valentini, inpsychology:Assessingpreregistrationstrictness
B., McCuaig, J., Baker, B. J., Collins, E., ... andpreregistration-studyconsistency(preprint).
Aczel, B. (2022). A community-sourced glos- MetaArXiv. https://doi.org/10.31222/osf.io/
sary of open scholarship terms. Nature Human h8xjw
Behaviour, 6(3), 312–318. https://doi.org/10. Van Den Akker, O. R., Van Assen, M. A. L. M., Bakker,
1038/s41562-021-01269-4 M., Elsherif, M., Wong, T. K., & Wicherts,
Protzko, J., Krosnick, J., Nelson, L. D., Nosek, B. A., J.M.(2023).Preregistrationinpractice:Acom-
Axt, J., Berent, M., Buttrick, N., DeBell, parison of preregistered and non-preregistered
M., Ebersole, C. R., Lundmark, S., MacIn- studies in psychology. Behavior Research Meth-
nis, B., O’Donnell, M., Perfecto, H., Puste- ods, 56(6), 5424–5433. https://doi.org/10.
jovsky, J. E., Roeder, S. S., Walleczek, J., & 3758/s13428-023-02277-0
Schooler,J.(2020).HighReplicabilityofNewly- VandenAkker,O.R.,Weston,S.,Campbell,L.,Chopik,
Discovered Social-behavioral Findings is Achiev- B., Damian, R., Davis-Kean, P., Hall, A., Kosie,
able (preprint). PsyArXiv. https://doi.org/10. J.,Kruse,E.,Olsen,J.,Ritchie,S.,Valentine,K.,
31234/osf.io/n2a9x Van ’t Veer, A., & Bakker, M. (2021). Preregis-
RCoreTeam.(2021).R:Alanguageandenvironmentfor tration of secondary data analysis: A template
statistical computing. R Foundation for Statisti- and tutorial. Meta-Psychology, 5. https://doi.
cal Computing. Vienna, Austria. https://www. org/10.15626/MP.2020.2625
R-project.org/ van ’t Veer, A. E., & Giner-Sorolla, R. (2016). Pre-
Revelle, W. (2021). Psych: Procedures for psychologi- registration in social psychology—A discussion
cal, psychometric, and personality research [R and suggested template. Journal of Experimen-
package version 2.2.9]. Northwestern Univer- talSocialPsychology,67,2–12.https://doi.org/
sity.Evanston,Illinois.https://CRAN.R-project. 10.1016/j.jesp.2016.03.004
org/package=psych Venkatesh, V., Morris, M. G., Davis, G. B., & Davis,
Shackel,B.(2009).Usability–Context,framework,def- F. D. (2003). User Acceptance of Information
inition, design and evaluation. Interacting with Technology:TowardaUnifiedView.MISQuar-
Computers,21(5-6),339–346.https://doi.org/ terly, 27(3), 425. https://doi.org/10.2307/
10.1016/j.intcom.2009.04.007 30036540
Spitzer, L., & Mueller, S. (2023). Registered report: Venkatesh, V., Thong, J. Y., & Xu, X. (2016). Unified
Survey on attitudes and experiences regarding Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology:
===== PAGE 21/21 =====
21
A Synthesis and the Road Ahead. Journal of verse. Journal of Open Source Software, 4(43),
the Association for Information Systems, 17(5), 1686.https://doi.org/10.21105/joss.01686
328–376.https://ssrn.com/abstract=2800121 Wickham,H.,&Bryan,J.(2022).Readxl:Readexcelfiles
Wei,T.,&Simko,V.(2021).Rpackage’corrplot’:Visual- [R package version 1.4.2]. https://CRAN.R-
izationofacorrelationmatrix [(Version0.92)]. project.org/package=readxl
https://github.com/taiyun/corrplot Williams, M. D., Rana, N. P., & Dwivedi, Y. K. (2015).
Wickham, H., Averick, M., Bryan, J., Chang, W., Mc- The unified theory of acceptance and use
Gowan, L. D., François, R., Grolemund, G., of technology (UTAUT): A literature review.
Hayes, A., Henry, L., Hester, J., Kuhn, M., Ped- Journal of Enterprise Information Management,
ersen, T. L., Miller, E., Bache, S. M., Müller, 28(3), 443–488. https://doi.org/10.1108/
K.,Ooms,J.,Robinson,D.,Seidel,D.P.,Spinu, JEIM-09-2014-0088
V., ... Yutani, H. (2019). Welcome to the tidy-