
===== PAGE 1/20 =====
Meta-Psychology,2023,vol7,MP.2020.2472 Opendata:NotApplicable Editedby:FelixD.Schönbrodt
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2020.2472 Openmaterials:Yes Reviewedby:LercheV.,RousseletG.,Wilcox,R.
Articletype:Originalarticle Openandreproducibleanalysis:Yes Analysisreproducedby:LucijaBatinovi´c
PublishedundertheCC-BY4.0license Openreviewsandeditorialprocess:Yes AllsupplementaryfilescanbeaccessedatOSF:
Preregistration:No https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/MEK4U
Another Warning about Median Reaction Time
Jeff Miller1
1UniversityofOtago
Contrary to the warning of Miller (1988), Rousselet and Wilcox (2020) argued that
itisbettertosummarizeeachparticipant’ssingle-trialreactiontimes(RTs)inagiven
conditionwiththemedianthanwiththemeanwhencomparingthecentraltendencies
of RT distributions across experimental conditions. They acknowledged that median
RTs can produce inflated Type I error rates when conditions differ in the number of
trials tested, consistent with Miller’s warning, but they showed that the bias respon-
sible for this error rate inflation could be eliminated with a bootstrap bias correction
technique. The present simulations extend their analysis by examining the power of
bias-correctedmedianstodetecttrueexperimentaleffectsandbycomparingthispower
withthepowerofanalysesusingmeansandregularmedians. Unfortunately,although
bias-corrected medians solve the problem of inflated Type I error rates, their power
is lower than that of means or regular medians in many realistic situations. In addi-
tion, even when conditions do not differ in the number of trials tested, the power of
tests(e.g.,t-tests)isgenerallylowerusingmediansratherthanmeansasthesummary
measures. Thus,thepresentsimulationsdemonstratethatsummarymeanswilloften
providethemostpowerfultestfordifferencesbetweenconditions,andtheyshowwhat
aspectsoftheRTdistributionsdeterminethesizeofthepoweradvantageformeans.
Keywords: reactiontime,power,means,medians,within-subjectscomparisons
Introduction and found that it successfully eliminated the bias prob-
lemidentifiedbyMiller(1988). Inbrief,theirprocedure
In typical reaction time (RT) experiments, re-
estimatesthemedianbiasasthedifferencebetweenthe
searchers collect many RTs per participant in each con-
observed median and the average median across many
ditionthatarethencomparedviarepeated-measurest-
bootstrap samples. The observed median is then cor-
testsorANOVAs. Whentheywanttodeterminewhether
rected by subtracting this estimated bias, and the final
the central tendencies of the RTs differ between condi-
result of this subtraction is taken as the bias-corrected
tions, they are faced with the problem of how to sum-
median estimate (for further details, see Rousselet and
marize the many within-condition RTs per participant
Wilcox, 2020). In view of the fact that the correction
into a single number for use in the repeated-measures
procedure eliminated median bias and other aspects of
test. Varioussummarymeasureshavebeenusedforthis
their analysis, R&W concluded that “the recommenda-
purpose—most commonly the means and medians of
tionbyMiller(1988)tonotusethemedianwhencom-
thewithin-conditionRTsforeachparticipant.
paring distributions that differ in sample size was ill-
Miller(1988)warnedthatwhenRTdistributionsare
advised” (p. 31). Their conclusions have been influen-
skewed,astheyusuallyare,medianRTsarebiased. Fur-
tial in encouraging researchers to analyze median RTs
thermore, this bias is larger when the number of trials
(e.g., Gordon et al., 2020, Maksimenko et al., 2019,
perconditionissmall. Hethereforerecommendedthat
ThorntonandZdravkovi´c,2020).
medians should not be used when comparing condi-
The present article reexamines the use of mean RT,
tionswithdifferentnumbersoftrials,becausethelarger
median RT, and bias-corrected median RT as summary
bias could cause conditions with fewer trials to appear
measuresforthecentraltendencyofanindividualpar-
slower, even with identical RT distributions in both con-
ticipant’sRTsobservedinaparticularexperimentalcon-
ditions. RousseletandWilcox(2020;henceforth,R&W)
dition, focusing on the statistical power of each sum-
recentlydisputedthisrecommendationbasedonanex-
mary measure. It is obviously desirable to use a sum-
tensive series of simulations examining means, medi-
mary measure that provides as much power as possi-
ans, and several other summary measures. In particu-
ble while staying within the chosen level of Type I er-
lar,theyusedastandardpercentilebiascorrectionpro-
cedure (e.g., Efron, 1979, Efron and Tibshirani, 1993)
===== PAGE 2/20 =====
2
ror rate1. In particular, the present simulations sought relative performance of the mean, median, and bias-
to identify the summary method that would provide corrected median summary measures depends strongly
the greatest power when comparing condition means on RT skewness, it depends hardly at all on the precise
of the summary scores across participants via paramet- underlyingdistributionfamilyproducingthatskewness.
ric tests (e.g., t-tests or ANOVAs), as is most commonly The ex-Gaussian and other skewed distributions are
done. Although this question has been looked at pre- helpfulnotonlyindescribingsingleRTdistributionsbut
viously, it appears that power is sometimes higher for even more so in describing the effects of experimental
meansandsometimeshigherformedians(e.g.,Ratcliff, manipulations on these distributions. Observed RT dis-
1993,RousseletandWilcox,2020),andtherehasbeen tributionscaneasilydifferinwaysthataretoocomplex
noclearcharacterizationoftheconditionsunderwhich to summarize in a single measure of central tendency
eachoneissuperior. such as a mean, so other descriptors of distributional
Theprimarysimulationsreportedinthisarticleused changes can provide useful clues about the causes of
the ex-Gaussian distribution as an ad hoc descriptive experimental effects (e.g., Balota et al., 2008, Balota
model of RT, because this simple distribution generally and Yap, 2011, Heathcote et al., 1991). Besides being
provides good fits to observed RT distributions (e.g., of interest in their own right, these distributional dif-
Luce,1986,Hohle,1965). Theex-Gaussiancanbecon- ferences may also have implications for the choice of
ceived of as the sum of two independent random vari- themostappropriatemeasureofcentraltendencytobe
ables. One is a normal with mean µ and standard de- used when that is the research focus. One possibility,
viationσ,theotherisanexponentialwithmeanτ,and illustratedbythepairofex-GaussiansontheleftofFig-
the overall mean RT is the sum of µ and τ. Examples ure 1, is that the experimental manipulation shifts the
of these distributions are shown in Figure 1, which il- distributiontotherightintheslowercondition,whichis
lustrates that the exponential τ parameter reflects the described within the ex-Gaussian model by an increase
skewness of the RT distribution—that is, the length of in the µ parameter with no change in skewness. For
the long tail of slow responses characteristically seen example, using a spatial Simon paradigm (e.g., Hom-
in real RT data (Burbeck and Luce, 1982 ,Luce, 1986, mel, 2011), Luo and Proctor (2018) asked participants
Hohle, 1965). The flexibility of the ex-Gaussian in de- in their Experiment 1 to respond with the left versus
scribing distributions with different amounts of skew right hand to red versus green squares that appeared
makes it a useful model for simulations investigating irrelevantlyto theleft orright offixation. Eventhough
Type I error rates, because these depend on skew (e.g., locationwasirrelevant,responseswerefasterwhenthe
Miller,1988). square appeared on the same side as the required re-
In addition to the ex-Gaussian, simulations were sponse than when it appeared on the opposite side. At
also carried out using four other statistical models for the distributional level, this RT difference was well de-
RT distributions in order to make sure that the ob- scribedasashifteffectreflectedentirelyintheµparam-
tainedresultswerenotidiosyncratictotheex-Gaussian. eter, with no change in skewness (τ). Another possibil-
Specifically, these were the ex-Wald distribution (e.g., ity, illustrated by the pair of ex-Gaussians on the right
Schwarz,2001),theshiftedlognormaldistribution,the side of Figure 1, is that the experimental manipulation
shifted gamma distribution, and the three-parameter stretchesthetailoftheRTdistributionintheslowercon-
(i.e.,shifted)Weibulldistribution. Asisillustratedwith dition, essentially increasing its skew, which can be de-
the examples in Figure 2, these are all similar to ob- scribedasaneffectthatisentirelyonτ. Forexample,in
served RT distributions in that they are skewed with their Experiment 3, Luo and Proctor (2018) asked par-
a long tail at the high end. For each of the differ- ticipants to respond with the left versus right hand to
ent ex-Gaussian distributions that we examined, paral- redversusgreenarrowsthatpointedirrelevantlytothe
lel simulations of 1,000 experiments were also carried leftorright,andresponseswerefasterwhenthearrow
out with each of these alternative distributional mod- pointed to the same side as the required response than
els. For these parallel simulations, the parameters of when it pointed to the opposite side. This time, how-
each alternative distribution were adjusted so that the ever, the RT difference was mainly due to a stretched
alternative distribution matched the corresponding ex-
Gaussian at the 5th, 50th, and 95th percentile points,
1R&Walsoevaluateddifferentsummarymeasureswithre-
specttovariouscriteriaforidentifying“thetypicalvalueofa
so we will refer to these as the “percentile-matched”
distribution,whichprovidesagoodindicationofthelocation
distributions. To foreshadow the results, the patterns
ofthemajorityofobservations”(p.2).Iwillnotaddressthose
obtained with all of these percentile-matched distribu-
criteria in the present article, but only consider the value of
tions closely matched the presented patterns obtained
themeasuresforstandardhypothesistesting,whichisavery
with the ex-Gaussian. More specifically, although the commonstatisticalprocedurewithsuchdata.
===== PAGE 3/20 =====
3
Figure1
Example probability density functions (PDFs) and cumulative distribution functions (CDFs) for three ex-Gaussian dis-
tributions differing in µ and τ, all with σ = 50. A reference distribution with µ = 400 and τ = 200 (solid lines, mean
600 ms, median 544.82 ms) is shown on all panels to facilitate visualization of the effects of changing µ versus τ. The
comparisondistributions(dottedlines,withmean700ms)differwithrespecttoeitherµ(leftpanels,median644.82ms)
orτ(rightpanels,median612.11ms).
tail, with increased skew reflected in a larger τ, and ing and stretching effects, in varying mixtures. There
therewaslittlechangeinµ. is unfortunately no consensus about the psychological
Since the introduction of the ex-Gaussian by Hohle meanings of changes in these different parameters, be-
(1965),manystudieshaveexaminedtheshiftingversus causethereareatbestweakdistinctionsbetweenexper-
tail-stretchingeffectsofvariousexperimentalmanipula- imental manipulations with shifting versus stretching
tions on the shapes of RT distributions as described in effects (e.g., Matzke and Wagenmakers, 2009, Rieger
terms of µ and τ. Both µ and τ are typically larger in andMiller,2020),buttheex-Gaussiandistributionnev-
the slower condition than in the faster one, indicating erthelessremainsusefulasawayofdescribingchanges
that most experimental manipulations have both shift- intheshapesofRTdistributionsaswellastheirmeans.
===== PAGE 4/20 =====
4
Figure2
Example probability density functions (PDFs) for the different RT distribution families examined. The ex-Gaussian
distributionhasparametersofµ=400,σ=50,andτ=200. Theparametersoftheotherdistributionswereadjustedto
matchtheex-Gaussianatthe5th,50th,and95thpercentilepoints,leadingtothefollowingparametervalues: ex-Wald:
Wald µ = 399.9 and σ = 50.9, and exponential τ = 199.9; shifted lognormal: µ = 312.9 and σ = 215.6, with a shift of
C =287.2;shiftedgamma: µ=246.3andσ=206.1,withashiftofC =353.0;Weibull: µ=239.8andσ=205.2,with
anoffsetofC =359.5.
0.0030
ex-Gaussian
ex-Wald
shifted lognormal
) 0.0020
T
shifted gamma
R
( F Weibull
D
P
0.0010
0.0000
0 500 1000 1500
RT
For the present purposes, the distinction between shift- Posner et al., 1978), and expectancy (e.g., Mowrer et
ing and stretching effects is relevant because—as will al., 1940, Zahn and Rosenthal, 1966). In addition,
beseen—statisticaltestsbasedonmeans,medians,and trial frequencies have often been varied across con-
bias-corrected medians are especially different in their ditions to explore a variety of cognitive processes by
powertodetectstretchingeffects. investigating their interactions with probability (e.g.,
Broadbent and Gregory, 1965, Den Heyer et al., 1983,
TypeIErrorRates MillerandPachella,1973,Sanders,1970,Theiosetal.,
1973). Currently, trial frequencies are commonly var-
For completeness, and to make the simulation pro-
iedinstudiesofspatialandtemporalstatisticallearning
cessmoreconcrete,thissectionreviewsbrieflythewell-
(e.g., Flowers et al., 2021, Gibson et al., 2021, Liese-
established fact that Type I error rates are inflated by
feld and Müller, 2021, Vadillo et al., 2021), the mod-
sample-size-dependent bias when medians are used to
ulationofattentionalcontrolprocessesbyenvironmen-
compare RTs across conditions with unequal numbers
talcontingencies(e.g.,Cochraneetal.,2021,Huanget
of trials (which I will call unequal trial “frequencies”
al., 2021, Kang and Chiu, 2021), action-outcome con-
rather than “sample size”, to avoid confusion with the
tingency learning (e.g., Gao and Gozli, 2021), adapta-
number of participants). This bias is an artifact that
tion to the frequency of congruent versus incongruent
wouldcontaminatecomparisonsofconditionswithdif-
information (e.g., Bausenhart et al., 2021, Ivanov and
ferent trial frequencies if medians were used to sum-
Theeuwes, 2021, Thomson et al., 2021), and between-
marize the RTs in each condition. Originally, compar-
task resource sharing (e.g., Miller and Tang, 2021), to
isons of such conditions were used particularly in stud-
namejustafewareas. Unfortunately,medianbiasisstill
ies of the main effects of stimulus and response prob-
sometimes overlooked and may contaminate published
ability (e.g., Hyman, 1953), attentional cuing (e.g.,
===== PAGE 5/20 =====
5
comparisons of conditions with different trial frequen- medians really is larger than that of the larger sam-
cies(e.g.,Bulgeretal.,2021). ples. The t-test results simply reflect this true differ-
As noted by Miller (1988) and confirmed by R&W’s ence in average medians for samples of these two sizes
Table 2, sample medians are biased with skewed dis- fromthisdistribution. Incomparison,acrossexactlythe
tributions, and the bias is greater when the number of samesimulateddatasetsusingeachparticipant’scondi-
trials is smaller. If medians are used to compare con- tion mean or bias-corrected median2 as the summary
ditions with different trial frequencies, this bias causes measure, approximately 2.5% Type I errors in each di-
the Type I error rate to be inflated—perhaps seriously. rectionwereobtained,asexpected.
Specifically, the low-frequency condition will often ap- Parallel simulations were carried out to determine
pear to be statistically slower than the high-frequency the extent of error rate inflation under a variety of dif-
condition,evenifthetrueRTdistributionsareidentical ferentsimulationconditions, andrepresentativeresults
inthetwoconditions. are shown in Figure 4. The different simulation condi-
A simple simulation of 5,000 experiments illustrates tions used: (a) varying numbers of trials N in the in-
the problem. In each simulated experiment, RTs were frequent condition (the frequent condition always had
generated for 60 participants. Each participant was 51 trials), as shown along the horizontal axis; (b) ex-
tested for 51 trials in the “frequent” condition and 5 Gaussian (or corresponding percentile-matched distri-
trials in the “infrequent” condition, with odd numbers butions)withdifferentvaluesofµandτtovarythede-
of trials used so that the median of each sample would greeofskewness,shownasdifferentlines;and(c)30or
be the unique middle score. The null hypothesis was 60 participants in the experiment, shown in the panels
alwaystrue—thatis,RTsforbothconditionsweresam- on the left or right. The vertical axis shows the pro-
pled from the same underlying ex-Gaussian distribu- portion of simulated experiments in which researchers
tion with µ = 400, σ = 50, τ = 200 shown in Fig- would reject the null hypothesis and conclude that re-
ure1. Withineachsimulatedexperiment,theRTssam- sponses were slower in the infrequent condition. Since
pled for each participant were summarized by comput- scores in both conditions were actually always drawn
ingthemedianineachcondition. Usingthesemedians fromthesamedistribution,thesewouldagainbeTypeI
asthedependentvariable,apairedt-testcomparingthe errorsinthatdirection. Obviously,theTypeIerrorrates
means of these medians was then computed across the for the median analyses can far exceed the appropriate
60 participants, with α = 0.05, two-tailed. Since the 2.5%withsmallNsintheinfrequentcondition,whereas
null hypothesis was true in the simulated experiments, theerrorratesforthemeansdonot. Bias-correctedme-
one would theoretically expect approximately 5% sig- diansalsoproducedappropriateerrorrates,replicating
nificantresults(i.e., TypeIerrors)bychance, withhalf R&W’sresults.
of these yielding significantly larger scores in the fre- Very similar patterns of Type I error rates were ob-
quent condition and half significantly larger scores in tainedinthesimulationswiththeotherfourpercentile-
theinfrequentcondition. However,thesimulationactu- matcheddistributionsusedasRTmodels(i.e.,ex-Wald,
allyproduced17.8%TypeIerrorswheretheinfrequent shiftedlognormal,etc). Forexample,acrossthe32sim-
condition appeared slower versus only 0.1% where the ulationconditionsshowninFigure4,theaverageTypeI
frequent condition appeared slower. Thus, in accor- errorrateforthemedianwas6.7%fortheex-Gaussian,
dancewiththewarningofMiller(1988),comparingthe whereas it ranged from 6.1% to 6.7% with the other
means of participant/condition median RTs produced four distributions. Similarly, the Type I error rate ex-
far too many Type I errors in the direction that would ceeded 15% for all distributions in the worst case (i.e.,
lead researchers to conclude that responses are slower the simulation with 60 participants, five trials in the
intheinfrequentcondition. infrequentcondition,andthemost-skeweddistribution
The inflated Type I error rate for medians arises for percentile-matchedtotheex-Gaussianwithµ=350and
purely statistical reasons. As is described in the Ap- τ=250). Meanwhile,theTypeIerrorratesforthemean
pendix,thefullsamplingdistributionofthesampleme- andbias-correctedmedianswerealwaysaround2%for
dians can be computed numerically using the known theseotherdistributions, justastheywerewiththeex-
properties of order statistics (i.e., the median of the Gaussian (Fig. 4). Thus, the finding of inflated Type I
smallersampleisthethirdorderstatisticinasampleof errors for medians seems relatively independent of the
five,andthemedianofthelargersampleisthe26thor- preciseshapeoftheskewedRTdistribution.
derstatisticinasampleof51),andthesesamplingdis- The simulations presented so far have all used pure,
tributions are shown in Figure 3. Crucially, the means uncontaminatedRTdistributions,buttherearereasons
ofthesesamplingdistributionsare561.4and546.7,re-
2For all simulations in this article, bias-corrected medians
spectively, so the long-run mean of the smaller sample
werebasedon200bootstrapsamples.
===== PAGE 6/20 =====
6
Figure3
Probability density function (PDF) for the theoretical sampling distribution of the median for samples of five and 51
trialsfromanex-Gaussiandistributionwithµ = 400, σ = 50, andτ = 200, togetherwiththemeanµofeachsampling
distribution.
0.0150
)
T 51 trials
R
5 trials
n
a
id 0.0100 =546.7
51
e
m
e
lp
m
0.0050
a
s
(
F =561.4
D 5
P
0.0000
200 400 600 800 1000
sample median RT
to suspect that observed RT distributions contain occa- ulation means (e.g., with t-tests), and their Figure 10B
sional outliers (e.g., Ratcliff, 1993, Ulrich and Miller, even shows simulation results displaying the problem.
1994), perhaps because the participant’s attention mo- Nonetheless,theyessentiallydismissedthisproblembe-
mentarilywandersawayfromthetask. Itisanempirical cause “the bias can be strongly attenuated by using a
question whether the results shown in Figure 4 would percentile bootstrap bias correction” (p. 31), which is
change markedly if the simulations included outliers. a procedure that was not considered by Miller (1988).
Forexample,sincemeansaremoreaffectedbyextreme Indeed, their Figure 10C shows that the bootstrap bias
scores than medians, the Type I error rates associated correction completely cures the Type I error rate prob-
with mean-based analyses might be inflated when out- lem, as is also shown in the present Figure 4. Thus, it
liers are included. To look at the effects of outliers, ad- isreasonabletoconsiderthebias-correctedmedianasa
ditional simulations were conducted using each of the possible summary measure of RTs, and the next step is
different RT models already introduced. These simula- tocheckitspower.
tionsincludedeither2%or4%outliers,andtheoutliers
were formed by summing an RT from the uncontam- Power
inated distribution with a random number distributed
Given that bias correction solves the median’s prob-
uniformly between 0–1,000 ms to reflect a distraction
lem of Type I error rate inflation, it is tempting to
delay3. Such outliers had hardly any influence on the
suspect that bias-corrected medians would be prefer-
Type I error rates obtained using means, medians, or
able to means, because the median is often the pre-
bias-corrected medians, so it seems unlikely that out-
ferred measure of central tendency with skewed dis-
liers in real RT data would reduce the Type I error rate
advantage for means and bias-corrected medians rela- 3Ratcliff(1993)introducedoutliersvaryinguniformlybe-
tivetoregularmedians. tween 0–2,000 ms, but it seems that responses delayed by
R&W acknowledged the problem of inflated Type I 1,000–2,000 ms would be easily identified and excluded by
errors when using sample medians for comparing pop- commonly-usedoutlierrejectiontechniques.
===== PAGE 7/20 =====
7
Figure4
Proportions of “infrequent mean larger” Type I errors obtained when using means, medians, or bias-corrected medians
to compare conditions with different numbers of trials N in the infrequent condition, with an expected Type I error
rate in this direction of 0.025 based on α = 0.05. Each point indicates the proportion of significantly larger means
in the infrequent condition across 10,000 simulated experiments with the indicated number of participants. The true
distribution was always an ex-Gaussian with σ = 50. Its value of µ was 350, 400, 450, or 500, with τ = 600−µ.
There were always 51 trials in the frequent condition, and the true underlying RT distributions were always identical
ex-Gaussians in the frequent and infrequent conditions. For the bias-corrected medians, 200 bootstrap samples were
usedtocorrectthemedianseparatelyforeachsimulatedparticipant/conditionpair.
===== PAGE 8/20 =====
8
tributions. Contrary to this intuition, however, Ratcliff with σ = 50 in both cases) and by allocating the RT
(1993) reported that regular medians provide less sta- increase in the slower condition either 25% to µ and
s
tistical power than means. R&W acknowledged Rat- 75%toτ ,orthereverse4. Thus,indifferentsimulation
s
cliff’s report, but they downplayed it because of the conditions the faster RT distribution was either more
smalltrialfrequenciesusedinRatcliff’sanalysis. Inad- or less skewed to begin with and the mean RT differ-
dition, it remains an open question how the power of encebetweenconditionsaroseeithermostlyfromshift-
bias-corrected medians compares with that of means. ing the distribution in the slower condition or mostly
Thepresentsimulationsinvestigatedtheseissues. from stretching it. Finally, the true mean RT difference
Fortunately,itiseasytocomparethepowerofmeans betweenthefastandslowconditionswasadjustedindi-
versusbias-correctedmediansusingsimulationssimilar viduallyforeachofthe32simulationconditionstopro-
tothosedescribedaboveforassessingTypeIerrorrate. duce an intermediate power level (i.e., approximately
Instead of using the same RT distributions for the two 25%–75%) for tests using means as the summary mea-
conditions being compared, one simply uses different sure. Intermediate power levels are desirable because
distributionsandcheckstheproportionofsimulatedex- theyprovidethebestopportunitytoobservepowerdif-
perimentsyieldingastatisticallysignificantdifference— ferences between means and bias-corrected medians;
this proportion is an estimate of statistical power. To with very low or high power levels, the differences be-
model the different types of experimental effects for tweenanalysismethodsarecompressedbyfloororceil-
whichresearchersmighttest,onecanallocatedifferent ingeffects. Acrossthe32simulationconditions,thetrue
amounts of the RT increase in the slower condition to meandifferencevariedfrom9–41ms.
different amounts of shifting versus skewing (i.e., tail- Not surprisingly, the results shown in Figure 5 indi-
stretching) effects on the RT distribution. Within the catethatthepoweroft-testcomparisonsincreaseswith
ex-Gaussian RT model this amounts to increases in the the number of participants and the number of trials
µ versus τ parameters, and changes in other parame- per participant, and in fact these power increases are
ters produce comparable shifting versus stretching ef- even more dramatic than are shown because the true
fectswithintheotherRTdistributionmodels. differences were adjusted to smaller values with larger
Thefirstsetofpowersimulationsexaminedtheabil- datasetsinordertoavoidceilingeffectsonpower. More
ity of the different summary measures to reveal a true critically,theyalsoshowaclearpoweradvantageforus-
between-condition RT difference in experiments where ingmeansratherthanbias-correctedmedians. Thus,al-
the two conditions had unequal trial frequencies, and thoughthebias-correctionprocedureletsthemediando
the results of these simulations are displayed in Fig- aswellasthemeanwithrespecttoTypeIerrors(Fig.4),
ure 5. Regular medians would not be appropriate in thissummarymeasuresseemstohavemuchlesspower
this situation because of the Type I error rate problem than the simpler option of using means. The advan-
described in the previous section, so these simulations tageformean-basedtestingdependslittleeitheronthe
onlycomparedthepoweroftestsusingmeansandbias- numberoftrialsintheslowerconditionorontheskew-
correctedmedians. Naturally,thesetwotypesoftesting nessofRTsinthefastercondition(i.e.,µ = 350versus
f
were compared under identical simulation conditions, µ =500). Itisclearlylarger,however,whentheexper-
f
and in fact identical samples of simulated RTs were al- imentaleffectarisesmainlyfromatail-stretchingeffect
waysanalyzedwiththetwosummarymeasures. (i.e., ∆ /∆ = 0.25; upper panels) rather than from a
µ
In total, there were 32 simulation conditions using shiftingeffect(i.e.,∆ /∆=0.75;lowerpanels). Indeed,
µ
ex-Gaussian RT distributions, corresponding to the 32 furthersimulations(notshown)indicatethatthepower
points shown in Figure 5, for each of the mean-based ofmean-basedanalysesisonlyslightlyhigherthanthat
and bias-corrected median-based tests. In all 32 sim- ofanalysesusingbias-correctedmedianswhenslowing
ulation conditions, 51 RTs per participant were sam- isalmostentirelyduetoashift(i.e., ∆ /∆ = 0.95). The
µ
pled from the faster condition, and the true mean RT reasons for this pattern will become clearer after the
in the faster condition was 600 ms. The 32 conditions nextsetofsimulations, whichreinforceandextendthe
were formed as the factorial combination of eight dif- pattern.
ferent dataset sizes and four conditions differing with Once again, the results of the simulations with
respect to RT skewness. The eight dataset sizes con- the other, percentile-matched RT distributions closely
sistedof30or60participantsfactoriallycombinedwith
5, 9, 17, or 33 trials in the slower condition. The four
4Inthecorresponding32simulationconditionsusingeach
ofthepercentile-matcheddistributions,adjustmentsofthepa-
skewnessconditionswereformedusingtwoamountsof
rametersofthosedistributionsweremadeasneededtomatch
skewness of the RT distribution in the faster condition
the percentiles of the other distributions to those of the ex-
(i.e., µ = 350 and τ = 250 or µ = 500 and τ = 100,
f f f f Gaussiansusedinthefastandslowconditions.
===== PAGE 9/20 =====
9
Figure5
Powerofmean-andbias-correctedmedian-basedtestsfortruedifferencesinex-GaussianRTdistributionsinexperiments
comparingafasterconditionwith51trialsperparticipantagainstaslowerconditionwithfewertrialsperparticipant.
Each point indicates the proportion of significant results across 5,000 simulated experiments (α = 0.025, one-tailed).
SimulationconditionsalsodifferedwithrespecttotheskewnessofthefasterRTdistribution(µ =350andτ =250or
f f
µ = 500 and τ = 100) and the proportion of the total RT slowing (∆) associated with the µ parameter (∆ /∆ = 0.25
f f µ
or 0.75). For the bias-corrected medians, 200 bootstrap samples were used to correct the median separately for each
simulatedparticipant/conditionpair.
match those of the ex-Gaussian RT distributions, with average power for means ranged from 0.55–0.58, and
thesesimulationsalsoshowinggreaterpowerformean- the average power for bias-corrected medians ranged
based testing. For example, across the 32 simulation from 0.26–0.31. Similarly, across all distribution types
conditions in Figure 5, the average power levels of the and all simulation conditions, the minimum and max-
mean-andbias-correctedmedian-basedtestswere0.58 imum power levels ranged from 0.30–0.37 and 0.77–
and0.32,respectively. Withtheotherdistributions,the 0.80 respectively for means, whereas these ranges ex-
===== PAGE 10/20 =====
10
tendedfrom0.11–0.12and0.51–0.61forbias-corrected these average power levels overall, but average power
medians. In further simulations including 2% or 4% wasstilllargestformeans(rangingacrossdistributions
outliersofthesametypeusedintheearlierTypeIerror from 0.46–0.49 and 0.41–0.43 with 2% and 4% out-
rate simulations, power decreased for both mean- and liers,respectively),second-largestformedians(ranging
bias-corrected median-based tests, but average power from 0.37–0.43 and 0.35–0.41), and smallest for bias-
across simulation conditions was still more than 10% corrected medians (ranging from 0.26–0.31 and 0.26–
higherforthemeanthanforthebias-correctedmedian 0.30).
withalldistributions. WhyisitthatusingparticipantmeanRTsasthesum-
In view of the fact that mean-based RT summaries mary measure has so much more power when the ex-
have demonstrably greater power than bias-corrected perimental effect is mostly a stretch in the slow tail?
median-basedsummariesforexperimentswithunequal The main reason is simply that power increases with
trial frequencies (Fig. 5), it is also sensible to compare effect size, as is true for all statistical tests. Consider
powerlevelsinexperimentswithequaltrialfrequencies. twoconditionswhosetruemeanRTsdifferby40ms. In
As noted by Miller (1988) and R&W, regular medians thatcase,theexpecteddifferenceinmeanRTsbetween
are not associated with Type I error rate inflation in those two conditions is 40 ms, regardless of how the
this situation because they would be equally biased in effectisdistributedbetweenshiftingandstretchingand
bothconditions,soregularmedianscanalsobeconsid- regardless of how many trials there are per participant
ered as an appropriate summary of single-trial RTs in ineachcondition. Thesituationisfarmorecomplicated
this case. It is, however, useful to compare the power for differences in medians, however, as is illustrated
of these three candidate measures of central tendency withtheex-GaussiandistributioninFigure7. Figure7A
(i.e.,means,medians,bias-correctedmedians). showstheexpectedvalueofthedifferencebetweenthe
Figure 6 shows the results of simulations analogous mediansofthefastandslowconditions(∆ )asafunc-
mdn
to those shown in Figure 5, except with equal num- tion of (a) how much of the 40 ms mean RT difference
bers of trials per participant in the faster and slower isproducedbychangesinµversusτ(i.e.,∆ versus∆ ),
µ τ
conditions, and naturally power again increased in the and (b) how many trials per participant are tested in
simulation conditions with more participants and trials each condition5. Critically, the expected difference be-
even though these conditions had smaller true mean tween medians is always less than the 40 ms expected
differences to avoid ceiling effects. Power is consis- difference in means, and it is far less when the condi-
tently lower for bias-corrected medians than for regu- tions differ mostly in τ (i.e., ∆ = 10 and ∆ = 30)
µ τ
lar medians, suggesting that the bias correction should rather than mostly in µ (i.e., ∆ = 30 and ∆ = 10),
µ τ
not be used with equal trial frequencies. Mean-based particularlywhenthenumberoftrialsislarge. Thefact
tests again have the most power, although the power thatthenumericaldifferencesarelargerformeansthan
differencebetweenmeansandmediansdependsheavily mediansstronglysuggeststhattestsusingmeanswould
on whether the experimental manipulation has mostly have more power. In theory, medians could provide
a shifting or tail-stretching effect. As can be seen in morestatisticalpowerdespitetheirsmallereffectsizein
the upper panels of Figure 6, means have substantially milliseconds if they had much smaller standard errors.
more power than medians when a minority of the RT They do not, however, as is clear in Figure 7B, which
differenceresultsfromachangeinµ(i.e.,∆ /∆=0.25). showsthecorrespondingratiosofthestandarderrorof
µ
Thepoweradvantageformeansismuchreducedwhen thedifferenceinmeanstothestandarderrorofthedif-
a majority of the RT difference results from a change ference in medians. These ratios are quite close to 1.0,
in µ (i.e., ∆ /∆ = 0.75), and medians can actually have whichmeansthatthestandarderrorsofthemeansand
µ
slightly more power when the RT difference is a pure mediansarenearlyequalinallofthesecases. Figure7C
shift (i.e., ∆ /∆ = 1.00; not shown). The same qualita- showsthecomparisonofmeansversusmediansplotted
µ
tivepatternsareevidentinFigs.14–16ofR&W. intermsofCohen’sd,astandardeffectsizemeasure. Ef-
Overall,thepatternofgreaterpowerformean-based fectsizesincreasewiththenumberoftrials,asexpected
testing shown in Figure 6 was again consistent across becausethestandarderrorofthesamplestatistics(i.e.,
distributions and outlier conditions. Averaging across mean and median) decrease as the number of trials in-
the different dataset sizes and skewness combinations creases. Moreimportantly,itisclearthateffectsizesare
shown in the figure, the average power levels of mean- largerformeansthanformediansacrossallconditions,
based testing ranged across distributions from 0.55– andthisisthesourceofthepoweradvantageformeans.
0.58,whereastherangesformedian-andbias-corrected
median-based testing were 0.38–0.45 and 0.27–0.33,
5Theresultsshowninthisfigurewereobtainedbycompu-
tationratherthanbysimulation,usingmethodsexplainedin
respectively. Thepresenceof2%or4%outliersreduced
theAppendix.
===== PAGE 11/20 =====
11
Figure6
Power of mean-, median-, and bias-corrected median-based tests for true differences in ex-Gaussian RT distributions in
experimentscomparingfasterandslowerconditionswithequalnumbersoftrialsperparticipant. Theparametersother
thanthenumbersoftrialsperconditionarethesameasthoseinFigure5.
Inessence,whenmuchofanexperimentalmanipula- dianmay[italicsinoriginal]sometimesbepreferableto
tion’seffectistostretchthelonguppertailoftheRTdis- themean,owingtoitsbeinglessaffectedbyabnormally
tribution, the median’s relative insensitivity to this part largeorsmallvaluesofthevariable”(p. 120),although
of the distribution eliminates part of the very between- he also commented that the median’s “limitations ren-
condition difference that the researcher is looking for6. dertheapplicationsofthemedianinanyworkinwhich
This is particularly ironic because insensitivity to skew theoretical considerations are necessary comparatively
is often cited as one of the median’s benefits, and it is
6The same problem would arise with trimmed means,
supposed to make the median especially tempting with
thoughtoalesserextent, becausetrimmingalsoreducesthe
skewed distributions (e.g., Hays, 1973, Marascuilo,
contributionofthehighendoftheRTdistribution,wherethe
1971). AsnotedbyYule(1911),forexample,“Theme-
conditiondifferenceisgreatest.
===== PAGE 12/20 =====
12
Figure7
A: Expected difference between fast- and slow-condition median RTs (∆ ) for two conditions whose true means differ
mdn
by 40 ms as a function of the number of trials per participant in each condition and of the division of the 40 ms effect
betweentheµandτparametersoftheex-GaussianRTdistribution(i.e.,∆ =10and∆ =30,∆ =20and∆ =20,or
µ τ µ τ
∆ = 30 and ∆ = 10). In all cases, the expected difference between the mean RTs of these conditions is 40 ms. B: The
µ τ
ratio of the standard error of the difference in means (σ ) to the standard error of the difference in medians (σ ),
mn mdn
illustrating that the standard errors of the differences are approximately equal. C: Cohen’s d for testing the condition
effect using means (d , thick lines) versus medians (d , thin lines) as the summaries of the individual-participant
mn mdn
performanceineachcondition.
===== PAGE 13/20 =====
13
circumscribed” (p. 119). As the present simulations ferences with any of the hypothesis testing methods
show, however, means can have much higher power to (i.e., t-test, 20% trimmed means test, median test). In
detect between-condition RT differences when experi- principle, any one of these nine options could provide
mental manipulations increase skewness, as they often the most statistical power. Thus, the conclusions of
do(e.g.,Heathcoteetal.,1991,Hockley,1984,Hockley the present simulations comparing different summary
andCorballis,1982,LuoandProctor,2018,Mewhortet methodsarespecifictothet-testsandthesesimulations
al., 1992, Moutsopoulou and Waszak, 2012, Possamaï, might have a different outcome if the summary mea-
1991, Singh et al., 2018). In a re-analysis of datasets sureswerecomparedacrossconditionswithsomeother
from seven published articles, for example, Rieger and method.
Miller (2020) found significant (p < 0.05) increases in In their comparison of different hypothesis testing
τ in 15 of 25 different statistical comparisons involv- proceduresusingtheg&hdistribution,R&Wdidnotdis-
ing various distinct experimental manipulations. Evi- tinguishbetweenthethreedifferentmethodsofsumma-
dence from research on bilingualism also suggests that rizing individual-trial RTs (i.e., means, medians, bias-
theRTadvantageforbilingualsismostlyduetothere- corrected medians). In fact, they only generated a
duced number of quite long RTs and that the power of single random number for each simulated participant,
bilingual/monolingual comparisons diminishes greatly and this number represented the difference (i.e., con-
when long RTs are not considered (Zhou and Krott, dition effect) for that participant summarized from
2016). the individual-participant RTs with “any type of differ-
encesbetweenmeans,mediansoranyotherquantities”
DistributionofDifferences (p. 17). These individual-participant difference scores
were generated from “g&h” distributions, which allow
In addition to comparing the effectiveness of means,
convenient parametric variation of distribution skew-
medians, and bias-corrected medians as summaries of
ness and kurtosis (i.e., tail heaviness) through g and h
individual-participant RTs, R&W also compared three
parameters, respectively. Although it might seem more
different methods of testing for a significant differ-
appropriatetosimulatesingle-trialRTsandexamineall
ence between conditions after a summary measure
nine possible analysis combinations (i.e., 3 summary
had been obtained for each participant in each con-
methods×3hypothesistestingmethods),itisnotclear
dition. They did this using simulations based on a
how to do that realistically. Even assuming that all
“g&h”distribution(seebelow). Onemethodwastocon-
of the individual-participant RT distributions were ex-
ductaone-samplet-testusingtheindividual-participant
Gaussians, the participants would surely differ in their
between-condition differences in the summary scores.
distribution parameters and in their between-condition
This method is equivalent to testing with a repeated-
differences in these parameters (e.g., effects on µ and
measures ANOVA or a paired t-test as in the present
τ). Thedistributionofindividual-participantdifference
simulations (e.g., Fig. 4), which appear to be the most
scores would be heavily influenced by this participant-
common methods of testing for overall RT differences
to-participantvariationaswellasbythechoiceofsum-
between conditions. The second method was to con-
mary method, but there does not yet exist an appropri-
duct a test on 20% trimmed means—that is, a test ex-
atemodelforthisindividualvariation. Thus,itwasnot
cluding participants with the most extreme between-
unreasonable for R&W to model the final distribution
condition differences. Finally, the third method was to
of individual-participant difference scores directly with
test whether the median of the participants’ between-
theg&hdistributionratherthanattemptingtospecifya
conditiondifferencesdifferedfromzero.
model in which these difference scores would emerge
It is important to realize that R&W’s g&h simula-
from varying individual RT distributions under each
tions comparing the three different methods of testing
summarymethod.
for differences in summary measures address a differ-
R&W’s simulations comparing the effectiveness of
ent question than that of how the individual RTs of
the different hypothesis testing methods produced two
a given participant should be summarized in the first
particularly important results (e.g., their Figs. 12 and
place. Specifically, comparing hypothesis testing pro-
13). First,eachofthehypothesistestingmethodstends
cedures addresses the question of how best to test for
to lose power when the distribution of participant-to-
a significant effect of conditions after summarizing the
participant difference scores is more skewed or has
originalindividual-participantRTsineachcondition. This
heavier tails (i.e., larger kurtosis). Second, this ten-
is a different question because researchers could ini-
dency to lose power with increasing skew or kurtosis
tially summarize individual-trial RTs with any of the
is much stronger for the t-test than for the tests us-
summarymethods(i.e.,means,medians,bias-corrected
ing trimmed means or medians. Naturally, then, R&W
medians) and then subsequently test for condition dif-
===== PAGE 14/20 =====
14
suggestedthatresearchersshouldconsidercarefullythe relative to many published studies, is that there were
amount of skew and kurtosis in their distributions of unusually many trials in each condition. One might
participant-to-participantdifferencescoreswhendecid- thereforewonderwhethertheresultsshowninFigure8
ing which procedure to use in testing for a condition would generalize to datasets with fewer trials per con-
effect. dition (perhaps because there were more conditions).
Although R&W’s simulations comparing hypothesis To examine this issue, I conducted simulations with
testing methods do not speak directly to the question smaller random subsets of the RTs for each participant
of how the individual-participant RTs should be sum- ineachcondition. Toincreasethestabilityofthesimu-
marized in the first place, as was mentioned earlier, lationresults,20subsetsofagivennumberofRTswere
one might suspect that they do so indirectly. In par- randomly selected for each participant, selecting with-
ticular,theirresultssuggestthatresearchersshouldpre- out replacement for each subset but with replacement
fer the summary measure for which the participant-to- across subsets (because there were not enough RTs to
participant difference scores are the least skewed and samplewithoutreplacementforthelargersubsets). For
havethelightesttails. Intuitively,itmightseemreason- each randomly selected subset of RTs from one partici-
abletoassumethatmedians—byvirtueoftheirsmaller pant, the condition effect was computed using each of
sensitivitytoextremescores—wouldproducedifference thethreesummarymeasures(i.e., mean, median, bias-
scoredistributionsthatarelessskewedandhavelighter correctedmedian). Finally, acrossallsimulatedsubsets
tailsthanthoseproducedbymeans,butthisassumption foragivennumberofRTs,thedistributionofcondition
mustbecheckedempirically. effects was analyzed using the same computations as
To do that, I examined the two large, publicly avail- thoseshowninFigure8forthefulldatasets.
able RT datasets of Ferrand et al. (2010) and Hutchi- Figure9showstheresultsofthesesimulations,which
son et al. (2013), both involving lexical decision nicelyextendtheresultsobtainedwithhundredsoftri-
tasks. In both datasets, responses to words were faster alsperparticipantineachcondition(Fig.8)todatasets
than responses to nonwords, which provided a conve- withsmallernumbersoftrials. Withvirtuallyanynum-
nient condition effect to examine. Since these are real ber of trials per condition per participant selected from
datasets, they have realistic trial-to-trial RT variabil- these real datasets, the between-participant difference
ityandparticipant-to-participantvariabilityincondition score distributions would be less skewed (i.e., smaller
effects, by definition, obviating the need to specify a skewness and g) and less heavy-tailed (i.e., smaller
formal model for these. Thus, I computed three sep- kurtosis and h) when differences were computed from
arate nonword-minus-word difference scores for each mean RTs than when they were computed from me-
participant—onceeachusingtheparticipant’scondition dians or bias-corrected medians. Thus, as with the
mean RTs, condition median RTs, and bias-corrected full datasets, these results in combination with R&W’s
conditionmedianRTs. Thenormalizedfrequencydistri- demonstration of greater power with less skew and
butions of these difference scores for the two datasets, lighter tails, provide a further argument for using the
tabulatedacross944and503participants,respectively, mean to summarize the central tendency of observed
areshowninFigure8. RTs.
Perhaps somewhat counterintuitively, the empirical
distributions of individual-participant difference scores Conclusions
showninFigure8arebothlessskewed(smallervalues
R&Wconcludedthat“thereseemstobenorationale
ofskewandg)andlightertailed(smallervaluesofkur-
for preferring the mean over the median as a measure
tosis and h) when the difference scores are computed
of central tendency for skewed distributions” (p. 31).
from mean RTs than when they are computed from ei-
On the contrary, when performing hypothesis tests to
ther of the median-based summary measures. In com-
compare the central tendencies of RTs between exper-
binationwithR&W’sfindingofgreaterpowerwithless
imental conditions, the present simulations show that
skewedandlighter-taileddifferencescoredistributions,
there may be an extremely clear rationale involving
this pattern provides clear evidence that researchers
bothTypeIerrorrateandexperimentalpower.
wouldhavemorepowerwhenusingmeansratherthan
When comparing conditions with unequal numbers
medians to summarize RTs. Based on R&W’s results,
oftrials, thesample-size-dependentbiasofregularme-
it seems that this would be true regardless of which
dians can lead to clear inflation of the Type I error rate
hypothesis testing procedure was used, but it appears
(Fig.4),sothesemediansdefinitelyshouldnotbeused.
thatthemeanadvantagewouldbeespeciallylargewith
Means and bias-corrected medians are both free of this
standardt-testsorANOVAs.
bias and thus have acceptable Type I error rates, so ei-
A distinctive feature of the SPP and FLP datasets,
ther could be considered as a possible summary mea-
===== PAGE 15/20 =====
15
Figure8
Normalized histograms of individual-participant RT difference scores computed from three different summary RT mea-
sures in the lexical decision task datasets from the Semantic Priming Project (a, c, e; Hutchison et al., 2013) and
the French Lexicon Project (b, d, f; Ferrand et al., 2010). Each participant’s observed 800–1,000 word and nonword
RTs were first summarized by computing the mean, median, or bias-corrected median, and the nonword minus word
differencewasthencomputedforeachmeasure. Thehistograms(bars)depictthefrequencydistributionsofthesediffer-
ences across participants, and the skewness (skew) and kurtosis (kurt) values computed from these observed difference
scores are shown on the panel. The solid line is the best-fitting (maximum likelihood) g&h distribution for each set of
differences,andthegandhparametersofthesedistributionsarealsoshown.
Semantic Priming Project French Lexicon Project
Mean Mean
y
c a b
n
e 0.01 skew = 1.82 0.01 skew = 0.75
u
q kurt = 10.88 kurt = 4.43
e
r f
e0.005
g = 0.32
0.005
g = 0.30
v h = 0.11 h = 0.09
ita
le
R
0 0
-100 0 100 200 300 400 -100 0 100 200 300 400
Median Median
y
c c d
n
e 0.01 skew = 2.77 0.01 skew = 1.11
u
q kurt = 19.51 kurt = 5.29
e
r f
e0.005
g = 0.36
0.005
g = 0.38
v h = 0.14 h = 0.10
ita
le
R
0 0
-100 0 100 200 300 400 -100 0 100 200 300 400
Bias-corrected median Bias-corrected median
y
c e f
n
e 0.01 skew = 2.74 0.01 skew = 1.12
u
q kurt = 19.31 kurt = 5.34
e
r f
e0.005
g = 0.36
0.005
g = 0.39
v h = 0.14 h = 0.10
ita
le
R
0 0
-100 0 100 200 300 400 -100 0 100 200 300 400
RT difference RT difference
sureinthissituation. Meansclearlyhavegreaterpower less power than regular medians, however, so here the
(Fig.5)thanbias-correctedmediansinmostsituations, choice is really between means and regular medians,
however, which would nearly always make them the depending on which of those has the higher power. As
preferredchoice. can be seen in Figure 6), the answer depends on how
When comparing conditions with equal numbers of the experimental manipulation affects skewness. Thus,
trials, means, medians, and bias-corrected medians all tochoosebetweenmeansandmediansasthesummary
have appropriate Type I error rates, so any of these measure maximizing power, researchers must consider
might be the preferred summary measure in this sit- theeffectoftheexperimentalmanipulationatthelevel
uation. Bias-corrected medians always seem to have oftheRTdistribution.
===== PAGE 16/20 =====
16
Figure9
Measures of skewness and kurtosis, plus maximum-likelihood estimates of parameters g and h, as a function of the
numberoftrialsperconditioninthelexicaldecisiontaskdatasetsfromtheSemanticPrimingProject(Hutchisonetal.,
2013)andtheFrenchLexiconProject(Ferrandetal.,2010). RandomsubsetsoftheindicatedNoftrialspercondition
weretakenforeachparticipantandparameterswereestimatedasinFigure8.
TheresultsinFigure6suggestthatthetwomeasures using medians. On the other hand, if this difference
will have approximately equal power when RT skew- is larger in the slower condition, power will be better
ness is unaffected by the manipulation, whereas medi- usingmeans.
answillhavegreaterpowerifskewnessdecreasesinthe An important caveat concerning the choice of sum-
slower condition and means will have greater power if mary measure is that this choice should not be made
skewness increases in the slower condition. Although basedonthedatabeinganalyzed. Toavoidtheinflation
the ex-Gaussian τ is one way of assessing skewness, ofTypeIerrorratethatariseswhenresearcherstrymul-
it is not always necessary to estimate ex-Gaussian pa- tiplealternativeanalysesintheattempttoobtainsignif-
rameters from RT distributions. Instead, one can use a icant results (i.e., “p-hacking”; Simmons et al., 2011),
simpler skewness measure—namely, the difference be- researchers must choose the best summary measure in
tweenthemeanandmedianofRT—asaproxyforτ. If advance, based on theoretical considerations regarding
this difference is smaller in the slower condition than theexpectedeffect,onpriorexperiencewithsimilarex-
the faster one, that is a sign that power will be better perimental manipulations, or on pilot data. It would
===== PAGE 17/20 =====
17
beinappropriatetodecidewhethertoanalyzemeanor References
median RTs based on whichever gave the larger effect
Arnold, B. C., Balakrishnan, N., & Nagaraja, H. N.
in a given dataset, because this would inflate the re-
(1992).Afirstcourseinorderstatistics.Wiley.
searcher’sTypeIerrorrate.
Balota, D. A., Yap, M. J., Cortese, M. J., & Watson,
J. M. (2008). Beyond mean response latency:
AuthorContact
Responsetimedistributionalanalysesofseman-
Address correspondence to Jeff Miller, Depart- tic priming. Journal of Memory & Language,
ment of Psychology, University of Otago, Dunedin, 59(4), 495–523. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
New Zealand. Electronic mail may be sent to jml.2007.10.004
miller@psy.otago.ac.nz. Balota, D. A., & Yap, M. J. (2011). Moving beyond the
mean in studies of mental chronometry: The
Acknowledgements power of response time distributional analy-
ses. Current Directions in Psychological Science,
I am grateful to Wolf Schwarz, Patricia Haden,
20(3), 160–166. https://doi.org/10.1177/
VeronikaLerche,GuillaumeRousselet,andRandWilcox
0963721411408885
for helpful comments on earlier versions of this article,
Bausenhart,K.M.,Ulrich,R.,&Miller,J.O.(2021).Ef-
andtoLudovicFerrandforprovidingtherawdatafrom
fects of conflict trial proportion: A comparison
theFrenchLexiconProject.
of the Eriksen and Simon tasks. Attention, Per-
ConflictofInterestandFunding ception,&Psychophysics,83(2),810–836.https:
//doi.org/10.3758/s13414-020-02164-2
Theauthordeclaresthathehadnoconflictsofinter- Broadbent, D. E., & Gregory, M. H. P. (1965). On the
estwithrespecttotheauthorshiporpublicationofthis interactionofS-Rcompatibilitywithothervari-
article. ables affecting reaction time. British Journal of
Psychology, 56, 61–67. https://doi.org/10.
AuthorContributions
1111/j.2044-8295.1965.tb00944.x
Jeff Miller: Conceptualization, Methodology, Soft- Bulger, E., Shinn-Cunningham, B. G., & Noyce,
ware, Validation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Re- A. L. (2021). Distractor probabilities modulate
sources,DataCuration,Writing-OriginalDraft,Writing flankertaskperformance.Attention,Perception,
- Review & Editing, Visualization, Supervision, Project & Psychophysics, 83(2), 866–881. https://doi.
administration,Fundingacquisition. org/10.3758/s13414-020-02151-7
Burbeck, S. L., & Luce, R. D. (1982). Evidence from
CodeAvailability auditory simple reaction times for both change
and level detectors. Perception & Psychophysics,
Theex-Gaussian,ex-Wald,shiftedlognormal,shifted
32, 117–133. https://doi.org/10.3758/
gamma, and Weibull distributions used in this
BF03204271
code are part of the Cupid package available at
Cochrane, A., Simmering, V., & Green, C. S. (2021).
https://github.com/milleratotago/Cupid.
Modulationofcompatibilityeffectsinresponse
to experience: Two tests of initial and se-
OpenSciencePractices
quential learning. Attention, Perception, & Psy-
chophysics, 83(2), 837–852. https://doi.org/
10.3758/s13414-020-02181-1
Den Heyer, K., Briand, K. A., & Dannenbring, G. L.
(1983). Strategic factors in a lexical-decision
This article earned the Open Materials badge for
task: Evidence for automatic and attention-
making materials openly available. It has been verified
drivenprocesses.Memory&Cognition,11,374–
thattheanalysisreproducedtheresultspresentedinthe
381.
article. Theentireeditorialprocess, includingtheopen
Efron, B. (1979). Computers and the theory of statis-
reviews,ispublishedintheonlinesupplement.
tics: Thinking the unthinkable. SIAM Review,
21, 460–480. https://doi.org/10.1137/
1021092
Efron, B., & Tibshirani, R. J. (1993). An introduction to
thebootstrap.Chapman&Hall.
===== PAGE 18/20 =====
18
Ferrand,L.,New,B.,Brysbaert,M.,Keuleers,E.,Bonin, nal of Experimental Psychology, 69, 382–386.
P., Méot, A., Augustinova, M., & Pallier, C. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0021740
(2010). The French Lexicon Project: Lexical Hommel, B. (2011). The Simon effect as tool and
decision data for 38,840 French words and heuristic. Acta Psychologica, 136(2), 189–202.
38,840 pseudowords. Behavior Research Meth- https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actpsy.2010.04.011
ods,42(2),488–496.https://doi.org/10.3758/ Huang, C., Theeuwes, J., & Donk, M. (2021). Statisti-
BRM.42.2.488 callearningaffectsthetimecoursesofsalience-
Flowers, C. S., Palitsky, R., Sullivan, D., & Peterson, drivenandgoal-drivenselection.JournalofEx-
M.A.(2021).Investigatingtheflexibilityofat- perimentalPsychology:HumanPerception&Per-
tentional orienting in multiple modalities: Are formance,47(1),121–133.https://doi.org/10.
spatialandtemporalcuesusedinthecontextof 1037/xhp0000781
spatiotemporal probabilities? Visual Cognition, Hutchison, K. A., Balota, D. A., Neely, J. H., Cortese,
29(2), 105–117. https://doi.org/10.1080/ M. J., Cohen-Shikora, E. R., Tse, C.-S., Yap,
13506285.2021.1873211 M.J.,Bengson,J.J.,Niemeyer,D.,&Buchanan,
Gao, C., & Gozli, D. G. (2021). Are self-caused dis- E. (2013). The Semantic Priming Project. Be-
tractors easier to ignore? experiments with havior Research Methods, 45(4), 1099–1114.
the flanker task. Attention, Perception, & Psy- https://doi.org/10.3758/s13428-012-0304-z
chophysics, 83(2), 853–865. https://doi.org/ Hyman, R. (1953). Stimulus information as a determi-
10.3758/s13414-020-02170-4 nant of reaction time. Journal of Experimental
Gibson, B. S., Pauszek, J. R., Trost, J. M., & Wenger, Psychology, 45, 188–196. https://doi.org/10.
M. J. (2021). The misrepresentation of spa- 1037/h0056940
tial uncertainty in visual search: Single- ver- Ivanov, Y., & Theeuwes, J. (2021). Distractor sup-
sus joint-distribution probability cues. Atten- pression leads to reduced flanker interference.
tion, Perception, & Psychophysics, 83(2), 603– Attention, Perception, & Psychophysics, 83(2),
623. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13414-020- 624–636. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13414-
02145-5 020-02159-z
Gordon, A., Geddert, R., Hogeveen, J., Krug, M. K., Kang, M. S., & Chiu, Y.-C. (2021). Proactive and reac-
Obhi, S., & Solomon, M. (2020). Not so au- tive metacontrol in task switching. Memory &
tomaticimitation:Expectationofincongruence Cognition, 49(8), 1617–1632. https://doi.org/
reduces interference in both autism spectrum 10.3758/s13421-021-01189-8
disorder and typical development. Journal of Liesefeld, H. R., & Müller, H. J. (2021). Modulations
AutismandDevelopmentalDisorders,50,1310– of saliency signals at two hierarchical levels of
1323. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-019- priority computation revealed by spatial statis-
04355-9 tical distractor learning. Journal of Experimen-
Hays,W.L.(1973).Statisticsforthesocialsciences.(2nd talPsychology:General,150(4),710–728.https:
ed.)Holt,Rinehart,&Winston. //doi.org/10.1037/xge0000970
Heathcote,A.,Popiel,S.J.,&Mewhort,D.J.K.(1991). Luce,R.D.(1986).Responsetimes:Theirroleininferring
Analysis of response-time distributions: An ex- elementarymentalorganization.OxfordUniver-
ample using the Stroop task. Psychological Bul- sityPress.
letin, 109, 340–347. https://doi.org/10.1037/ Luo, C., & Proctor, R. W. (2018). The location-, word-,
0033-2909.109.2.340 andarrow-basedSimoneffects:Anex-Gaussian
Hockley, W. E. (1984). Analysis of response time dis- analysis.Memory&Cognition,46(3),497–506.
tributions in the study of cognitive processes. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13421-017-0767-3
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Maksimenko, V. A., Frolov, N. S., Hramov, A. E., Run-
Memory,&Cognition,10,598–615.https://doi. nova, A. E., Grubov, V. V., Kurths, J., & Pis-
org/10.1037/0278-7393.10.4.598 archik, A. N. (2019). Neural interactions in
Hockley,W.E.,&Corballis,M.C.(1982).Testsofserial a spatially-distributed cortical network during
scanninginitemrecognition.CanadianJournal perceptualdecision-making.FrontiersinBehav-
ofPsychology,36,189–212.https://doi.org/10. ioralNeuroscience,13,220.https://doi.org/10.
1037/h0080637 3389/fnbeh.2019.00220
Hohle, R. H. (1965). Inferred components of reaction Marascuilo, L. A. (1971). Statistical methods for behav-
timesasfunctionsofforeperiodduration.Jour- ioralscienceresearch.McGraw-Hill.
===== PAGE 19/20 =====
19
Matzke,D.,&Wagenmakers,E.J.(2009).Psychological Rieger, T. C., & Miller, J. O. (2020). Are model pa-
interpretation of the ex-Gaussian and shifted rameters linked to processing stages? An em-
Wald parameters: A diffusion model analysis. pirical investigation for the ex-Gaussian, ex-
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 16, 798–817. Wald, and EZ diffusion models. Psychological
https://doi.org/10.3758/PBR.16.5.798 Research, 84(6), 1683–1699. https://doi.org/
Mewhort,D.J.K.,Braun,J.G.,&Heathcote,A.(1992). 10.1007/s00426-019-01176-4
Response time distributions and the Stroop Rousselet,G.A.,&Wilcox,R.R.(2020).Reactiontimes
task: A test of the Cohen, Dunbar, and Mc- and other skewed distributions: Problems with
Clelland(1990)model.JournalofExperimental the mean and the median. Meta-Psychology, 4.
Psychology: Human Perception & Performance, https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2019.1630
18, 872–882. https://doi.org/10.1037/0096- Sanders, A. F. (1970). Some variables affecting the re-
1523.18.3.872 lationbetweenrelativestimulusfrequencyand
Miller, J. O. (1988). A warning about median reaction choicereactiontime.ActaPsychologica,33,45–
time. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Hu- 55. https://doi.org/10.1016/0001-6918(70)
manPerception&Performance,14(3),539–543. 90121-6
https://doi.org/10.1037/0096-1523.14.3.539 Schwarz, W. (2001). The ex-Wald distribution as a
Miller,J.O.,&Pachella,R.G.(1973).Locusofthestim- descriptive model of response times. Behav-
ulus probability effect. Journal of Experimental ior Research Methods, Instruments & Comput-
Psychology, 101(2), 227–231. https://doi.org/ ers, 33, 457–469. https://doi.org/10.3758/
10.1037/h0035214 BF03195403
Miller,J.O.,&Tang,J.L.(2021).Effectsoftaskproba- Simmons,J.P.,Nelson,L.D.,&Simonsohn,U.(2011).
bilityonprioritizedprocessing:Modulatingthe False-positive psychology: Undisclosed flexibil-
efficiency of parallel response selection. Atten- ity in data collection and analysis allows pre-
tion, Perception, & Psychophysics, 83(1), 356– senting anything as significant. Psychological
388. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13414-020- Science, 22(11), 1359–1366. https://doi.org/
02143-7 10.1177/0956797611417632
Moutsopoulou, K., & Waszak, F. (2012). Across-task Singh, T., Laub, R., Burgard, J. P., & Frings, C. (2018).
priming revisited: Response and task con- Disentangling inhibition-based and retrieval-
flicts disentangled using ex-Gaussian distribu- based aftereffects of distractors: Cognitive ver-
tion analysis. Journal of Experimental Psychol- sus motor processes. Journal of Experimental
ogy: Human Perception & Performance, 38(2), Psychology: Human Perception & Performance,
367–374.https://doi.org/10.1037/a0025858 44(5), 797–805. https://doi.org/10.1037/
Mowrer,O.H.,Rayman,N.,&Bliss,E.(1940).Prepara- xhp0000496
toryset(expectancy)-Anexperimentaldemon- Theios, J., Smith, P. G., Haviland, S., Traupmann, J., &
stration of its “central” locus. Journal of Exper- Moy, M. (1973). Memory scanning as a serial
imental Psychology, 26, 357–371. https://doi. self-terminating process. Journal of Experimen-
org/10.1037/h0058172 tal Psychology, 97, 323–336. https://doi.org/
Posner,M.I.,Nissen,M.J.,&Ogden,W.C.(1978).At- 10.1037/h0034107
tended and unattended processing modes: The Thomson, S. J., Simone, A. C., & Watter, S. (2021).
roleofsetforspatiallocation.InH.L.PickJr.& Item-specific proportion congruency (ISPC)
E.Saltzman(Eds.),Modesofperceivingandpro- modulates, but does not generate, the back-
cessing information. (pp. 137–157). Lawrence ward crosstalk effect. Psychological Research,
Erlbaum. 85(3), 1093–1107. https://doi.org/10.1007/
Possamaï, C. A. (1991). A responding hand effect in a s00426-020-01318-z
simple-RT precueing experiment: Evidence for Thornton, I. M., & Zdravkovi´c, S. (2020). Searching
a late locus of facilitation. Acta Psychologica, forillusorymotion.Attention,Perception,&Psy-
77, 47–63. https://doi.org/10.1016/0001- chophysics, 82, 44–62. https://doi.org/10.
6918(91)90064-7 3758/s13414-019-01750-3
Ratcliff, R. (1993). Methods for dealing with reaction Ulrich, R., & Miller, J. O. (1994). Effects of truncation
time outliers. Psychological Bulletin, 114, 510– onreactiontimeanalysis.JournalofExperimen-
532.https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.114. tal Psychology: General, 123(1), 34–80. https:
3.510 //doi.org/10.1037/0096-3445.123.1.34
===== PAGE 20/20 =====
20
Vadillo, M. A., Giménez-Fernández, T., Beesley, T., whichhasexpectedvalueE[D ]=µ −µ . Thevariance
mn 2 1
Shanks, D. R., & Luque, D. (2021). There is ofthisdifferenceisVar[D ]=σ2/n+σ2/n,becauseX
mn 1 2 1,i
more to contextual cuing than meets the eye: and X areindependentsamplesoftrials.
2,i
Improving visual search without attentional
guidance toward predictable target locations.
JournalofExperimentalPsychology:HumanPer-
ception & Performance, 47(1), 116–120. https:
Medians
//doi.org/10.1037/xhp0000780
Yule,G.U.(1911).Anintroductiontothetheoryofstatis-
tics.CharlesGriffin&Co.
Zahn, T. P., & Rosenthal, D. (1966). Simple reaction To analyze the between-condition difference in me-
time as a function of the relative frequency of dianRTs,theresearchercomputesforeachparticipant
the preparatory interval. Journal of Experimen-
tal Psychology, 72, 15–19. https://doi.org/10.
D = X −X (2)
1037/h0023328 mdn 2(k) 1(k)
Zhou, B., & Krott, A. (2016). Data trimming procedure
where X indicates the k’th order statistic in the sam-
can eliminate bilingual cognitive advantage.
·(k)
ple of n RTs. The median is the k’th order statistic for
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 23(4), 1221–
k=(n+1)/2whennisodd.
1230. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13423-015-
0981-6 Given the CDF F(t) for the RTs in either condition,
theCDFofthemedianinthatcondition X is
(k)
Appendix
Expected Values and Standard Errors of Differences (cid:88)n (cid:32) n(cid:33)
inMeansandMedians F (t)= F(t)j·[1−F(t)]n−j (3)
X(k) j
j=k
This appendix describes the numerical procedures
for computing the expected values and standard er-
rors of between-condition differences in mean RTs and
(e.g., Arnold et al., 1992). As is illustrated in Figure 3,
between-condition differences in median RTs that are
theprobabilitydistributionofthemedianRTinthiscon-
depictedinFigure7.
dition is uniquely determined by this CDF, so the me-
Let X and X , i = 1...n, be random samples of
1,i 2,i dian’s expected value E[X ] and variance Var[X ] in
(k) (k)
n RTs from the two conditions being compared. These
the condition can be computed by numerical integra-
come from assumed probability distributions (e.g., ex-
tion. Once this computation is carried out for each of
Gaussian, etc) with means µ and µ , variances σ2 and
1 2 1 thetwoconditionsindividually,theexpectedvalueand
σ2, and cumulative distribution functions (CDFs) F (t)
2 1 varianceofthedifferencebetweenconditionsare
and F (t), respectively. For simplicity in dealing with
2
medians,assumethatnisodd.
E[D ]=E[X ]−E[X ] (4)
mdn 2(k) 1(k)
Means
Toanalyzethebetween-conditiondifferenceinmean
and
RTs,theresearchercomputesforeachparticipant
(cid:88)n (cid:88)n
D = X¯ −X¯ = X /n− X /n, (1) Var[D ]=Var[X ]+Var[X ]. (5)
mn 2 1 2,i 1,i mdn 2(k) 1(k)
i=1 i=1