
===== PAGE 1/19 =====
Opendata:NotApplicable Editedby:NickBrown
Meta-Psychology,2023,vol7,MP.2021.2756 Openmaterials:NotApplicable Reviewedby:MaartenDerksen,SophiaCrüwell
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2021.2756 Openandreproducibleanalysis:NotApplicable Analysisreproducedby:NotApplicable
Articletype:OriginalArticle Openreviewsandeditorialprocess:Yes AllsupplementaryfilescanbeaccessedatOSF:
PublishedundertheCC-BY4.0license Preregistration:No https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/MZ87J
A Falsificationist Treatment of Auxiliary
Hypotheses in Social and Behavioral Sciences:
Systematic Replications Framework.
Duygu Uygun Tunç
Eindhoven University of Technology
Mehmet Necip Tunç
Tilburg University
Abstract
Auxiliary hypotheses (AHs) are indispensable in hypothesis-testing, because without them specification of testable
predictionsandconsequentlyfalsificationisimpossible. However,asAHsenterthetestalongwiththemainhypoth-
esis,non-corroborativefindingsareambiguous. Duetothisambiguity,AHsmayalsobeemployedtodeflectfalsifi-
cationbyproviding“alternativeexplanations”offindings. ThisisnotfataltotheextentthatAHsareindependently
validatedandsafelyrelegatedtobackgroundknowledge. Butthisisnotalwayspossible,especiallyintheso-called
“softer”scienceswhereoftentheoriesarelooselyorganized,measurementsarenoisy,andconstructsarevague. The
Systematic Replications Framework (SRF) provides a methodological solution by disentangling the implications of
thefindingsforthemainhypothesisandtheAHsthroughpre-plannedseriesofsystematicallyinterlinkedcloseand
conceptual replications. SRF facilitates testing alternative explanations associated with different AHs and thereby
increasestestseverityacrossabatteryoftests. Inthisway,SRFassesseswhetherthecorroborationofahypothesisis
conditionalonparticularAHs,andthusallowsforamoreobjectiveevaluationofitsempiricalsupportandwhether
posthocmodificationstothetheoryareprogressiveordegenerativeintheLakatosiansense. Finally,SRFhasseveral
advantagesoverrandomization-basedsystematicreplicationproposals,whichgenerallyassumeaproblematicneo-
operationalistapproachthatprescribesexploration-orientedstrategiesinconfirmatorycontexts.
Keywords: AuxiliaryHypotheses,Duhem-QuineThesis,EmpiricalUnderdetermination,Falsificationism,Adversarial
Collaboration
Introduction the differences in intelligence test scores represent a
true difference in cognitive abilities between various
Some of the problems that social and behavioral sci-
ethnic groups?”, “Does willpower draw on a finite sup-
ences tackle have far-reaching and serious implications
ply of resources that can dry up?”, “What are the main
in the real world. Among them one could list very
dimensions through which we form our impressions
diverse questions, such as “Is exposure to media vio-
aboutotherhumanbeings?”,“Areemotionsdistincten-
lence related to aggressive behavior and how?”, “Do
tities demonstrating natural-kind-like properties (e.g.
===== PAGE 2/19 =====
2
having clear neurological and physiological markers)?” inisolation. TheSystematicReplicationsFrameworkwe
Apart from all being socially very pertinent, substan- propose consists in logically connected series of close
tialnumbersofstudiesinvestigatedeachoftheseques- and conceptual replications and will provide a way to
tions. However, the similarities do not end here. Cu- increase the informativity of non-corroborative results
riously enough, even after so much resource has been and thereby effectively reduce the ambiguity of falsifi-
invested in the empirical investigation of these almost- cation.1
too-relevantproblems,nothingmuchisaccomplishedin
termsofarrivingatclear,definitiveanswers(seeBarrett Duhem-Quine Thesis and the ambiguity of falsifica-
etal., 2019; Ellemersetal., 2020; Hilgardetal., 2017; tion
Lin et al., 2020; Wicherts et al., 2010). If we take the
Falsificationist methods are widely regarded by the
firstinthelistasanexample,webegantheinquirywith
scientific community as the most useful tools in test-
threelogicalpossibilitiesregardinghowmediaviolence
ing the comparative merits of theoretical claims (Di-
can influence aggression, namely: 1) it increases ag-
enes, 2008; Hull, 1999; LeBel et al., 2017; Tarantola,
gression,2)itdecreasesaggression,3)itdoesnotaffect
2006). In essence, the falsificationist strategy consists
aggression. After decades of investigation, endless dis-
in deriving empirical predictions (P) from a theory (T)
cussions, and what seems to be a yearly updated series
andtosearchforinstancesthatcontradictthesepredic-
ofconflictingmeta-analyses,onecanarguethatweare
tionsandtherebyrefutethetheoryfromwhichtheyare
notfarfromwherewestarted(Hilgardetal.,2017).
derivedviamodustollens: (T→P∧¬P)→¬T. Itisbuilt
This is a depressing state for any scientific discipline
on the fundamental asymmetry between confirmation
tobein,astheaimofscienceisnottoaccumulate(con-
and falsification: While acquiring supportive evidence
tradicting)observationsforitsownsake,buttoexplain
is trivial and even a huge number of observations do
howtheuniverseworksortomakereliablepredictions
not give us sufficient reason to accept a theory, a sin-
aboutitsfuturestates(Lakatos,1978). Besides,thesci-
gle counterevidence is (at least potentially) enough to
entificenterprisediffersfromothertypesofnomothetic
rejectit(Popper,2002b).
inquiry(e.g.,mythological,philosophical)inthatitputs
However,thisstraightforwardfalsificationiststrategy
itspostulationstoempiricaltestsinthehopeofeventu-
is complicated by the fact that theories do not logically
ally selecting theories with higher verisimilitude (Pop-
imply any testable predictions. This is because theo-
per,2002a). Researchprogramsordisciplineswhichfail
retical terms themselves are not observable (only their
inthesetasksofprovidingvalidexplanationsandaccu-
empiricalinstancesare),andtheoreticaltermsandtheir
rate predictions or weeding out the bad seeds would
empirical instances are not directly linked (Woodward,
have a hard time maintaining their scientific credibility
1989). So,astheDuhem-QuineThesis(DQT)famously
in the long run. This problematic situation has been
propounds, scientific theories or hypotheses have em-
going on for a considerably long time in the social and
piricalconsequencesonlyinconjunctionwithotherhy-
behavioral sciences, which renders an old observation
potheses or background assumptions (Laudan, 1990)
of Meehl still relevant; namely, that theoretical claims
that help bridging theoretical terms to their empirical
often do not die normal deaths at the hands of em-
instances. For example, for testing a theory concerning
pirical evidence but are discontinued due to a sheer
intelligenceandsocialclasslink,youfirstneedtodefine
loss of interest (Meehl, 1978). Observing this state,
how intelligence and social class look like in the real
Lakatosmaintaineddecadesagothatmosttheorizingin
world and doing that requires you to make certain as-
thesocialsciencesrisksmakingmerelypseudo-scientific
sumptions(i.e.,auxiliaryhypotheses)regardingthena-
progress(Lakatos,1978,p. 88-9,n. 3-4).
tureoftheseabstracttheoreticalconstructs. These“aux-
Any entity that experiences such a crisis of (self-
iliary”hypotheses(AH)rangefromvariousassumptions
)confidencehaseveryrighttoquestionitscoreassump-
regardingthequalitiesandtheexecutionoftheresearch
tions. Given the seriousness of the issue, there might
designandthereliabilityoftheinstrumentsbeingused,
indeedbegreatvalueinreflectingontheage-oldprob-
theassessmentand/orcreationoftheexperimentalcon-
lemsoftheestablishednormsofscientificinquiry. Here,
ditions, the accuracy of the measurements, the validity
we investigate how the current undesirable state is re-
oftheoperationalizationsofthetheoreticaltermslinked
lated to the problem of empirical underdetermination
in the main hypothesis, to the implications of previous
and its disproportionately detrimental effects in the so-
cialandbehavioralsciences. Wethendiscusshowclose 1The present paper offers a methodological solution to
and conceptual replications can be employed to miti- the problem of underdetermination from a sophisticated
gate different aspects of underdetermination, and why methodologicalfalsificationistperspective. Forother, suchas
theymightevenaggravatetheproblemwhenconducted Bayesian,proposalsfordealingwithunderdetermination,see
e.g.,HolcombeandGershman,2018;Strevens,2001.
===== PAGE 3/19 =====
3
theories and the ceteris paribus clause (i.e., all other betrueorvalid.
things being equal). These assumptions are not nec- Popper was aware of the necessity of auxiliary hy-
essarily directly derivable from the main theory to be potheses and the difficulties they present whenever we
tested. Consequently, it is impossible to test a theoreti- try to falsify a theoretical claim. However, Popper rel-
cal hypothesis in isolation. For this reason, falsification egates AHs to unproblematic background knowledge,
is necessarily ambiguous. That is, it cannot be ascer- whichthescientistneedstodemarcatefromthetheory
tained from a single test if the hypothesis under test under test by independently testing and corroborating
or one or more of the auxiliary hypotheses should bear them and taking certain methodological decisions (see
the burden of falsification (see Duhem, 1954, p. 187; e.g., Churchland, 1975; Lakatos, 1978; Popper, 2002a,
Quine,1969,p. 79;alsoStrevens,2001,p. 516).2 Like- p. 238-239; Popper, 2002b, sections 19-20 and p. 23-
wise, Lakatos maintained that absolute falsification is 28;UygunTunçetal.,2023). WhilePopperianmethod-
impossible, because in the face of a failed prediction, ologicalfalsificationismdoesnotdenytheroleofAHsin
thetargetofthemodustollenscanalwaysbeshiftedto- derivingempiricalpredictionsfromtheories,itsuggests
wards the auxiliary hypotheses and away from the the- that we set up our investigation so that there would
ory(Lakatos,1978,p. 18-19;seealsoPopper,2002b,p. be little reason to regard them as part of the empirical
20). testsituation(forinstance, themeasuresmightbewell
In the context of single hypothesis testing, we have validated in other independent studies, so even when
attheminimumtwosuchauxiliaryhypotheses,because they are in the test bundle, they can be considered as
the simplest falsifiable scientific proposition hypothe- not contributing to underdetermination). Then we can
sizes a certain relation (e.g. causal or correlational) be in a position to regard the empirical test as a fight
between two terms (say, X → Y). More precisely, we exclusively between a theoretical claim and evidence.
needahypothesis(say,AH )thatlinksthetheoretical Accordingly, methodological falsificationism condemns
pre
predictor X (e.g., ’intelligence’) to the observable pre- the allocation of blame to AHs after a failed test as an
t
dictor X (e.g., ’academic aptitude, measured through inadmissibleadhocmaneuver.
o
SAT scores’) and another hypothesis (say, AH ) that In the social and behavioral sciences, depending on
out
links the theoretical outcome Y (e.g., ’social class’) to the state of a particular literature or the nature of the
t
theobservationaloutcomeY (e.g.,’controlovermeans construct, it may sometimes be the case that some AHs
o
ofproduction,measuredthroughoccupation’). or their constituent assumptions are preferable to their
When we reformulate the modus tollens of falsifi- alternatives on independently established theoretical
cation accordingly, our antecedent clause in the first grounds, in reference to widely endorsed disciplinary
premise becomes a bundle containing at least three el- norms or for directly observational reasons. For in-
ements (TH, AH , AH ). If the test results are in dis- stance,inasubsequentreplicationofthe"elderly-slow"
pre out
agreement with our prediction, then the conclusion of priming effect (Doyen et al., 2012), the outcome vari-
the modus tollens inference would be a negation of the able (walking speed as leaving the lab) was measured
whole bundle. Thus, the ambiguity of falsification as via sensors instead of handheld stopwatches that were
impliedbytheDQTcanbeexpressedminimallyassuch: usedintheoriginalstudy(Barghetal.,1996). Clearly,it
¬THor¬AH or¬AH (seeFigure1). Inthisregard, ispossibletoinferontheoreticalandempiricalgrounds
pre out
to every isolated empirical test we pose at least three thatsensorsofferhigherprecisionasameasurementin-
largely independent questions such as, (i) "Does intel- strument than handheld stopwatches. Therefore, the
ligence predict social class?", (ii) "Do SAT scores mea- particularcomponentoftheAH concerningthenovel
out
sure intelligence?", and (iii) "Does occupation capture methodofmeasurement(i.e.,theaccuracyoflasersen-
socialclass?". Andtoallwereceivejustasingleanswer. sors)canbemoreeasilyregardedasan“unproblematic
Moreover, while the AH and AH can be treated as backgroundassumption.”
pre out
unitaryhypothesesforsimplicity,theyactuallyconsistin
twosetsofvariousassumptions(forinstance,theAH 2This problem is also called “holist” underdetermination
pre
(Stanford, 2017). Empirical underdetermination of theories
set comprises “Academic aptitude reflects intelligence,”
also has serious implications for the issue of theory choice,
“SAT scores have adequate reliability,” “Test familiarity
sincethesamebodyofevidencecansupportalternativethe-
is not an issue” etc.). Different assumptions that con-
oriesequally,whichiscustomarilycalled“contrastive”under-
stitute an AH set may become individually highly rele-
determination. Thispaperaddressesempiricalunderdetermi-
vant in designing and interpreting empirical tests and nationonlyasitbearsonfalsification.
replication studies. Thus, when speaking of the falsity
orinvalidity ofan AH set, we alsohaveto takeintoac-
countthatsomeofitsconstituentassumptionsmaystill
===== PAGE 4/19 =====
4
Figure1. TestingabundleconsistingofTH andAHs
Theoretical Hypothesis
(TH)
X Y
Theo Theo
Predictor Outcome
Auxiliary Auxiliary
Hypotheses Hypotheses
(AH set) (AH set)
pre out
Observable
X Y Relationships
Obsr Obsr
Non-observable
Empirical Test Relationships
Not-so-unproblematicbackgroundassumptions testable due to being heavily theory-laden or difficult
to experimentally isolate (Meehl, 1978; 1990). Conse-
However, promoting the components of AH and
pre quently, often no particular operationalization qualita-
AH sets to the rank of unproblematic background as-
out tively stands out. Moreover, in these disciplines, the-
sumptions is often a quite formidable task. For ex-
oretical terms are often vague (Green, 2019; Meehl,
ample, it might be the case that the suspect AHs are
1978; 1990), value-laden (Weber, 2017), and hard to
not of the sort that can be independently corroborated
formalize (Eronen and Romeijn, 2020) or to seman-
(cf. Rowbottom, 2010) or not embedded in some well-
tically close (MacCorquodale and Meehl, 1948). To-
established theory or widely accepted theory of mea-
gether with the fact that researchers have less control
surement (See e.g. Muthukrishna and Henrich, 2019.
ontheenvironmentofinquiry,thisimpliesthathypoth-
The problem is further complicated by the possibility
esized relationships can be expected to be spatiotem-
that an AH can receive blame not merely to save a the-
porally less reliable (Leonelli, 2018), and covered in
ory from refutation by an ad hoc maneuver, but rightly
ambient noise (i.e., crud factor; see Orben and Lak-
so(Lakatos,1978);forinstance,whenamalfunctioning
ens, 2020). Moreover, in the absence of a strong the-
instrumentorcoincidentalchoiceofanextremesample
ory of measurement that is informed by the dominant
preventthepredictedeffectfrombeingrealized.
paradigm of the given scientific discipline (Muthukr-
In the social and behavioral sciences, treating AHs
ishna and Henrich, 2019), the selection of AHs is usu-
as unproblematic background assumptions is particu-
allyguidedbytheassumptionsoftheverytheorythatis
larly difficult, and consequently the implications of the
put into test. Consequently, each contending approach
DQTareparticularlyrelevantandcrucial(Meehl,1978;
develops its own measurement devices regarding the
1990). For several reasons we need to presume that
same phenomenon, heeding to their own theoretical
problematic AHs nearly always enter the test along
postulations. Attestingtothethreatthissituationposes
with the main theoretical hypothesis (Meehl, 1990).
for the validity of scientific inferences, it has recently
Firstly, in the social and behavioral sciences the theo-
beenshownthatthedifferencesinresearchteams’pref-
riesaresolooselyorganizedthattheydonotsaymuch
erences of basic design elements drastically influence
about how the measurements should be (Folger, 1989;
theeffectsobservedforthesametheoreticalhypotheses
Meehl,1978). Secondly,AHsareseldomindependently
(Landyetal.,2020). Forallthesereasons,theproblem
===== PAGE 5/19 =====
5
of underdetermination is usually more acute in social beregardedastheultimatetestofahypothesis(Shadish
andbehavioralsciences. et al., 2002; Stroebe and Strack, 2014). Still others
havearguedagainsttheveryassociationbetweenrepli-
The problem of underdetermination as regards cability and the truth (or verisimilitude) of theoretical
replicationstudies claims,maintainingthatstudieswithfalseresultsmight
behighlyreplicable(e.g.,Devezeretal.,2021;Hacking,
It can be argued that one of the main functions of
1992;Mayo,2018;Shadishetal.,2002).
replicationstudieshasalwaysbeentacklingvariousas-
We think that the main methodological function of
pects of the problem of underdetermination. While
both close and conceptual replications is to reduce the
close replications test auxiliary hypotheses such as the
epistemicrisksassociatedwiththeproblemofunderde-
reliability of the instruments or that the original find-
termination. However, each typeof replicationiseffec-
ingisnotastatisticalfluke,conceptualreplicationstest
tive in investigating only particular types of alternative
otherauxiliariessuchastheonesthatpertaintotheop-
explanationsassociatedwithproblematicAHs. Inorder
erationalizationofvariablesofinterest. Thisisarguably
to establish a stronger connection between the theory
one of the main reasons why the scientific community
and its test, we need to garner the advantages of both
cametoregardreplicationsasa“cornerstoneofscience”
close and conceptual replications while controlling for
(Moonesinghe et al., 2007; Simons, 2014) or even as
their respective weaknesses. In this way, it can be pos-
the"goldstandard"(Bonett,2012).
sible to dissociate the TH and the AHs to a certain ex-
However, the results of single replication studies are
tentbyorganizingreplicationsintoapre-plannedseries
similarly ambiguous because they too rely on isolated
whose parts are designed so as to systematically vary
tests to rule out at least three independent hypotheses
the AHs associated with predictor and outcome vari-
atonce(i.e.,thoseassociatedwiththeAH ,theAH ,
pre out
ables.
and the TH), and there is no way to reach a definitive
answer as to which of the three was corroborated or
SystematicReplicationsFramework
disconfirmedby theobservation. Itis arguedthatfalsi-
fiabilitygoeshandinhandwithreplicability(e.g.,Earp The THs under examination in the social and behav-
and Trafimow, 2015). But if replications also at best ioralsciencesoftenaresubmergedinacomplexbundle
only diagnose the truth value of the TH & AHs bundle of potentially confounding AHs which cannot be rele-
withoutindicatingwhethertheTHitselforanynumber gated to unproblematic background knowledge due to
of AHs are chiefly responsible for the observed results, the reasons mentioned in the previous sections. In this
theymightevenaggravatetheambiguityoffalsification. kindofsituations,itisstillpossibletoinvestigatecondi-
Althoughnotnecessarilyaddressingtheimplications tionalrelationshipsbetweenparticulartheoreticalmod-
oftheDQT,similarargumentshavealreadybeenvoiced els(i.e.,consistingofTH,AH ,AH )andtestresults.
pre out
with respect to close and conceptual replications. For Learningmoreabouttheserelationshipswouldallowus
instance, conceptual replications, and particularly the to incrementally identify the most problematic parts of
onesthatyieldnon-corroborativeresults,arepurported the complex bundle of hypotheses under examination.
toberelativelyuninformativeandsusceptibletobeeas- This, in turn, would significantly reduce the ambigu-
ily brushed aside by the original author (Nosek et al., ity of falsification due to underdetermination. Conse-
2012; Pashler and Harris, 2012), since it is not clear if quently,hypothesistestsinsocialandbehavioralscience
the differences between the original study and replica- wouldbecomemuchmoreinformative.
tions indicate a problem with the TH or the AHs in the Thehypothesistestingandreplicationframeworkwe
replication study. Due to theproblem ofunderdetermi- propose (Systematic Replications Framework or SRF)
nation, unsuccessful close replications also cannot pro- is a methodological procedure for investigating such
videthescientificcommunitywithdefinitiveanswersre- conditional relationships. SRF consists in a systemati-
gardingwhichelementinthetestbundleisresponsible cally organized series of replications that function col-
for the results, as the discussions about hidden moder- lectively as a single research line. The main idea be-
ators, sampling characteristics and sundry other differ- hind SRF is coordinating replication studies in such a
ences between the original and replication studies fol- waythattheyrevealifthecorroborationoftheTHisre-
lowing failed close replications illustrate (see Stroebe, stricted to particular theoretical models with particular
2019forasummary). Theproblemofunderdetermina- AHsintheAH andAH sets. Byrevealingsuchcon-
pre out
tionisnotdissolvedwhenclosereplicationattemptsare ditional relationships, it is also possible to track how a
successful either, since the observed effect might be an theoryrespondstorecalcitrantinstances,soSRFisalso
artefact of particular operationalizations of the predic- atoolforassessingifatheoryacquiresaprogressiveor
torsandoutcomes,andhenceclosereplicationscannot degenerative character over time (see Lakatos, 1978).
===== PAGE 6/19 =====
6
This is an achievable aim, we believe, because in each all crucially influential in testing a TH. It is such hy-
(close and conceptual) replication study only a limited potheses that comprise the AH and AH sets. The
pre out
number of AHs in the AH and AH sets are varied. designelements(includingthestatisticalanalysisstrat-
pre out
By tracking how the results change in tandem with the egy)featuredinawell-writtenmethodssectionofasci-
exact set of AHs utilized in each individual replication, entificpapercanalsobethoughtasspecifyingtheAH
pre
wecansignificantlyreduceunderdetermination. andAH sets.
out
A practical example of how the AH and AH
pre out
TheAH pre andAH out sets sets diverge from other AHs that fall under the ceteris
paribus clause can be found in the very idea of close
SinceselectingtheAHstobevariedintheAH and
pre
replications. It has been rightly pointed out that no
AH sets is is at the heart of this strategy, we need to
out
close replication is an exact copy of an original study
explicate in more detail what we mean by these sets
(i.e., it is not possible that all AHs are the same in two
before we lay out SRF. In any hypothesis testing situa-
different studies), yet close replications still serve as
tion, the number of AHs is potentially infinite (Quine,
an important part of cumulative science because of the
1951; Lakatos, 1978). So, accounting for all of them is
roletheyplayinestablishingintersubjectiveagreements
practicallyunattainable. Forexample, inthesocialand
on facts (Brandt et al., 2014). Close replications can
behavioral sciences (depending on the particular ques-
playthisroledespitebeing“different”fromtheoriginal
tions investigated) it is usually assumed that the exact
study in many different ways, because for the theoreti-
color of the lab walls, the elevation of the lab above
calmodelunderinvestigationonlytheTHandtheAH
thesealevel, theexactdesignofthechairsusedbythe pre
and AH sets are expected to matter, while the other
subjects, the humidity of the room that the study takes out
AHs under the ceteris paribus clause are not. So, even
place or many other minute details do not significantly
ifexactresemblancebetweentheoriginalandtherepli-
influence the study outcomes. It would be a Herculean
cation study is beyond the bounds of possibility, close
task even to identify each and every one of such hy-
replications can establish intersubjective testability by
potheses,anditisimpossibletomakeeventhesimplest
reiteratingtheelementsthatwereexpectedtomatterin
observationintheabsenceofthem. Therefore, sincein
theoriginalstudy(i.e.,theAH andAH sets).
both original and replication studies we are potentially pre out
From a methodological perspective, the prob-
dealingwithaninfinitenumberofAHs,wecannotprac-
lem of underdetermination can be conceived as a
ticallykeeptrackofallAHsthatarealtered. Therefore,
(mis)specification problem regarding the AH and
one might think that isolating the effect of individual pre
AH sets. That is, in a perfectly specified theoretical
AHs by monitoring the changes in AH sets in the orig- out
model (in terms of the AH and AH sets and the
inal and replication studies is a task doomed from the pre out
ceteris paribus clause) only the TH can be held to ac-
start.
countforthetestresults. However,thisisalmostnever
However, among the plethora of different AHs ex-
the case. Firstly, one or more elements in the AH
isting in a hypothesis test only a certain subgroup of pre
and AH sets can be false, invalid or in conflict with
AHscanbeexpectedtomeaningfullyimpacttheresults. out
other elements. Secondly, nontrivial AHs might be er-
ThereareinfinitelymanyotherAHsthatpresumablydo
roneouslyrelegated tothe ceterisparibus clausebythe
not exert a meaningful enough influence on the results
theoreticalmodel. Thislatterkindofmisspecificationis
duetobeingcompletelyinconsequential,oronlybarely
always a logical possibility no matter how severely we
consequential so that their influence can be safely ig-
test our theoretical model. What this means is that the
nored to a certain extent, or coinciding with opposing
possibilityofmisspecificationcanneverbeconclusively
factors that always nullify the potential effect, and so
excluded. Thatbeingsaid,byprobingthesetwosources
forth. AHs that are thought to belong this category are
ofmisspecificationwecansignificantlydiminishthede-
relegated to the ceteris paribus clause (Meehl, 1978).
greesofunderdetermination.
As long as they are deemed to belong to the ceteris
We can utilize mainly three types of probes in inves-
paribus clause, they are not explicitly stated, and thus
tigating the possibility of misspecification, whereby we
arenottestedand(tentatively)acceptedastheyare.
would decrease the epistemic risks due to underdeter-
TheremainingAHssuchasthereliabilityofthemea-
mination and increase test severity: 1) The theoretical
sures used in the study, whether the variables are op-
model(i.e.,theTHandtheAH andAH sets)should
erationalized in a way that is true to the theoretical pre out
beassociatedwithrelativelystableobservations,2)the
construct (i.e., accurate and exhaustive) and various
boundaryconditionsofatheorydefinedbytheparticu-
otherfactorsthatareassociatedwithsampleandtreat-
larAH andAH setsshouldnotbetoolimiting, and
ments/measures interactions (e.g., if measures are ap- pre out
3)ifcertainAHsarefeaturedintheAH andAH sets
propriatetobeusedinaparticularculturalcontext)are pre out
===== PAGE 7/19 =====
7
ofacontendingtheorywhiletheywererelegatedtothe AHs. Therefore,inthecontextofSRF,ifweobtaincon-
ceteris paribus clause in another theory, the difference flicting results between the original study and its close
should be accounted for. We can call these the stability replications, the possible implications are: 1) the non-
probe, boundary conditions probe, and the contending corroborativefindingsinthereplicationareduetotype
theories probe. Next, we describe how SRF proceeds 2 error (the higher powered the close replications are
andexaminehowthethreemisspecificationprobesare the less chance that this is true), 2) theoretical model
usedinSRFviasystematicallyorganizedcloseandcon- intheoriginalstudyismisspecifiedintermsofAHsthat
ceptualreplications. arerelegatedtotheceterisparibusclauseor3)theorig-
inal corroborative finding was due to type 1 error and
SRF:Theprocedure thetheoreticalmodeliswrong.
In the face of non-corroborative replications, if the
SRFisatestingframeworkwith6distinctsteps. The
implication 1 is deemed tenable (i.e., type 2 error in
first and the second steps consist in an original study
replication), then further replications should be con-
and its close replications. Next, series of conceptual
ducted. If implication 2 is thought to have more cred-
replications are conducted for testing the AH and
pre
ibility (i.e., the AH and AH sets are misspecified),
AH sets which are also followed by associated close pre out
out
the route one should take is reformulating the theoret-
replications (steps 3 to 6). A visual summary of SRF
ical model with additional elements in the AH and
canbeseeninFigure2.3 Thefigurehastwoparts. The pre
AH sets (e.g., by either describing the limiting in-
upperpartillustrateshowobservablevariablesarealter- out
stances or defining the hidden moderators). If impli-
natedindifferentstepsforcomparingtheeffectsofindi-
cation 3 is thought to be more plausible (i.e., the the-
vidualAHelementsintheAH andAH setsspecified
pre out
oretical model is wrong), then seriously modifying or
by the theoretical model. In the first 2 steps, the same
abandoningthetheoreticalmodelshouldbeconsidered.
sets of AH and AH are being tested with different
pre out
IncaseswheremodificationstakeplaceintheTHorthe
samples. Fromstep3tostep6,theAH andAH sets
pre out
AH andAH setstheprocessshouldstartafreshfrom
are varied. The lower part of the figure describes how pre out
theverybeginning.
this variation of the AH and AH sets is done in de-
pre out
However,forthereasonswediscussedsofar,neither
tail. Thelowercaselettersinthelowerpartofthefigure
success nor failure in close replications provides suffi-
standforindividualauxiliaryhypothesesthatconstitute
cient evidence for reaching a verdict on the corrobo-
the AH and AH sets. The sets are represented as
pre out
ration of a TH. Due to misspecifications in the model
finiteVenndiagramsandarepresentationoftheceteris
with respect to the AHs, artefactual findings might be
paribusclauseisomittedforthesakeofsimplicity. The
perfectly replicable or a true effect might persistently
intersectionrepresentsthe AHsthatarenotdirectlyre-
elude us. This is also true where a TH seems to be
lated to the predictor or outcome variables but pertain
repeatedly confirmed by a finding which it completely
to the test as a whole, such as the assumptions of the
misrepresents, such as the theory of phlogiston which
statistical model (e.g., sampling related assumptions).
Highlightedlowerlettersstandfortheelementsthatare 3A decision guide explicating in more detail how to pro-
variedinthatstep. ceed in different research scenarios can be found in the sup-
SRF starts with close replications of an original find- plementarymaterials.
ing and close replications are conducted in 3 out of 6 4Itcanbesuggestedthatthe“skillorexpertiseoftherepli-
steps in the procedure. Close replications are indis- cators”mightnotbeaseasilydismissibleasanunreliableaux-
pensable for scrutinizing if the theoretical model (i.e., iliary hypothesis as something like “flair.” Admittedly, most
the TH and the AH and AH sets) is associated with scientific studies require expertise in a particular method or
pre out
relatively stable observations (Schmidt, 2016; Simons, domain of research to be properly conducted. That being
said, if one assumes that intersubjective testability or repli-
2014). So, close replications correspond to the stabil-
cabilityisadesirablepropertyforconfirmatoryresearch, the
ity probe that we introduced earlier. Stability probes
term“skill”canbeunderstoodonlyasobjectivelydefinedade-
investigateifthetheoreticalmodelintheoriginalstudy
quateexperienceandtraining,whichmightamounttohaving
erroneouslyrelegatedsomepotentiallyproblematicAHs
an academic qualification (e.g., a degree in a relevant field)
(e.g., hidden moderators, cultural context dependency,
ordemonstrableexpertiseincertaintechniques(e.g.,demon-
“flair” or expertise of the researcher who conducts the strable previous experience with the online experiment soft-
study4)intotheceterisparibusclause,sothereplication ware). Understood thus, however, “lack of skill” explanation
study unintendedly varied it and ended up making dif- cannot be justifiably applied to other researchers who have
ferent observations than the original study. Investigat- been conducting studies in the same field, if one does not
ing if a theoretical model can generate stable observa- foregotheclaimforintersubjectivetestabilityandthusobjec-
tions is also a test for statistical (i.e., sampling related) tivityaltogether.
===== PAGE 8/19 =====
8
Figure2. TheSystematicReplicationsFramework
Step 1. The Original Test Step 2. Close Replications
Theoretical Theoretical
Hypothesis (TH) Hypothesis (TH)
X Y X Y
Theo Theo Theo Theo
Predictor Outcome Predictor Outcome
Auxiliary Auxiliary Auxiliary Auxiliary
Hypotheses Hypotheses Hypotheses Hypotheses
set 1 set 1 set 1 set 1
X Y X Y
Obs1α Obs1α Obs1β→ω Obs1β→ω
Step 3&4. Conceptual Replications testing Step 5&6. Conceptual Replications testing
Predictor AH sets Outcome AH sets
Theoretical Theoretical
Hypothesis (TH) Hypothesis (TH)
X Y X Y
Theo Theo Theo Theo
Predictor Outcome Predictor Outcome
Auxiliary Auxiliary Auxiliary Auxiliary
Hypotheses Hypotheses Hypotheses Hypotheses
set 2→n set 1 set 1 set 2→n
X Y X Y
Obs2→n Obs1 Obs1 Obs2→n
1. Original Study 2. Close Replication 3. Conceptual Replications testing AHpre sets
AHpre set AHout set AHpre set AHout set AHpre set AHout set AHpre set AHout set
.b .x .b .x .n .x .o .x
.a .a .a .a
.k .y .l .y .k .y .k .y
.c .z .c .z .m .z .m .z
4.Close Replication 5. Conceptual Replications testing AHout sets 6. Close Replication
AHpre set AHout set AHpre set AHout set AHpre set AHout set AHpre set AHout set
.o .x .b .x .b .x .b .x
.a .a .a .a
.l .y .k .p .k .p .l .p
.m .z .c .r .c .q .c .q
mistook oxygen for dephlogisticated air (Trafimow and ofclosereplicationswouldfailatidentifyingwhichAHs
Earp,2016). Ifthisisthecase,evenaninfinitenumber areerroneouslyincludedinorexcludedfromtheAH
pre
===== PAGE 9/19 =====
9
and AH sets. To do that, it is necessary to conduct in relation to individual AH elements. So, for example,
out
further tests that connect close and conceptual replica- if an AH associated with a particular manipulation is
tions in a logically systematic way, which would allow suspectedtobechieflyresponsibleforthepreviousfind-
the researchers to identify if or to what extent the cor- ings(e.g.,usinghandheldwatchesinsteadoflasersen-
roboration of the TH is conditional on particular AH sorsinaprimingexperiment),thenthevariationshould
pre
andAH sets. be targeted at that hypothesis. Examining probable al-
out
This is practicable if conceptualreplications are con- ternativeexplanationsassociatedwithdifferentAHsets
ducted with the aim that they will have consequences wouldbeausefulmethodforselectingthemostsevere
for distinct AHs in the AH and AH sets. If either test available at the time and thus it would potentially
pre out
an element in the the AH or the AH set is changed providethestrongestcorroborationfortheTH.
pre out
while the elements in the other set are kept constant, Another way to increase the test severity by deter-
wecantrackchangesintheresultstodiscernwhichset mining the most problematic AHs in the testing situa-
orelementmaybechieflyresponsibleforthedifference. tion and isolating their effects in subsequent tests is to
Forexample,aresearchercanfirstkeeptheoperational- comparethetheoreticalmodelputforwardbyonethe-
ization of the predictor variable the same (i.e., keeping orytothetheoreticalmodelsofthecontendingtheories.
AH constant) while using various different outcome That is, when particular AHs that are unspecified (i.e.,
pre1
variables (i.e., varying AH sets: AH → n). In the relegated to the ceteris paribus clause) in a theoretical
out out2
next step, a similar diversification procedure is applied model are included in the explicit AH and AH sets
pre out
to the variable that was kept constant in the previous ofacontendingtheoryascrucialfactorsfortheinvesti-
step(i.e.,varyingAH sets: AH →n),andthistime gated effect, these particular AHs should be considered
pre pre2
the variable that was being varied in the previous step problematic and further investigated. This is the con-
iskeptconstant(i.e.,keepingAH constant). Ifathe- tending theories probe we mentioned earlier. The ba-
out1
oreticalclaimsurvivesallthesestepswithoutbeingfal- sicideabehindthisprobeisthattheoriesmightdisplay
sified,itcanbesaidthatitisseverelytestedandlargely self-servingbiasinselectingtheparticularAHstobein-
corroborated. When it faces mixed results, SRF allows cluded in AH and AH sets. Utilizing the distinct
pre out
researchers to relatively isolate the effects of different preferencesofcontestingtheoriesfornontrivial,explic-
AHs (i.e., different elements in AH sets), and to see if itlyspecifiedAHscanofferacost-effectivewaytotackle
theirTHisconditionalonparticularoperationalizations with the self-serving selection of AHs to be included in
(i.e.,particularAH orAH sets). thetheoreticalmodel.
pre out
Step 3 and 5 in SRF feature such an investigation of Inthisregard, SRFwillfindaparticularlysignificant
conditional relationships. This is the boundary condi- and effective application in the case of contested theo-
tions probe we introduced earlier. It serves to identify reticalclaimsandquestions,especiallyifitisemployed
conditional relationships between the TH and the ele- asaframeworkforhypothesistestingthroughadversar-
ments of the AH or AH sets, which might signifi- ial collaboration. Contested questions such as the ones
pre out
cantly delimit the application of the TH if not directly we mentioned in the beginning are extremely difficult
undermine it. That being said, a TH whose corrobo- to definitively answer in the present context, because
rationisstrictlydependentonparticularAH orAH the scientific community lacks clear criteria for falsify-
pre out
setswouldhaveonlyaverylimitedtheoreticalandprac- ing points of view and disagrees on key methodologi-
ticaluse. cal issues—a situation which comes close to what Tet-
Wewouldliketoemphasizeherethatthesystematic lock described as an “epistemic hell” (2006). The idea
variation in the AH sets is not envisioned to be a ran- of adversarial collaboration has been articulated a few
domprocessinSRF.TheAH setstobetestedshouldbe times in the recent past (Tetlock, 2006; Mellers et al.,
decided with a view to severely test the main hypothe- 2001) to organize empirical testing of such contested
sis (see Mayo, 2018). Test severity, in turn, is inversely questions. However, it did not find realization except
relatedtounderdetermination(OudeMaatman,2021): for a couple of cases (e.g., Bateman et al., 2005; Do-
The more there are probable alternative explanations hertyetal.,2019;Matzkeetal.,2015). Andevenwhen
oftheresultsinrelationtoindividualAH elements,the it did, the studies conducted as adversarial collabora-
less severe our test will be. Since underdetermination tions have been isolated tests, so they were plagued
is a relative matter and admits of degrees (Oude Maat- with the same problem of underdetermination we dis-
man, 2021), severity is also a relative property of tests cussed throughout. Adversarial collaborations are for
and can increase or decrease. Aiming for higher test resolvingdisputes,butthisveryproblemrendersithard
severity means in this context, then, to critically exam- toreacharationalconsensusonwhattheresultsmean
inethemostprobablealternativeexplanationsthatarise whentheyareundertakenforconductingisolatedtests
===== PAGE 10/19 =====
10
andparticularlyiftheyproducemixedresults(e.g.,Do- corroborated by the evidence in subsequent tests,
herty et al., 2019). However, in direct contrast to this, the TH should be discarded as a refuted theoretical
in the context of SRF adversarial collaborations would claim. While both conventionalist and methodological
facilitate an active confrontation of conflicting theories falsificationist strategies for tackling non-corroborative
inregardtowhichAHscanbesafelyrelegatedtothece- findings in conceptual replications are acceptable on
terisparibusclauseandwhichothersshouldbeseenas purely logical grounds, the latter is empirically more
a crucial part of the testing situation. In an SRF-based justifiable.
adversarial collaboration, even if the researchers can-
notreachconsensusregardingtheAH andAH sets, SRF, theory-ladenness, and the experimenter’s
pre out
they can at least agree on conditionals and thus reach regress
consensusintheappraisaloftheoutcomesofthewhole
Ultimately all decisions regarding which AHs are
scheme.
to be relegated to ceteris paribus clause are theory-
laden (See Kuhn, 1996), which might lead one to
Conventionalist and methodological falsificationist
think that all hypothesis tests are in a way circular.
strategies
That is, theories choose their own benchmarks, and
What happens when the TH faces a non- those benchmarks are used in testing theories, lead-
corroborative observation at any point during this ingtowhatHarryCollinscalls“experimenter’sregress”
procedure? A theoretical model is preferable to its (1992). What would make this problem intractable is
alternatives to the extent that it is proficient in solving the absence of theory-independent (i.e., external) epis-
the puzzles posed by non-corroborative instances (i.e., temicsuccesscriteria. Buildinguponearliersuggestions
“If the TH is true how can this anomalous case be concerningpiecemeal-testingandcalibration(Franklin,
explained?”). There are broadly two ways to deal with 1999, p.470-491), we believe regress problem is not
such puzzles; namely conventionalist and method- intractable and SRF provides a way out of this conun-
ological falsificationist strategies (see Popper, 2002b, drum. The three probes that we introduced above are
sections 19-20). The conventionalist strategy, on the precisely conceived as theory-independent methods for
one hand, is degenerative/deflationary in the sense investigatingtheorymisspecification. Firstly, whenthe-
that it involves taking the TH’s explanatory claim back ory misspecification is due to an erroneous relegation
from some classes of phenomena to save the theory ofsomecrucialAHstotheceterisparibusclause,diver-
fromrefutation(e.g.,fromtheTH“Allswansarewhite” gentresultsinclosereplicationscanbeanindicationof
one retreats to the claim that the whiteness-swanness suchunspecifiedAHs(e.g.,hiddenmoderators). Inthis
link envisioned by the TH only applies to swans living regard, the stability probe is not embedded in the the-
inIstanbul,orredefinesthecategory‘swan’sothatany ory under test and constitutes an external success cri-
other color would indicate a different species). The terion. Secondly, the boundary condition probe is by
methodological falsificationist strategy, on the other definitiontheory-independent,asitinvolvestestingthe
hand,involvescommitmenttothelevelofgeneralityto theory with AHs that were not included in the initial
which the TH initially put its claim on. That means, if theoreticalmodelspecifiedbythetheory. Consequently,
an unexpected observation is reported and the theory theboundaryconditionprobecanevenbeconceivedas
is still believed to have some merit, the observation a tool for generating incompatible observations for the
shouldbeassimilatedbyeitherappealingtothegreater theory. Thirdly,thecontendingtheoriesprobeisalready
theory (or theories) which the TH is dependent upon the most stringent test of theory-ladenness, since it in-
and proposing a testable hypothesis that explains the volvesemployingAHsthatarespecifiedbytherivalsof
discrepancy (e.g., irregularities in Uranus’ orbit with the theory under test. Thus, SRF is impervious to the
regard to Newton’s gravitational theory led to the criticism of theory-ladenness and circularity of testing
discovery of Neptune), or making some peripheral totheutmostextentthisispossible.
adjustments to the theory (e.g., when the temporal To summarize, SRF reduces the degrees of underde-
distribution of fossil records of different species do not termination and thereby the ambiguity of test results
lend support to the traditional gradualist approach in in original studies as well as in close and conceptual
Darwinian evolution, punctuated equilibrium model replications. Primarily, it allows for non-corroborative
was proposed), or demonstrating the existence of evidence to have differential implications for the com-
hidden moderators. That requires additional studies ponents of the TH & AHs bundle. Although empirical
(from step 3 to 6) to be conducted to test the new underdetermination may never be eliminated (i.e., we
theoretical model that introduces novel AHs into mayneverconduct“crucialtests”),itcantherebybere-
the AH or AH sets. If these responses fail to be duced to a sufficient degree that the scientific commu-
pre out
===== PAGE 11/19 =====
11
nitycanrationallyconvergeonaverdictoffalsification However, despite the superficial similarity, the un-
orhighcorroboration. Thiscanbeachievedbecauseby derlying philosophy of science and relatedly the con-
reducing the degree of underdetermination we can de- creteobjectivesofthesemethodsareverydifferentfrom
visemoreinformativetestsanddemarcatejustifiedpost those of SRF. First, SRF differs from the methods that
hocrevisionsoftheoriesfrommerelyadhocmaneuvers rely on randomization in regard to the role they assign
to save them from falsification. If research is planned toAHsinscience. Operationalism,whichlargelyconsti-
and executed in compliance with SRF, the community tutes the philosophical framework that randomization-
cantellwithsubstantiallyincreasedsafetywhenreject- based approaches operate in, purports that the mean-
ing a falsification leads to the discovery of new factors, ing of a concept is exhausted by the empirical justifica-
clarificationofconceptualrelationshipsortheimprove- tion provided for the existence of its referent (Bridg-
ment of measurement techniques, and when it comes man et al., 1927, p. 5). In other words, a concept
atthepriceoflosingexplanatoryandpredictivepower. consists in nothing but the set of operations used to
Thus, SRF facilitates factual and theoretical consensus empirically measure or manipulate its referent. Thus,
formation by increasing the informativity of hypothesis the set of operations is not a sign, more particularly an
tests. index, of a theoretical entity or property that is con-
In cases where it is not possible to achieve corrobo- ceptuallyrepresentedinaconstruct—operationsdonot
ration,SRFallowsdemarcatingonwhichpairingsfrom measure or manipulate anything beyond themselves.
possibleAH andAH setsthetruth-valueoftheTHis Randomization-basedapproachesremainfaithfultothe
pre out
conditional. In all cases, the confounding effects deriv- basic tenets of operationalism, but extend the defini-
ing from the AHs can be relatively isolated. Lastly, SRF tions of concepts (i.e., operational definitions) to all
canenabletoapproximatetoanidealtestofatheoreti- possible operationalizations, arguably in order to ad-
calhypothesiswithinthemethodologicalfalsificationist dress the surplus meaning problem.5 It is quite obvi-
paradigmbyembeddingalternativeoperationalizations ous that no particular operationalization can perfectly
and associated measurement approaches into a severe capture the underlying concept as each individual op-
testingframework(seeMayo,1997;2018). erationalization introduces some random and system-
atic error to the measurement, but operationalists as-
Alternative proposals and their underlying philoso- sume that collectively they can do the job. But it is
phiesofscience obviously a practical impossibility to identify, let alone
testeverypossibleoperationalizationofaconcept. How
The suggestion that tests should be logically inter-
can one, then, empirically capture a scientific concept
connectedmightnotappearentirelynewtothereader.
definitively? The solution offered to this problem by
Sidman(1960),forexample,usesthenotionofsystem-
randomization-based approaches is to “randomly” se-
atic replication. The idea behind Sidman’s systematic
lect a sample of operationalizations from an imagined
replication is that changing one particular research de-
universe, in the hope that the errors associated with
sign element at a time (such as the sampling strategy)
each operationalization would cancel each other out.
in successive studies can allow researchers to test the
This, in turn, would reveal the true nature of the links
internal consistency and generalizability of their origi-
betweenconcepts,freedfromtheconfoundingeffectsof
nalfindings. Lykken’s(1968)constructivereplicationis
different sets of operations. We can thus call the philo-
anotherexample,whereresearchersreplicatetheorigi-
sophical framework offered (though rather implicitly)
nalstudywithdifferentoperationalizationsofthesame
byrandomization-basedapproachesneo-operationalist.
constructs. By getting beyond the limitations of partic-
This neo-operationalism, however, does not really
ularoperationalizations,itissuggestedthatresearchers
address the problems of classical operationalism previ-
willbeabletotestthehypothesisof“realinterest;”that
ously raised by numerous critics. Among these, a quite
is, the hypothesis that links the theoretical constructs
serious one is the inherent circularity of how concepts
(hence the name “constructive” replication). There
and their measurements are conceived in the opera-
are other similar, more recent suggestions for design-
tionalistframework–atruechickenandaneggsituation
ingmeta-studies,whereindependentexperimentalvari-
(Bickhard, 2001). So, without first arriving at a defi-
ablesareindiscriminatelyrandomized(Baribaultetal.,
nition of a concept that incorporates test-independent
2018), or different operationalizations are introduced
as random factors into studies (Yarkoni, 2022; see also 5The surplus meaning problem is that no matter how
Barretal.,2013onrandomeffects). Triangulation,an- meticulously you devise the list of all the possible relevant
other concept, also indicates the need for diversifying operationalizations, it is logically and empirically impossible
andconnectingreplications(MunafòandDaveySmith, toruleoutthatthemeaningoftheconstructisnotexhausted
2018). bythem(seeLeahey,1980).
===== PAGE 12/19 =====
12
(i.e., non-operational) qualities, it is impossible to de- SRF as a severe testing procedure and a tool for as-
cide when and how different measurements can be sessingLakatosianprogressiveness
meaningfullygroupedintoaconcept(Vessonen,2021).
Following largely the sophisticated methodological
For example, the argument that intelligence is what in-
falsificationism of Lakatos (1978), SRF has a very dif-
telligenceteststestiscircular,sowithoutatheoryofin-
ferent idea about the role we should assign to AHs in
telligenceitisimpossibletodefinetheconstructintelli-
science. According to this view, theoretical statements
genceonlyusingtheexisting“measuresofintelligence”.
lendthemselvestoempiricaltestsonlywiththehelpof
The neo-operationalist thinking behind the
AHs,becausetheyconnectcoretheoreticalconceptsand
randomization-based approaches has its unique
relationships to observations. As auxiliary hypotheses,
problems as well. One of them is how to define
operationalizations do not substitute or collectively ex-
the universe of all possible operationalizations of a
haust theoretical concepts and relationships. AHs can
concept (classical operationalism limits the meaning of
also function as a protective belt that saves the core
a concept to established operations), which is actually
theory by taking the burden of falsification on them-
a problem more intractable than it first appears to be.
selves. The prevalence of one of these two different
Forexample,itmightnotbeidealtoincludeameasure
roles which AHs can play (i.e., increasing testability vs.
thatisknownforitspoorpsychometricqualitiesinthat
deflectingfalsification)canhelpusidentifyrespectively
universe just because of its connection to the concept
whether modifications to theories vis-à-vis accumulat-
(Köhler and Cortina, 2021). Or we can always (and
ing evidence are of a progressive or degenerative char-
often do) imagine that future researchers will come up
acter (see also Popper, 2002a, p. 240f.). In progres-
with a much better, previously unthought of measure
siveresearchprogrammes(consistingofsuccessivever-
ofaconceptthatwouldclearlywinoutoveritsexisting
sions of a theory), AHs predominantly increase empir-
alternatives (you may think of Popper’s black swan
ical content by increasing the explanatory and predic-
in terms of measurement). Therefore, the sampling
tive power, and hence generating more potential falsi-
at any given time might not be sufficiently random
fiersforthecoretheory,whileindegenerativeresearch
(it might be biased towards white swans/hypothesis-
programmestheyoftenserveacontent-decreasingfunc-
confirming measures) as the error associated with
tionbyputtingforwardadhocalternativeexplanations
these operationalizations are often systematic rather
that do not suggest any empirical discoveries or novel
than purely random. Thus, we can never be sure
research questions. Researchers may avoid falsification
whether the results obtained via existing operations
of the TH, on pain of losing explanatory or predictive
reflect the true underlying relationship between the
power and giving their research programme a degen-
concepts. It is particularly problematic to cluster good
erative character, by continuously refining its terms ac-
and bad operationalizations together, thinking that
cording to whether particular AHs yield corroborative
the associated errors are always normally distributed
or non-corroborative results, for instance by delimiting
and will cancel each other out if random selection is
the boundary conditions of the TH to a pair of oper-
applied.
ationalizations that work (see also Laudan, 1990, p.
Furthermore, randomization-based approaches can
276). Such refinements often result in decreasing the
be said to adhere to a kind of thinking that share pe-
theory’s scope, precision or narrowing its semantic ref-
culiarly many features with enumerative induction. As
erence, and consequently diminishes its empirical sup-
inenumerativeinduction,thenumberofconfirmingin-
port and makes it increasingly less rational to stick to
stanceswillbeinterpretedasthemagnitudeofsupport-
it.
ing evidence for the conclusions reached. Still more
Using an earlier distinction that we made regarding
problematically, mistakenly believing in the possibility
thepossible“solutions”inthefaceofnon-corroborating
of defining a universe of operationalizations and in the
evidence, conventionaliststrategiesareassociatedwith
effectivenessofrandomlyselectingasetofoperational-
degenerative research programmes while methodolog-
izations in eliminating the error associated with them,
ical falsifiactionist strategies are associated with pro-
theseapproachesmightleadresearcherstoafalsesense
gressive research programmes. In this regard, SRF is
of certainty regarding the “true nature” of the relation-
alsoamethodforidentifyingifandtowhatextentare-
shipsbetweenconcepts. Inthissense,theseapproaches
searchprogrammecanbedeemedprogressive,bytrack-
seem to prescribe a practice of enumerative induction
ing how the researchers respond to non-corroborative
onsteroids,soPopper’slogicalcriticismsofverification-
results(seethesupplementarymaterialsforamorede-
ism(2002b,p. 1-7;133-208)applyevenmorestrongly
tailed exposition). If (or to the extent that) the corrob-
here.
oration of TH is made increasingly dependent on cer-
tain operationalizations, then the set of AHs that com-
===== PAGE 13/19 =====
13
prises these operationalizations can be said to play a outhavingajustifiableopinionabouttheuniversefrom
falsification-deflecting role. In this respect, SRF facili- which they are selected. Whereas in SRF, being a falsi-
tatesanobjectiveassessmentofLakatosianprogressive- ficationist method that aims to disentangle AH depen-
nessofaresearchprogramme. dencies,non-confirmatoryresultsaremuchmoreinfor-
In SRF the systematic variation of design elements mative. SRF shares the core advantage of falsification-
is not a bottom-up and random procedure, but rather ist frameworks in confirmatory hypothesis-testing set-
is organized with a view to examine the most prob- tings: Trying to devise a testing situation that maxi-
able alternative explanations associated with different mizesthechancesoffindingafalsifyinginstanceifthere
AHs and thereby to increase test severity. In this sense, isany(i.e.,conductingseveretests)isamoreattainable
what we understand from replication is quite akin to goal than collecting verifying examples and/or weigh-
“constructivereplication”ofKöhlerandCortina(2021), ing the rational belief in a hypothesis by enumerating
where the succeeding replications are conducted with such instances (Mayo, 2018), even when collecting all
theobjectiveofimprovingthemeasures/operationaliza- the verifying examples is not deemed necessary thanks
tions. However, because of the reasons we explained to randomization. Lastly, unlike some randomization-
before, it is usually not possible to justify the superior- based approaches, SRF also does not require conduct-
ity of one measure over other in social sciences. Un- ing mega studies and allows hypothesis testing to be
der these conditions, the best we can do is to map realized in a step-by-step fashion, which also provides
out on which particular AHs the main hypothesis is flexibility. That being said, we do not completely re-
conditional. By providing a way to accomplish this, jectthatrandomsamplingofoperationalizationsmight
SRF increases the transparency of how AHs influence have a use. The famous distinction of Reichenbach
“(non-)corroborativeevidence,”andallowsustoevalu- (1938, p. 7) between the context of justification and
ateposthocmodificationstotheoreticalclaimsvis-à-vis the context of discovery is to the purpose here. The
evidence. Thisinturncanpotentiallyfosterprogressive present falsificationist criticism of the inductivist ten-
theory development and the discovery of novel effects dencies in neo-operationalist, randomization-based ap-
byrevealingtheweakspotsoftheories. proachesonlyappliesifthesemethodsareimplemented
Consequently, SRF can be said to have certain the- inthejustificationcontext,thusinconfirmatorystudies.
oretical and practical advantages over other system- Hypothesisgenerationisnotboundbythestrictlogical
atic replication approaches. The main difference lies validity criteria of hypothesis testing. In the context of
in the philosophical commitments. Randomization- discovery,hyper-poweredexplorationviarandomselec-
based approaches seem to follow a neo-operationalist tion of operationalizations can be considered perfectly
and inductivist philosophy of science, while SRF rests kosher. However, the context of justification necessi-
on sophisticated methodological falsificationism. The tates logically valid inferences, which is exactly what
objective of hypothesis testing in randomization-based SRFaimstofacilitate.
approaches is to collect confirming evidence (“hyper-
powered” through randomization), and to inductively PracticalImplications
verify generalizability of findings as such, while in SRF
As it stands, SRF can be said to have practical im-
theaimistoseverelytesthypothesesbyexaminingthe
plications for three broad domains of scientific inquiry,
most plausible alternative explanations associated with
namely 1) Hypothesis testing via providing a severe
AH sets (for the distinction, see Mook, 1983). In terms
testing framework for self-replications or collaborative
of interpretation, confirming results in randomization-
projects, 2) Replication studies via coordinating close
based approaches might lead researchers to mistakenly
and conceptual replications into a more coherent, in-
believe that their TH reflects the true nature of the re-
formativeandcriticalbodyofinvestigationsand3)Lit-
lationship between the concepts, despite it is logically
erature reviews via offering an alternative structure of
invalid to draw such an inductive conclusion no mat-
clustering the existing findings in terms of the AH sets
ter how big your sample of operationalizations is (see
thatgeneratethem.
Popper, 2002b). However, in SRF confirmatory results
We already examined how SRF can help us in disen-
are interpreted only as further corroboration, and the
tanglingAHandTHdriveneffectsinasystematicseries
door is never closed for possible alternative explana-
of close and conceptual replications under different re-
tions and discovery of systematic errors due to partic-
searchscenarios(seealsothesupplementarymaterial),
ular AHs. Non-confirmatory results are also very hard
and how this replication effort might be most fruitfully
to interpret in randomization-based approaches, as it
realizedthroughadversarialcollaboration. Nowwedis-
is impossible to know the sample characteristics of a
cuss how a similar systematic approach can be imple-
given set of randomly chosen operationalizations with-
mentedinorganizingself-replicationattemptsorcollab-
===== PAGE 14/19 =====
14
orative research projects, and also in straightening up self-replications never quell the need for independent
an existing body of findings into a meaningful network replications,aswhethertheexperimenter’sbias(Rosen-
ofrelationshipsinasystematicliteraturereview. thal and Fode, 1963) influences the results is an AH
SRFcanbeimplementedasahypothesis-testingpro- that needs almost always to be taken seriously. A still
cedure in place of a single study in order to substan- more rigorous strategy to hypothesis-testing would be
tiallyincreasetestseverityacrossapre-plannedbattery tofollowSRFasacollaborativeresearchproject,where
of systematically organized tests. One obvious way to various steps are distributed among collaborating re-
do this is by conducting self-replications as an integral searchers or teams. This research strategy will be sim-
partofthehypothesis-testingprocedure. Replicatingan ilar to applying SRF as a replication procedure, but in-
initial finding before publication (i.e., self-replication) stead of evaluating earlier findings and resolving dis-
has long been considered among the best practice (Ce- putes it will serve to severely test novel hypotheses.
sario, 2014; Roediger III, 2012). Nevertheless, the Since conducting highly controlled studies is more dif-
DQT-related problems (which render the results of iso- ficult in social and behavioral sciences, increasing test
lated close/conceptual replications nothing but tenta- severityoverasystematicallyorganizedbatteryoftests
tive) are also relevant for self-replication efforts. Since is a viable alternative that would serve the same pur-
the problem of underdetermination equally applies to pose.
self-replicationstudies,organizingthemintoalogically AnotherpotentialpracticalimplicationofSRFliesin
connected set of replications that systematically vary usingthesamestrategyoflogicallyconnectingdifferent
sets of AH and AH will substantially increase their AH bundles in conducting and interpreting systematic
pre out
informativity. literature reviews (particularly when the previous find-
Aself-replicationattemptplannedincompliancewith ings are mixed). Such a strategy can help researchers
the requirements of SRF follows a similar procedure distinguish the effects that seem to be driven by cer-
as we described for other replication studies. So, also tain AHs from the ones in which the TH is more robust
herein an initial hypothesis test should be re-examined to such influences. To put it differently, in a contested
withaclosereplication. Then,thehypothesisshouldbe literature there are already numerous conceptual repli-
furtherinvestigatedbyconceptualreplicationsthatsys- cations that have been conducted, and at least some of
tematicallyvarytheAHs. Themainideaagainistolink these replications rely on the same AHs in their opera-
closereplicationstoconceptualreplicationswithaview tionalizations. Therefore, to the extent that they have
toincreasetestsseveritybydecreasingthedegreeofun- overlaps in their AHs, their results can be organized in
derdetermination; that is, to become able to determine such a way that resembles a pattern of results that can
if the inconsistent results are driven by one or more of be obtained with a novel research project planned ac-
the AHs or by the TH (thus suggest that we modify or cording to SRF. The term “systematic” insystematic lit-
abandontheTH). eraturereviewalreadyindicatesthatthescientificques-
We also recommend pre-registering the whole SRF tiontobeinvestigated(i.e.,thesubject-matter,theprob-
plan before the data collection. At present, the com- lem or hypothesis), the data collection strategy (e.g.,
mon practice is to pre-register only a single study (or databases to be searched, inclusion criteria) as well as
a single set of studies) where the operationalization of themethodthatwillbeusedinanalyzingthedata(e.g.,
variables (and hence the AHs) are kept constant. This statistical tests or qualitative analyses) are standard-
conventionalpracticeofpre-registeringonlyasingleset ized. However, for various reasons (e.g., to limit the
of operationalizations might pave the way for a setting inquiry to those studies that use a particular method),
that condones conducting multiple studies and selec- not every systematic literature review is conducive to
tively reporting the studies that corroborated the TH. figuring out whether the TH is conditional on particu-
Pre-registeringSRFinthecontextofself-replicationcan lar AH sets. An SRF-inspired strategy of tabulating the
decrease the researcher degrees of freedom (see Sim- resultsinasystematicliteraturereviewwillalsohelpre-
monsetal., 2011). Realisticallyit wouldbeatentative searchersinappraisingtheconceptualnetworksofthe-
plan, but it would still inform both the researchers and oreticalclaims,theoreticallyrelevantauxiliaryhypothe-
theiraudienceabouttheinitialexpectations. Andsince ses and measurements. Thus, it can eventually help in
SRF-compatiblepre-registrationscanofferbroaderpro- appraisingtheempiricalsupportoftheTH byrevealing
tection against researcher degrees of freedom, a sep- howitisconditionaloncertainAHs,andcanleadtothe
arate badge (that is similar to the ones awarded for
6Preregistering only individual steps of SRF (as indepen-
pre-registrationoropendata/code)canbebestowedon
dent studies) will not provide the level of test severity that
studiesthatsatisfythecriteria.6
will be achieved with the whole procedure. For the relation
That being said, it is important to note here that
betweenpreregistrationandtestseverity,seeLakens(2019).
===== PAGE 15/19 =====
15
reformulation or refinement of the TH as well as guide sis the need for disciplinary self-reflection might over-
andconstrainsubsequentmodificationstoit. comethatfornoveltyandgrowth. Thedecade-longdis-
cussion on a replicability and confidence crisis in sev-
Coda eral disciplines of social, behavioral and life sciences
(e.g., Camerer et al., 2018; Open Science Framework,
In this paper, we have suggested, firstly, a method-
2015; Ioannidis, 2005) has identified the utilization of
ologicalprocedurethatwillconsiderablybolstertheso-
methods that would be most fitting for accomplishing
cialandbehavioralsciences’abilitytoaddresstheprob-
the exploratory mission in the context where the crit-
lem of empirical underdetermination. While theories
ical mission should be prioritized as being one of the
arealwaysunderdeterminedbyempiricalevidence,we
main causes of the problem. This diagnosis led to pro-
arguedthatinthecontextofhypothesistestingitcanbe
posals for slowing science down (Stengers, 2018), ap-
possibletoreducecertainresearcherdegreesoffreedom
plying more caution in giving policy advice (IJzerman
with respect to auxiliary hypotheses and thus to facili-
et al., 2020), and inaugurating a credibility revolution
tate decision making. Achieving this requires, first and
(Vazire, 2019). All potential contributions of SRF will
foremost,thatresearcherspaysubstantiallymoreatten-
be part of a strategy to prioritize science’s critical mis-
tion to the auxiliary hypotheses they assume to be true
sion on the way towards more credible research in so-
in designing empirical tests. Moreover, it requires that
cial,behavioral,andlifesciences. Thiswouldimplythat
they acknowledge that individual tests cannot investi-
thescientificcommunityfocuseslessonproducinghuge
gatetheepistemicworthofsinglescientifichypotheses,
numbers of novel hypotheses with little corroboration
letaloneoftheories.
and more on having a lesser number of severely tested
On a more general note, opting for a series of sys-
theoretical claims. Successful implementation of SRF
tematically interconnected tests instead of single stud-
alsorequiresopennessandtransparencyregardingboth
ies in deciding the fate of scientific theories implies a
positiveandnegativeresultsoforiginalandreplication
more critical process of scientific inquiry, which would
studies(Noseketal.,2015)anddemandsincreasedre-
also require a relatively higher investment of time and
search collaboration (Landy et al., 2020). Ideally, this
resourcesthanatypicalempiricalstudyinthesocialsci-
wouldalsotaketheformofadversarialcollaboration.
ences. Weshould,however,weighthisextrainvestment
notagainstasinglestudy,butagainstthecurrentsitua-
AuthorContact
tionwherethesameamountoftimeandresourcesyield
numerous independent studies which are much less in- Duygu Uygun Tunç Philosophy & Ethics Group /
formative individually as well as collectively. More- Eindhoven University of Technology, the Netherlands
over, SRF-style research strategies can be implemented Philosophy Department/ Middle East Technical Univer-
much faster and with much less burden falling on in- sity, Ankara, Turkey ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-
dividual researchers by way of scientific collaboration; 0003-0148-0416
thatis,throughcollectivetestingandappraisalofscien- Mehmet Necip Tunç Social Psychology Depart-
tific theories. Today researchers have at their disposal ment/ Tilburg University, the Netherlands ORCID:
more opportunities for large scale collaborations, such https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1350-174X
as the Psychological Science Accelerator (Moshontz et
al.,2018). ConflictofInterestandFunding
Clearly, the methodological decision between more
There are no conflicts of interest associated with
rigorous tests and quicker decisions on the empirical
this research. This research is partly funded by the
worthoftheoriesisboundtobeacollectiveone,which
European Union and the Turkish Scientific and Tech-
reflects our collective take on scientific priorities. We
nological Research Council under the Horizon 2020
can generally speak of two central missions of scien-
Marie Skłodowska-Curie Actions Cofund program Co-
tific inquiry; namely, extending the established body of
Circulation2.
knowledge to include novel phenomena (i.e., science’s
exploratorymission)andtoweedoutfalsetheoriesvia
AuthorContributions
testingandreplication(i.e., science’scriticalmission).7
Depending on the state of a particular discipline or re- Both authors have contributed equally to conceptu-
search programme, one or the other of these two mis- alization, project administration, visualization, original
sions might be more accentuated. While in expansion- draftpreparation,review,andediting.
ist periods accumulation of novel hypotheses is priori-
7AsimilardistinctionismadeinLongino(1990).
tized over severe tests, replications of earlier studies or
criticalassessmentofliterature,duringmomentsofcri-
===== PAGE 16/19 =====
16
Acknowledgements Brandt, M. J., IJzerman, H., Dijksterhuis, A., Farach,
F.J.,Geller,J.,Giner-Sorolla,R.,Grange,J.A.,
The authors would like to thank Mark Brandt,
Perugini, M., Spies, J. R., & Van’t Veer, A.
Willem Sleegers, Daniël Lakens, Choi Hong Hui, Agnes
(2014).Thereplicationrecipe:Whatmakesfor
Bolinska, Nico Formanek, the two reviewers at Meta-
aconvincingreplication?JournalofExperimen-
Psychology Sophia Crüwell and Maarten Derksen and
talSocialPsychology,50,217–224.
the editor Nick Brown, the participants of two invited
Bridgman, P. W., Bridgman, P. W., Bridgman, P. W., &
talksatEindhovenUniversityofTechnologyandBog˘az-
Bridgman, P. W. (1927). The logic of modern
içi University for critical comments and suggestions on
physics(Vol.3).MacmillanNewYork.
earlier versions of this paper, which helped to substan-
Camerer, C. F., Dreber, A., Holzmeister, F., Ho, T.-H.,
tiallyimproveit.
Huber, J., Johannesson, M., Kirchler, M., Nave,
G., Nosek, B. A., & Pfeiffer, T. (2018). Evalu-
OpenSciencePractices
ating the replicability of social science experi-
This article is theoretical and as such received no mentsinnatureandsciencebetween2010and
Open Science badges. The entire editorial process, in- 2015.NatureHumanBehaviour,2(9),637–644.
cludingtheopenreviews,ispublishedintheonlinesup- Cesario, J. (2014). Priming, replication, and the hard-
plement. estscience.Perspectivesonpsychologicalscience,
9(1),40–48.
References Churchland, P. M. (1975). Karl popper’s philosophy of
science. Canadian Journal of Philosophy, 5(1),
Bargh, J. A., Chen, M., & Burrows, L. (1996). Auto-
145–156.
maticity of social behavior: Direct effects of
Collins, H. (1992). Changing order: Replication and
trait construct and stereotype activation on ac-
induction in scientific practice. University of
tion. Journal of personality and social psychol-
ChicagoPress.
ogy,71(2),230.
Devezer,B.,Navarro,D.J.,Vandekerckhove,J.,&Ozge
Baribault, B., Donkin, C., Little, D. R., Trueblood, J. S.,
Buzbas,E.(2021).Thecaseforformalmethod-
Oravecz,Z.,VanRavenzwaaij,D.,White,C.N.,
ologyinscientificreform.RoyalSocietyopensci-
De Boeck, P., & Vandekerckhove, J. (2018).
ence,8(3),200805.
Metastudies for robust tests of theory. Pro-
Dienes, Z. (2008). Understanding psychology as a sci-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
ence: An introduction to scientific and statistical
115(11),2607–2612.
inference. Macmillan International Higher Edu-
Barr,D.J.,Levy,R.,Scheepers,C.,&Tily,H.J.(2013).
cation.
Random effects structure for confirmatory hy-
Doherty,J.M.,Belletier,C.,Rhodes,S.,Jaroslawska,A.,
pothesis testing: Keep it maximal. Journal of
Barrouillet, P., Camos, V., Cowan, N., Naveh-
memoryandlanguage,68(3),255–278.
Benjamin,M.,&Logie,R.H.(2019).Dual-task
Barrett,L.F.,Adolphs,R.,Marsella,S.,Martinez,A.M.,
costs in working memory: An adversarial col-
& Pollak, S. D. (2019). Emotional expressions
laboration. Journal of experimental psychology:
reconsidered: Challenges to inferring emotion
learning,memory,andcognition,45(9),1529.
from human facial movements. Psychological
Doyen, S., Klein, O., Pichon, C.-L., & Cleeremans, A.
scienceinthepublicinterest,20(1),1–68.
(2012).Behavioralpriming:It’sallinthemind,
Bateman, I., Kahneman, D., Munro, A., Starmer, C., &
butwhosemind?PloSone,7(1),e29081.
Sugden, R. (2005). Testing competing models
Duhem,P.(1954).Theaimandstructureofphysicalthe-
of loss aversion: An adversarial collaboration.
ory(Vol.13).PrincetonUniversityPress.
JournalofPublicEconomics,89(8),1561–1580.
Earp, B. D., & Trafimow, D. (2015). Replication, falsi-
Bickhard,M.H.(2001).Thetragedyofoperationalism.
fication, and the crisis of confidence in social
Theory&Psychology,11(1),35–44.
psychology.Frontiersinpsychology,6,621.
Bonett, D. G. (2012). Replication-extension stud-
Ellemers, N., Fiske, S. T., Abele, A. E., Koch, A., &
ies. Current Directions in Psychological Science,
Yzerbyt, V. (2020). Adversarial alignment en-
21(6),409–412.
ables competing models to engage in coopera-
tivetheorybuildingtowardcumulativescience.
ProceedingsoftheNationalAcademyofSciences,
117(14),7561–7567.
===== PAGE 17/19 =====
17
Eronen, M. I., & Romeijn, J.-W. (2020). Philosophy of LeBel, E. P., Berger, D., Campbell, L., & Loving, T. J.
science and the formalization of psychological (2017). Falsifiability is not optional. Journal of
theory.Theory&Psychology,30(6),786–799. personalityandsocialpsychology,113,254–261.
Folger,R.(1989).Significancetestsandtheduplicityof Leonelli, S. (2018). Rethinking reproducibility as a cri-
binarydecisions.AmericanPsychologicalAssoci- terion for research quality. Including a sympo-
ation. sium on Mary Morgan: curiosity, imagination,
Franklin,A.(1999).Canthatberight?Springer. andsurprise.
Green,B.(2019).Theessentialambiguityofthesocial. Lin, H., Saunders, B., Friese, M., Evans, N. J., & In-
Philosophy of the Social Sciences, 49(2), 108– zlicht, M. (2020). Strong effort manipulations
136. reduce response caution: A preregistered rein-
Hacking, I. (1992). The self-vindication of the labora- vention ofthe ego-depletionparadigm. Psycho-
torysciences.Scienceaspracticeandculture,30. logicalscience,31(5),531–547.
Hilgard, J., Engelhardt, C. R., & Rouder, J. N. (2017). Longino, H. E. (1990). Science as social knowledge: Val-
Overstatedevidenceforshort-termeffectsofvi- uesandobjectivityinscientificinquiry.Princeton
olent gameson affectand behavior:A reanaly- UniversityPress.
sis of anderson et al.(2010). Psychological Bul- Lykken, D. T. (1968). Statistical significance in psycho-
letin,143,757–774. logical research. Psychological bulletin, 70(3),
Holcombe, A. O., & Gershman, S. J. (2018). Bayesian 151.
belief updating after a replication experiment. MacCorquodale,K.,&Meehl,P.E.(1948).Onadistinc-
BehavioralandBrainSciences,41. tion between hypothetical constructs and in-
Hull,D.L.(1999).Theuseandabuseofsirkarlpopper. terveningvariables.Psychologicalreview,55(2),
BiologyandPhilosophy,14(4),481–504. 95.
IJzerman, H., Lewis, N. A., Przybylski, A. K., Wein- Matzke, D., Nieuwenhuis, S., Van Rijn, H., Slagter,
stein, N., DeBruine, L., Ritchie, S. J., Vazire, H. A., Van Der Molen, M. W., & Wagenmak-
S., Forscher, P. S., Morey, R. D., & Ivory, J. D. ers, E.-J. (2015). The effect of horizontal eye
(2020).Usecautionwhenapplyingbehavioural movements on free recall: A preregistered ad-
science to policy. Nature Human Behaviour, versarialcollaboration.JournalofExperimental
4(11),1092–1094. Psychology:General,144(1),e1.
Ioannidis, J. P. (2005). Why most published research Mayo, D. G. (1997). Duhem’s problem, the bayesian
findingsarefalse.PLoSmedicine,2(8),e124. way,anderrorstatistics,or“what’sbeliefgotto
Köhler, T., & Cortina, J. M. (2021). Play it again, sam! do with it?” Philosophy of Science, 64(2), 222–
ananalysisofconstructivereplicationintheor- 244.
ganizational sciences. Journal of Management, Mayo,D.G.(2018).Statisticalinferenceasseveretesting:
47(2),488–518. Howtogetbeyondthestatisticswars.Cambridge
Kuhn,T.S.(1996).Thestructureofscientificrevolutions UniversityPress.
(3rded.).Chicago:UniversityofChicagoPress. Meehl,P.E.(1978).Theoreticalrisksandtabularaster-
Lakatos,I.(1978).Themethodologyofscientificresearch isks: Sir karl, sir ronald, and the slow progress
programmes.CambridgeUniversityPress. of soft psychology. Journal of Consulting and
Lakens, D. (2019). The value of preregistration for ClinicalPsychology,46,806–834.
psychological science: A conceptual analysis., Meehl,P.E.(1990).Whysummariesofresearchonpsy-
62(3),221–230. chological theories are often uninterpretable.
Landy,J.F.,Jia,M.L.,Ding,I.L.,Viganola,D.,Tierney, Psychologicalreports,66(1),195–244.
W., Dreber, A., Johannesson, M., Pfeiffer, T., Mellers, B., Hertwig, R., & Kahneman, D. (2001). Do
Ebersole,C.R.,&Gronau,Q.F.(2020).Crowd- frequency representations eliminate conjunc-
sourcing hypothesis tests: Making transparent tion effects? an exercise in adversarial collab-
howdesignchoicesshaperesearchresults.Psy- oration.PsychologicalScience,12(4),269–275.
chologicalBulletin,146(5),451. Mook, D. G. (1983). In defense of external invalidity.
Laudan, L. (1990). Demystifying underdetermination Americanpsychologist,38(4),379.
in savage CW (ed.), scientific theories (pp. Moonesinghe,R.,Khoury,M.J.,&Janssens,A.C.J.W.
267–297). (2007). Most published research findings are
Leahey, T. H. (1980). The myth of operationism. The false—but a little replication goes a long way.
JournalofMindandBehavior,127–143. PLoSmedicine,4(2),e28.
===== PAGE 18/19 =====
18
Moshontz, H., Campbell, L., Ebersole, C. R., IJzerman, observer/psychologys-woes-and-a-partial-
H., Urry, H. L., Forscher, P. S., Grahe, J. E., cure-the-value-of-replication
McCarthy, R. J., Musser, E. D., & Antfolk, J. Rosenthal,R.,&Fode,K.L.(1963).Theeffectofexper-
(2018). The psychological science accelerator: imenter bias on the performance of the albino
Advancing psychology through a distributed rat.BehavioralScience,8(3),183–189.
collaborativenetwork.AdvancesinMethodsand Rowbottom, D. P. (2010). Corroboration and auxiliary
Practices in Psychological Science, 1(4), 501– hypotheses: Duhem’s thesis revisited. Synthese,
515. 177(1),139–149.
Munafò, M. R., & Davey Smith, G. (2018). Robust re- Schmidt, S. (2016). Shall we really do it again? the
searchneedsmanylinesofevidence. powerful concept of replication is neglected
Muthukrishna, M., & Henrich, J. (2019). A problem in the social sciences. In Methodological issues
intheory.NatureHumanBehaviour,3(3),221– andstrategiesinclinicalresearch(pp.581–596).
229. American Psychological Association. https://
Nosek, B. A., Alter, G., Banks, G. C., Borsboom, D., doi.org/10.1037/14805-036
Bowman,S.D.,Breckler,S.J.,Buck,S.,Cham- Shadish, W. R., Cook, T. D., & Campbell, D. T. (2002).
bers,C.D.,Chin,G.,&Christensen,G.(2015). Experimentalandquasi-experimentaldesignsfor
Promoting an open research culture. Science, generalized causal inference. Houghton, Mifflin;
348(6242),1422–1425. Company.
Nosek, B. A., Spies, J. R., & Motyl, M. (2012). Sci- Sidman, M. (1960). Tactics of scientific research. Basic
entific utopia: II. restructuring incentives and Books.
practices to promote truth over publishability. Simmons,J.P.,Nelson,L.D.,&Simonsohn,U.(2011).
PerspectivesonPsychologicalScience,7(6),615– False-positive psychology: Undisclosed flexibil-
631. ity in data collection and analysis allows pre-
Open Science Framework. (2015). Estimating the re- senting anything as significant. Psychological
producibility of psychological science. Science, Science,22(11),1359–1366.
349(6251),aac4716. Simons, D. J. (2014). The value of direct replication.
Orben, A., & Lakens, D. (2020). Crud (re) defined. Ad- Perspectives on psychological science, 9(1), 76–
vancesinMethodsandPracticesinPsychological 80.
Science,3(2),238–247. Stanford, K. (2017). Underdetermination of scien-
Oude Maatman, F. (2021). Psychology’s theory cri- tific theory. In The stanford encyclopedia of
sis, and why formal modelling cannot solve it. philosophy (Winter 2017). The Metaphysics
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.31234/osf. Research Lab. https : / / plato . stanford .
io/puqvs edu/archives/win2017/entries/scientific-
Pashler, H., & Harris, C. R. (2012). Is the replicability underdetermination/
crisis overblown? three arguments examined. Stengers, I. (2018). Another science is possible: A mani-
PerspectivesonPsychologicalScience,7(6),531– festoforslowscience.JohnWiley&Sons.
536. Strevens, M. (2001). The bayesian treatment of auxil-
Popper, K. (2002a). Conjectures and refutations: The iary hypotheses. British Journal for the Philoso-
growthofscientificknowledge.Routledge. phyofScience,52(3).
Popper, K. (2002b). The logic of scientific discovery Stroebe,W.(2019).Whatcanwelearnfrommanylabs
(2nded.).Routledge. replications? Basic and Applied Social Psychol-
Quine, W. V. O. (1969). Epistemology naturalized. (pp. ogy,41(2),91–103.
38-114). In Ontological relativity and other es- Stroebe,W.,&Strack, F.(2014).Theallegedcrisisand
says(pp.38–114).NewYork:ColumbiaUniver- the illusion of exact replication. Perspectives on
sityPress. PsychologicalScience,9(1),59–71.
Quine,W.(1951).Twodogmasofempiricism.,60,20- Tarantola, A. (2006). Popper, bayes and the inverse
43.ThePhilosophicalReview,60,20–43. problem.Naturephysics,2(8),492–494.
Reichenbach, H. (1938). Experience and prediction: An Tetlock, P. E. (2006). Adversarial collaboration: Least
analysis of the foundations and the structure of feasiblewhenmostneeded?leastneededwhen
knowledge.TheUniversityofChicagoPress. mostfeasible.
RoedigerIII,H.L.(2012).Psychology’swoesandapar- Trafimow, D., & Earp, B. D. (2016). Badly specified
tialcure:Thevalueofreplication.APSObserver, theories are not responsible for the replication
25. https://www.psychologicalscience.org/
===== PAGE 19/19 =====
19
crisis in social psychology: Comment on klein. Weber, M. (2017). Methodology of social sciences. Rout-
Theory&Psychology,26(4),540–548. ledge.
Uygun Tunç, D., Tunç, M. N., & Lakens, D. (2023). Wicherts, J. M., Borsboom, D., & Dolan, C. V. (2010).
The epistemic and pragmatic function of di- Why national IQs do not support evolutionary
chotomous claims based on statistical hypoth- theoriesofintelligence.Personalityandindivid-
esis tests. Theory Psychology, 33(3), 403–423. ualdifferences,48(2),91–96.
https://doi-org.proxy.lnu.se/10.1177/ Woodward, J. (1989). Data and phenomena. Synthese,
09593543231160112 393–472.
Vazire,S.(2019).Dowewanttobecredibleorincredi- Yarkoni, T. (2022). The generalizability crisis. Behav-
ble?APSObserver,33. ioralandBrainSciences,45.
Vessonen, E. (2021). Respectful operationalism. Theory
&Psychology,31(1),84–105.