
===== PAGE 1/15 =====
Opendata:NotApplicable Editedby:Carlsson,R.&Innes-Ker,Å
Meta-Psychology,2023,vol7,MP.2021.2762 Openmaterials:NotApplicable Reviewedby:RebeccaWillén,FarhanSarwar
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2021.2762 Openandreproducibleanalysis:NotApplicable Analysisreproducedby:NotApplicable
Articletype:OriginalArticle Openreviewsandeditorialprocess:Yes AllsupplementaryfilescanbeaccessedatOSF:
PublishedundertheCC-BY4.0license Preregistration:No https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/YCS8T
A Theory of Ethics to Guide Investigative
Interviewing Research
David A. Neequaye
University of Gothenburg
Abstract
This article examines ethical considerations relevant to the formulation of psychological investigative interviewing
techniques or methods. Psychology researchers are now devoting much attention to improving the efficacy of
eliciting information in investigative interviews. Stakeholders agree that interviewing methods must be ethical.
However, there is a less concerted effort at systematically delineating ethical considerations to guide the creation
of interviewing methods derived from scientific psychological principles. The disclosures interviewees make may
put them at considerable risk, and it is not always possible to determine beforehand whether placing interviewees
undersuchrisksiswarranted. Thus,Iarguethatresearchpsychologistsaimingtocontributeethicalmethodsinthis
contextshouldensurethatthosemethodsabidebyastandardthatactivelyprotectsintervieweesagainstunjustified
risks. Interviewing techniques should provide interviewees, particularly vulnerable ones, with enough agency to
freely determine what to disclose. Researchers should explicitly indicate the boundary conditions of a method
if it cannot achieve this standard. Journal editors and reviewers should request such discussions. The suggested
standardtasksresearchpsychologiststobecircumspectaboutrecommendingpsychologicaltechniqueswithoutfully
addressing the ethical boundaries of those methods in their publications. I explain the proposed ethical standard’s
necessityanddiscusshowitcanbeapplied.
Keywords: disclosure, ethical investigative interviewing, human intelligence source, psychological manipulation,
suspect,witness
ATheoryofEthicsonInvestigativeInterviewing ing as investigative interviewing (see, e.g., Hartwig et
al.,2014). However,somestakeholdersassociateinter-
This article discusses ethical considerations relevant
rogation with questioning methods aimed at confirm-
to the formulation of psychological investigative inter-
ing a preconceived notion rather than eliciting infor-
viewing techniques or methods. Such techniques are
mation (Rachlew, 2017; Williamson, 1993). Therefore,
means of asking people questions in investigative in-
I adopt the term investigative interviewing. The term
terviews. In those interviews, interviewers question in-
is arguably a more intuitive designator of the majority
terviewees to potentially elicit information pertinent to
of social interactions wherein the objective is to elicit
perceived local/national or international security con-
truthfulinformationinaninvestigationorinterview.
cerns or interests a governing entity may have. I use
Before proceeding, it is critical to preempt any later
the word, perceived, deliberately in this definition of
confusionbynotingrelevanttopicsthatarenotthecur-
investigative interviewing. Different governing enti-
rent article’s focus. This examination does not discuss
ties may have different views on whether an investiga-
the ethics of interviews psychologists conduct, such as
tion is a security issue or whether an interest is legiti-
psychological evaluations in the health sector, for em-
mate. Anotherterm, interrogation,hasasimilarmean-
===== PAGE 2/15 =====
2
ployers, and other organizations. Additionally, the ar- 2005);(b)therevelationsthatlawenforcementperson-
ticle does not delve into how psychologists should per- nelroutinelyemploydubioustechniquesthatelicitfalse
sonally comport themselves when directly performing confessionstocrimes(Kassin,2017);(c)themissedop-
consultationsinaprofessionalcapacity. TheAPAEthical portunitiestoobtaininformationthatcouldhavehelped
PrinciplesofPsychologistsandCodeofConductaddresses prevent security breaches worldwide (Soufan, 2011).
these important issues (American Psychological Associ- Psychology researchers are now devoting much atten-
ation,2002),whicharenotthefocusofthepresentdis- tion to improving the efficacy of eliciting information
cussion. ininvestigativeinterviews(Meissner,2021;Vrij,Fisher,
Thearticlecentersoninvestigativeinterviewingper- et al., 2017). The majority of research focused on de-
taining to national/international security concerns and veloping interviewing techniques draws on psycholog-
interests—and research psychologists contributing ethi- ical principles that facilitate disclosure. Researchers
cal methods to that enterprise. Research psychologists andpractitionersagreethatinterviewingmethodsmust
mayserveasconsultants,advisingdirectlyonactualin- be ethical (Alison and Alison, 2017; Hartwig et al.,
vestigativeinterviews,anditisgenerallyrecommended 2014; Vrij, Fisher, et al., 2017). However, there is a
that such consultations follow the APA ethical guide- less concerted effort at systematically delineating ethi-
lines. It is worth repeating here that this article does calconsiderationsrelevanttothecreationofinterview-
not delve into how research psychologists should per- ing methods derived from scientific psychological prin-
sonallycomportthemselvesduringprofessionalconsul- ciples.
tations. Previousexaminationshaveaddressedthesees- Two seminal works have considered this topic previ-
sential issues (see, e.g., American Psychological Associ- ously. Skerker (2010) extensively discusses the moral-
ation, 2002; Porter et al., 2016). Moreover, this work ity of investigative interviewing. Hartwig et al. (2016)
does not address how security personnel, for example, reviewedextantpsychologicalinterviewingmethods,at
the police, should behave when conducting investiga- the time, and analyzed their moral implications. The
tive interviews—or the ethical-legal standards thereof present work draws on Skerker (2010) and Hartwig et
(e.g., the recording of suspect and witness interviews). al. (2016), and when necessary, I will describe the rel-
Otherresearchhasexaminedsuchessentialissues(see, evantaspects. However,thisworkisnotacommentary
e.g.,Clarke,2001;Newton,1998;Snooketal.,2020). onthosepublications. Thecurrentarticletakesadiffer-
This article focuses on the burgeoning research field ent approach and examines the ethics of investigative
whereresearchpsychologistscontributesomewhatindi- interviewinginwaysthataddressexistinginterviewing
rectly by developing and recommending psychological methods and those that may be developed in the fu-
interviewing techniques to be used by other practition- ture. This work aims to contribute to the discussion by
ers,specifically,lawenforcementandintelligenceinter- calling on the field to now consider a more forward-
viewers. Many existing scientific publications recom- looking approach. I will argue that interviewing meth-
mend such psychological interviewing techniques (see, ods should provide interviewees, particularly vulnerable
Vrij, Fisher, et al., 2017; Vrij and Granhag, 2014 for ones,withenoughagencytofreelydeterminewhattodis-
overviews). The ethics of these methods published close. As such, researchers should explicitly indicate the
in scientific journals remain underexamined. Existing boundary conditions of a technique if it cannot achieve
ethics codes are either underspecified for investigative this standard. The proposed ethical standard may as-
interviewing (e.g., American Psychological Association, sist in regulating researchers’ creation and publication
2002)ortypicallyspeaktohowresearchersorpsycholo- ofpsychologicalinterviewingtechniques.
gistsshouldpersonallycomportthemselves(e.g.,Porter Theproposedstandardpurposelyfocusesonthepub-
et al., 2016). This article explores and specifies ethical lications of research psychologists for pragmatic rea-
considerations relevant to indirect contributions to in- sons. Guidelines aimed directly at practicing investiga-
vestigativeinterviewingthatfeatureinpsychologyjour- tive interviewers may be ineffective since practitioners
nalarticles. are generally under no obligation to abide by an ethi-
cal standard the academic literature posits—unless the
Researchers’ Current Focus on Developing Psycho- relevant authorities ratify the standard. Such ratifica-
logicalInterviewingTechniques tionmaycompriseanarduousandlengthybureaucratic
process,deceleratingthegoalsathand.
Various events in recent history have sparked a gen-
Nonetheless, practicing interviewers may draw on
eralinterestininvestigativeinterviewing. Forexample,
therecommendationsofresearchpublications,andthey
(a) the discovery that the Central Intelligence Agency
areencouragedtodoso(Fallon,2014). Supposeapub-
(United States) used undeniably abusive questioning
lication indicates that an interviewing technique leads
methods at Guantanamo Bay and Abu Ghraib (Cohen,
===== PAGE 3/15 =====
3
people to disclose information. In that case, a prac- the morality of psychological techniques will be close
titioner may implement the technique in an actual in- to unmanageable. Thus, this work will focus on moral
terview. This possibility offers a pragmatic way for the issues that generally arise when people are subjected
academic literature to proactively contribute to practi- to psychological techniques in investigative interviews.
tionersusingethicalmethods. Wemustensurethatthe The analysiswill not delveinto thespecific laws ofany
methods researchers develop and recommend via their context. Also,thisarticledoesnotnecessarilyprovidea
publications are ethical. The editorial process of scien- completetheory. Thegoalistoofferageneralproposal
tific publishing is an opportune avenue to assure that tocommenceopendiscussionsonthetopic.
researchers primarily disseminate ethical interviewing I have structured the remainder of this article as fol-
methods. Importantly, this approach could preempt lows. First, the work discusses the moral challenges
possibilitiesforthescientificliteraturetosustainorpro- andlegitimacyofinvestigativeinterviewing. Next,Ide-
duceethicallyproblematictechniquesthatpractitioners scribe the categories of people that typically feature in
mightadopt. However,thereislittlespecificationwhen interviews and the risks interviews pose to them. The
itcomestostandardsbywhichtodeterminetheethical article then explores how research psychologists may
natureofinterviewingmethodsresearcherspublish. structure interviewing methods they develop to navi-
Later, I will elaborate on the details of the proposed gatesuchrisksethically. Finally,Iexploretheethicalna-
ethicalstandard;now,Iwillexplainitspragmaticneces- ture of the Scharff technique—an interviewing method
sity. TheAPAethicscode(AmericanPsychologicalAsso- that features in the published literature. That analysis
ciation,2002)offersprinciplestogovernthepsychology providesanexampleofhowonemayexaminetheethics
profession;twoarerelevanttothepublicationofinves- ofaninterviewingtechnique.
tigative interviewing methods in psychology journals.
PrincipleA:thebeneficenceandnonmaleficenceprinciple MoralChallengesofInvestigativeInterviewing
charges members of the psychology profession to en-
Investigativeinterviewscontainamoralconundrum:
sure that they do no harm. In this view, we must strive
to what extent is it permissible to (sometimes) compel
to safeguard the welfare of those whom our work may
people to submit to questioning about whatever topic
affect. PrincipleEcallsforrespectingpeople’srightsand
a governing entity deems fit? Surely one is entitled to
dignity. Theworkofpsychologyshouldnotinfringeon
keep what they know a secret if one wishes? Control-
individuals’ rights to privacy, confidentiality, and self-
ling the information one wants to be open or secret is
determination. Itisincumbentuponresearchpsycholo-
the essence of human autonomy—that is, one’s ability
giststoensurethattheirpublicationsalignwiththerel-
todeterminetheiridentity,intentions,possessions,and
evantethicscodes. However,theAPAethicscodeisde-
actions (Bok, 1989). Previous works, namely, Hartwig
signed to be applicable across the organization’s many
et al. (2016) and Skerker (2010) have addressed this
(∼54)divisions;theprinciplesthereinarepurposelyas-
generalprobleminvestigativeinterviewingraises. Iwill
pirational. The respective divisions and fields of psy-
drawontherelevantaspectsofthoseworkstoreiterate
chologyareencouragedtocreateenforceablestandards
thelegitimacyofinvestigativeinterviewingbecausethe
that put the APA ethics principles into action (Behnke,
discussionisausefulreminder, anditsetsthestagefor
2006). Thestandardthisarticleproposesisanattempt
theremainderofthiswork.
to provide such an enforceable standard applicable to
Bok(1989)arguesthatonecannotautomaticallyap-
the development and recommendation of investigative
prove or disapprove of secrecy. One must examine the
interviewingmethodsviascientificpublication. Putsim-
moral arguments for every occasion where the justifia-
ply, the standard is an effort to provide a metric to as-
bilityofsecrecyisundercontentionBok(1989). Letus
sure that published interviewing techniques align with
now address whether investigative interviewing, which
thebeneficenceandnonmaleficenceplustherespectfor
often comprises probing others’ secrets, is a justifiable
rightsanddignityprinciples.
enterprise. Liberal democracy is presently the most
Tomyknowledge,acompendiumofgenerallyappli-
popularformofnationalandinternationalgovernment
cable ethics principles does not exist when it comes to
(e.g., Mukand and Rodrik, 2020). In this system of
psychological interviewing methods. The current state
governance, founded on deontological ethics, a signif-
of the literature is not exactly a shortcoming but an in-
icant aspect of exercising one’s rights is the freedom
evitable result of moral and legal entanglements com-
to enjoy autonomy without interference Hartwig et al.
monly associated with investigative interviewing (see,
(2016). There is a general understanding that people
e.g., Sukumar et al., 2016). Moreover, there are var-
are morally equal; Skerker (2010) explains this phe-
ied legal jurisdictions and cultural contexts worldwide.
nomenonindetail,andtheremainderofthisparagraph
Broadly examining legal nuances simultaneously with
provides a summary. Mutual respect for one another’s
===== PAGE 4/15 =====
4
rightsupholdsmoralequality. Onecanfullyenjoyone’s ter anticipate such moral risks. That knowledge could
rights if they do not impede another’s rights (Skerker, be a useful crutch to navigate the formulation of inter-
2010). For example, a person is free to own a house viewingmethodsethically.
providedshepurchasesitusingherresources,notsteal-
ing another’s house. Illegitimate means of exercising PeopleSubjectedtoInterviews
one’s rights is a rights violation. The violator conse-
A central discussion point regarding the moral risks
quently forfeits the expectation that others will respect
of investigative interviewing is the injuries interview-
her rights. Hence, it is permissible to inhibit such vio-
ingmethodsposeorcouldposetointervieweesorpeo-
lations but only to the extent that the restraint restores
ple subjected to interviews. For example, the exam-
thestatusquo—moralequality(Skerker,2010).
ination by Hartwig et al. (2016) classified the exist-
Typically,inliberaldemocracies,thestateorthelegit-
ing psychological interviewing techniques into themes
imategoverningentityisresponsibleforensuringmoral
and analyzed their potential moral hazards; next fol-
equalitybyprotectingtheinterestsofthegoverned. Ac-
lows a summary. One theme comprised interviewing
cordingly, governing entities usually have a monopoly
techniquesthatseektoconfirmpreconceivednotionsof
on coercion. They can, therefore, compel the governed
guilt. Thosemethodsimplementcoerciveanddeceptive
toattendinvestigativeinterviewsifthereiscausetobe-
practices to elicit confessions; examples include decep-
lieve a deviation in moral equality has occurred. As
tively minimizing or maximizing the consequences of
such, the interview may support efforts to restore the
crimes to force suspects to confess at any cost (Inbau
status quo. For instance, a murder suspect may be de-
et al., 2001). Confession-based techniques have been
tained and questioned about their whereabouts when
shown to reliably elicit false confessions (see Kassin,
the crime happened. Ordinarily, detaining, and asking
2017). Moreover, such methods damage the integrity
anyonetosharepersonaldetailscompromisestheirau-
of interviewers and the institutions under which they
tonomy,whichisarightsviolation. However,Hartwiget
serve(Hartwigetal.,2016).
al. (2016) note that a warranted temporary restriction
The other theme consists of interviewing methods
ofaperson’srights,asintheexampleofthismurdersus-
that actively avoid confirming preconceived notions.
pect, isnot necessarilyaviolation butarightsinfringe-
ThePEACEmodelisanexampleofaframeworkunder
ment. An infringement, in this case probing the secrets
the information-gathering approach (see Clarke, 2001
of a suspected murderer, is not inherently wrong. Re-
for an overview). PEACE is an abbreviation denot-
member that governing entities in liberal democracies
ing five stages of the interviewing process—Planning
are responsible for safeguarding moral equality, which
and Preparation; Engaging and explaining; asking an
allowsthemandatetocompel.
interviewees’ Account of events; Closure; and Evalua-
Nonetheless, such rights infringements must not ex-
tion. The PEACE model offers the interviewee maxi-
ceedtheamountofcompellingagoverningentityneeds
mumopportunitiestoprovideathoroughaccountinre-
torestorethestatusquo(Skerker,2010). Thegoverned
sponse to an interviewer’s inquiries. Other techniques
have the right to procedural fairness or natural justice
advocate asking questions in a manner that elicits dif-
(Bayles,2012). Butinvestigativeinterviewingisfraught
ferences between liars and truth tellers (Granhag &
with epistemic limitations. It is impossible always to
Hartwig,2015;Vrij,2018). Somemethodsalsoemploy
know whether subjecting a person to an interview is
subtle elicitation tactics that lead interviewees to dis-
justifiedinthefirstplace,asignificantpartofinterview-
close information without realizing they have provided
ing aims to determine if the interview is appropriate
new information (Oleszkiewicz et al., 2014). In all,
(Hartwig et al., 2016). Suspects undergo questioning
the techniques under the information-gathering theme
as part of establishing whether they are culprits—they
equip interviewers with tactics and strategies to gather
might well be innocent. An interviewer might have
information about a topic of interest. Hartwig et al.
to ask an informant probing questions before fully de-
(2016) note that the information-gathering theme pro-
termining whether the probe was necessary for under-
videsabetterethicalviewofinvestigativeinterviewing.
standingsomeinvestigationofinterest. Theseepistemic
Itfocusesontreatingintervieweesfairlyandrespecting
limitationsmakeitchallengingtoestablishtheextentto
theirrights—unlikeconfession-basedmethods.
which chosen interviewing methods overly infringe on
I have chosen a different way of approaching the
an interviewee’s autonomy—and rise to the level of a
topic by first categorizing interviewees to provide a
rights violation. That is to say, investigative interviews
generic classification system. This entry point offers a
are highly morally risky (Hartwig et al., 2016). How-
novelapproachdifferentfromHartwigetal.(2016)and
ever,interviewsareanecessaryaspectofassuringmoral
isusefulbecauseitallowsamoretractableandforward-
equality. Thus,itiscriticaltoequipstakeholderstobet-
looking discussion than classifying interviewing tech-
===== PAGE 5/15 =====
5
niques. Wecannotanticipateallthemethodsthatmight having had some direct sensory experience of a crime
bedevelopedinthefuture. Hence,aclassificationofex- underinvestigationorhavebeendirectlyharmed. Ordi-
tantinterviewingtechniquesislikelytobecomelimited narily, these are cases where the person may have seen
as the field develops new methods. Classifying inter- or heard aspects of a crime as a bystander (Read and
viewees affords a forward-looking analysis and offers Craik,1995;WellsandOlson,2003)—ortheymayhave
morelongevity. Suchacategorizationallowsonetoex- beenavictimofthecrime(Spalek,2016). Theinforma-
amine whether any existing or upcoming interviewing tion a witness provides sheds light on the crime under
method may pose injuries to the class of interviewees investigation in various ways. Three are relevant here:
from which the technique aims to elicit information. (a) whatever a witness discloses may contribute to ex-
Generically classifying interviewees better situates the culpatingorincriminatingasuspect;(b)ortheinforma-
field to examine the moral implications of current and tion may lead someoneto become a suspect. (c) Inthe
future interviewing methods. Additionally, the shift in first instance, a witness is not a suspect, and a witness
analysis, highlighting interviewees’ experiences, could may refuse to answer incriminating questions (Pieck,
spurdiscussionstowardpotentialmodificationsexisting 1960). Nonetheless, if a witness unwittingly provides
techniquesmayneedtoenhancetheirethicalstandards. self-incriminatinginformation, theymaybecomeasus-
Types of Interviewees and the Risks for Worst- pectintheinvestigation.
CaseOutcomes. Surveysoftheliteraturerevealthree Risks. In the worst-case scenario, what a witness re-
generalfunctionsthatcanarguablycharacterizeanyin- veals may inadvertently cause another person or the
terviewee1; a suspect, a witness, or a human intelli- witness themselves to become a suspect or ultimately
gence(HUMINT)source(e.g.,Vrij,Fisher,etal.,2017; losesomecivilliberties(WellsandOlson,2003).
Vrij, Meissner, et al., 2017). An individual is likely to Human Intelligence Sources. HUMINT sources are
fit at least one of these designations when questioned questionedbecausetheymightpossessinformationrel-
in an investigative interview at any time point. Hence, evant to an investigation. A broad range of HUMINT
this classification system sets the stage for a forward- investigations exist. Those investigations could be pre-
lookingethicsanalysisthatoffersmorelongevity. Iwill vious, ongoing, or possible future local/national or in-
examine each interviewee category and the associated ternational crimes (Hartwig et al., 2014). The interest
riskforworst-caseoutcomesininterviews. mayalsobeageneralsecurityissuethatisnotexactlya
Suspects. Suspects are individuals whom interview- crime(Burkett,2013). Forexample,aninvestigationof
ers question because of reasonable grounds to believe, known or ostensible threats posed by a local or foreign
at least temporarily, that the person has committed a organizationoraforeigngovernment. Alternatively,the
crimeorsomeaspectofacrime. Typically,interviewers investigation could be gathering information to further
question suspects in a local/national law enforcement an entity’s interests (Ransom, 2013). For instance, a
jurisdiction(e.g.,Meissneretal.,2015). Somesuspects government seeking to gain insight into subjects that
can, however, be interviewed in an international law can inform foreign policy or foreign aid decisions. Un-
enforcementcontext(Glasius,2006). Internationalsus- likesuspects,HUMINTsourcesarequestionedprimarily
pectsusuallyfeatureininvestigationssanctionedbyin- becauseoftheinformationtheymaypossess,notneces-
tergovernmentalorganizationssuchastheInternational sarilyduetoabeliefthattheyhavecommittedacrime.
CriminalCourt(ICC).Anyactlabeledacrimeinajuris- There are a few distinctions between the HUMINT
diction is unlawful by default. A governing entity can source and witness designations worth noting. Some-
meteoutpunishmenttoanyonefoundguiltyofacrime times, the objective of an intelligence interview is to
(Morrison, 2013; Tierney, 2009). If a suspect is con- elicit information about a previous, ongoing, or immi-
victedofacrime,penaltiescanrangefromapartialtoa nentcrime. Here,unlikewitnesses,intelligencesources
totallossofcivilliberties. Forexample,thoseconvicted arethosewhomayhaveobtainedinformationindirectly
can receive a fine or a prison sentence. What a suspect and not necessarily through direct harm or sensory ex-
revealsduringquestioningcouldcontributetoabsolving perience. For instance, another person could have pro-
orimplicatingthem. vided the information a HUMINT source now holds. In
Risks. In the worst-case scenario, what a person dis- this view, one could consider such indirect sources of
closeswhenquestionedasasuspectcouldinadvertently
1Possibly, some jurisdictions may call the categories by
cause them to lose some civil liberties or contribute to
slightly different names. However, stakeholders are familiar
theloss.
with and frequently use these designators in the manner de-
Witnesses. Like suspects, witnesses can feature in a
finedbytheclassificationscheme.Itisunlikelythatthenames
local/nationaloraninternationallawenforcementcon-
used here will cause unnecessary ambiguity in the investiga-
text. Theseindividualsundergointerviewsiftheyreport
tiveinterviewingliterature.
===== PAGE 6/15 =====
6
informationincriminalinvestigationstobeintelligence Navigating the Moral Risks of Investigative Inter-
sources, as they possess relevant information (Carter, viewing
1990). Indeed, investigators may question other in-
The current article aims to improve the ethics of in-
dividuals to better understand aspects of an incident;
vestigative interviewing techniques research psycholo-
for instance, cross-checking suspects’ alibis or witness’
gists publish. If so, why delve into risks to intervie-
statements using third party information. An example
weesdirectlycausedbypracticinginterviewers—notre-
ofsuchintelligencegatheringcouldbeinterviewingvar-
search psychologists? After all, jurisdictions have laws
iouscare-giversinachildsexualabusecasetoshedlight
andguidelinestodetermineandpreventmalpractice,at
on the alleged abuse. Investigators may also ask inde-
least in local and national law enforcement (e.g., Col-
pendent experts about different aspects of a crime; for
lege of Policing, 2019). As I noted earlier, research
example, requesting an explanation of DNA evidence
psychologists recommend that practicing interviewers
analysis. The goal could be to better understand, for
should implement interviewing methods published in
instance,howthecrimeoccurred.
the scientific literature. Often the recommendation
Risks in Criminal Investigations. Despite the func-
comes with the claim that those techniques are ethical
tionaldistinctions,theHUMINTsourceandwitnessdes-
orelicitinformationeffectively(see,e.g.,Vrij,Fisher,et
ignations have similar risks when an intelligence inter-
al., 2017). Suppose practitioners heed the recommen-
view relates to a criminal investigation. A HUMINT
dations of the published literature because of the pre-
sourcemayprovideinformationthatcontributestoim-
sumedbenefits. Inthatcase,researchpsychologistsmay
plicating or absolving a suspect. Under certain circum-
contributeindirectlytotherisksintervieweesfaceeven
stances, an intelligence interviewee could incriminate
though practitioners directly cause those risks. There-
herself. Thus,theworst-casescenariohereisaHUMINT
fore,itbehoovesresearchpsychologiststobecognizant
source unwittingly revealing information—and those
of the dangers they could inadvertently contribute to
details implicate someone or her to become a suspect
and preempt such possibilities. Importantly, research
in a criminal investigation or eventually lose some civil
psychologists should strive to prevent possible misuse
liberties.
oftechniquestheypublish.
Risks in Non-Criminal Investigations. Other intelli-
Investigative interviewing is an inevitable aspect of
genceinterviewsentailelicitinginformationaboutgen-
assuringmoralequalitydespitetherisksinvolved. Thus,
eral security issues such as criminal networks and for-
thecriticalquestiontonowaddressisthis: howshould
eign threats. Alternatively, the questioning can cen-
stakeholders ethically navigate these moral risks when
ter on certain interests an entity may have (e.g., for-
developing interviewing methods? How should re-
eignpolicydecisions). Theseintelligenceinvestigations
searchpsychologistsdesignfail-safetechniquesthatin-
are not necessarily alleged crimes, at least not until a
hibit interviewees from being excessively compelled in
governing entity launches a formal criminal investiga-
interviews? The following sections delve into these is-
tion. Thus, here, an intelligence source may come by
sues.
information directly, as a witness would, or the source
Interviewees Should Decide Their Disclosures.
couldobtainitindirectly,asIhavedescribedearlier. Un-
Actions that tend to result in unpleasant outcomes can
likewitnesseswhoprovideinformationaboutaspecific
be permissible if one consents to partaking (Hartwig et
(past) crime, intelligence sources here could undergo
al., 2016; Tadros, 2011). For example, pugilists con-
questioning about known or ostensible events. When
senttothepossibilityofconcussionswhentheyengage
thematterisageneralsecurityissueoranentity’sinter-
in prizefighting. In this view, the risks of investigative
ests,theworst-caseeventualityfortheHUMINTsource
interviewingarenotimmoralbydefault. Hartwigetal.
is revealing details on a subject when one does not in-
(2016)notethat,sometimes,suchoutcomesareworthy
tendto.
ofconsentbecause,inliberaldemocracies,thegoverned
Caveats. I must emphasize that the above catego-
expect governing entities to ensure moral equality. Cit-
rizationsderivefromtheimmediatepurposeorfunction
izens presume that governing entities will take action
anintervieweeisservingduringquestioning. Thus,the
tokeepthemsafeandprotecttheirinterests. However,
classification scheme does not preclude an interviewee
epistemiclimitationspreventknowingbeforehandifan
fromswitchingrolesduringanongoingorasubsequent
investigative interview is warranted. By extension, we
interview. The point is—an interviewee assumes a des-
alsocannotknowwhetherthepotentialworst-casesce-
ignationdependingontheircurrentfunction,andthose
narioaninterviewingmethodpresentsisworthyofcon-
functionsaresubjecttochange.
sent. Interviewees must first disclose information for
the worst-case scenario to arise. As a result, in liberal
democracies, interviewees generally have the right to
===== PAGE 7/15 =====
7
silence,eveniftheycanbecompelledtoquestioningin consequencesofthedisclosure.
interviews. The right to silence allows the interviewee Two Principles for Ethical Interviewing Methods.
controloverwhatinformationtobeopenorkeepsecret. Howshouldresearchpsychologistsformulateinterview-
This control assures that interviewees consent to the ing techniques that are worthy of consent? By what
possible consequences of their disclosures beforehand. principles should those questioning methods strive to
I use the phrase—possible consequences—deliberately abide? Thisworkofferstwoprinciplestosetfuturedis-
because it is not always viable to foresee the exact out- cussionsinmotion. Thefollowingproposalaimstocon-
comesofdisclosuresininterviews. tribute to developing parameters to assess or guide the
The right to determine one’s disclosures may allow ethics of current and future psychological interviewing
bad-faithactorstowithholdinformationorprovidemis- techniques.
leadingdetailstoavoiddeservedpunishment. Moreim- A psychological interviewing method can achieve
portantly, however, such autonomy enables good-faith consent worthiness by ensuring the following. (a) An
actorstoprovidealltheinformationagoverningentity interviewee is maximally and instantaneously aware of
may need toward ensuring moral equality (Seidmann an interviewer’s inquiry or what the interviewer is ask-
andStein,2000). Thesefeaturesdonotnecessarilyad- ing; call this the inquiry-clarity principle. (b) An in-
vocatefreeingthebad-faithactors. Instead,theyuphold terviewee is maximally and instantaneously aware of
a primary aspect of moral equality—the protection of the information they are choosing to disclose; call this
goodfaithactors(Bandes,2009;Cassell,2017). Acrit- the disclosure-awareness principle. These principles ar-
icalparameterforwhatcanbedonetopersonswithout guably give interviewees substantial agency to decide
compromising their rights is that no one should harm theirdisclosuresandsafeguardagainstdisclosinginfor-
another without the other’s consent (Nozick, 1974). In mationunwittingly. Supposeanintervieweehasagency,
this vein, an interviewing method worthy of consent that is, maximum and instant awareness of an inter-
should inhibit the worst-case scenarios for good-faith viewer’s inquiry and forms a clear intention of an ac-
actors in the class of interviewees from which it aims ceptable response, which she discloses. It is then con-
toelicitinformation. ceivable that the interviewee has consented to the po-
Interviewing methods purposed to elicit information tential consequences of their disclosure. Agency allows
from suspects should make it near impossible for in- the expectation that a person bears responsibility for
nocent suspects to inadvertently say anything that can their actions (Frith, 2014; Haggard and Tsakiris, 2009;
cause or contribute to them losing civil liberties. The Moore,2016).
witness and HUMINT source designations in criminal It is worth reiterating that the two principles are to
investigations are similar. Techniques designed to elicit be applied in serial order, the inquiry-clarity principle
informationfromsuchintervieweesshouldmakeitnear andthenthedisclosure-awarenessprinciple. Bothprin-
impossible for an innocent person to say anything self- ciples must be satisfied. Suppose that an interviewing
incriminating or unwittingly incriminate another inno- technique falls short of making an interviewee aware
centperson. of what an interviewer is asking. One cannot justify
HUMINTinterviewingmethodsaimedatelicitingin- the consent-worthiness of that technique by claiming
formation about general security threats or an entity’s or demonstrating that the method makes interviewees
interest should also protect interviewees’ autonomy in aware of what they are choosing to disclose. Without
decidingwhattodisclose. Becausetheseintelligencein- inquiry-clarity,itischallenging,ifnotimpossible,toas-
terviewsdo notconcern formalcriminalinvestigations, certain a reasonably proximate cause of a disclosure.
intervieweesherearenotnecessarilyinnocentorguilty. Iftheinquirythatelicitedadisclosureisunknown,one
Consequently, such interviewees may be propositioned cannotclaimtheunknowninquiryisconsent-worthy,re-
tosubmittoaninterviewandnotcompelledasamatter gardless of the interviewee’s response. After satisfying
of course. To be consent-worthy, elicitation techniques the inquiry-clarity principle, the method must also al-
purposedforsuchHUMINTsourcesshouldmakeitnear lowtheintervieweetochoosetheirpreferredresponse.
impossible to say anything one has not formed a clear Suppose a method elicits a legitimate response from an
intention to share. The consequences of disclosure in interviewee, but the interviewee does not realize they
these HUMINT contexts are highly unpredictable, un- have offered such a response. In that case, the method
like in criminal investigations where some rules (e.g., falls short of the disclosure-awareness principle. Here,
constitutions)regulatethepotentialoutcomesofdisclo- legitimateresponsemeansaresponseontherecordthat
sure. Assuch,itshouldremainthesource’sprerogative onecanmateriallyascribetotheinterviewee.
todeterminewhattodisclose; thisprovidesreasonable Proponentsofapsychologicalinterviewingtechnique
assurancethatthesourcehasconsentedtothepossible must offer theoretical arguments or empirical evidence
===== PAGE 8/15 =====
8
demonstrating the conditions under which the method minimumrequirementofconsent-worthinessshouldbe
satisfies the inquiry-clarity and disclosure-awareness one that adheres to the inquiry-clarity and disclosure-
principles. Such exposition will reveal the extent to awareness principles when a vulnerable person under-
whichthemethodallowsintervieweesagencyovertheir goes a technique. This standard calls on research psy-
disclosures. Editors and reviewers of investigative in- chologists to apply a maximin rule when formulating
terviewing research may draw on the principles of- interviewing methods. The maximin rule is an ethics
fered here to request such discussions from authors. principleadvocatingthat,typically,therightstateofaf-
This requirement will encourage much-needed reflec- fairsisonestructuredsuchthattheworstoutcomeisas
tionabouttheethicsofinterviewingmethods. acceptableascanbe(Rawls,1971).
Theprinciplesoffermuch-neededclarityaboutwhat Amethodshouldallowthemostvulnerableintervie-
constitutes a psychologically manipulative technique. wee, within a class of interviewees, maximum agency
Currently,thetermpsychologicalmanipulationremains in determining what to disclose. The standard neces-
undefined in the investigative interviewing literature. sitates research psychologists to be explicit about the
Torture, physical coercion, and deceptive methods do possible boundary conditions where a technique fails
not comport with the principles proposed here. Ana- to be consent-worthy—if such conditions exist. To my
lysts condemn such practices (Meissner et al., 2015); knowledge, there is little ongoing discussion about the
they compromise interviewees’ agency to freely deter- ethical boundaries of techniques derived from psycho-
minewhattodiscloseandessentiallypreventonefrom logicalprinciples. Letussay,forexample,onedesignsa
providingaccurateinformation. Forexample,deceptive techniquetoelicitinformationfromsuspects. Atamin-
interviewingtechniquesarepronetoelicitfalseconfes- imum, I propose that the method give vulnerable sus-
sions(Kassin,2017;KassinandKiechel,1996). Hartwig pects agency to determine what information they want
et al. (2016) address the immorality of these dubious to share. For example, the technique should give the
methods;theynotethatsuchtechniquesundermineso- most suggestible suspect, who is prone to falsely con-
ciety’strustinpublicinstitutionsanddamageinterview- fessing, maximum agency to determine what to dis-
ers’character. close—without undermining such ability in any way.
That notwithstanding, indubitably immoral tech- This standard is not always attainable. Techniques for
niques should not be the standard against which stake- vulnerable interviewees may require special considera-
holders determine ethical techniques. This criterion is tions. However,theproposedstandardtasksdevelopers
toolow. Itdoesnotguaranteeinterviewees’protection, to indicate the target populations of their methods and
given that investigative interviewing is fraught with not leave that to assumption. For instance, does the
epistemic limitations, and governing entities can com- method provide agency to neurotypical adults but not
pelpeopletointerviews. Accordingly,derivinganinter- adultswithintellectualdisabilitiesandchildren?
viewingmethodfromscientificpsychologicalprinciples It is worth clarifying that this work does not suggest
does not necessarily make a technique consent-worthy. that consent-worthy methods must provide an equal
The scientific interviewing technique may still obscure amount of agency to all interviewees within the rele-
an interviewer’s inquiry and lead an interviewee to un- vant class. Such a feat will be unproductive and, ul-
wittingly disclose information—then the method is ar- timately, insurmountable due to individual differences.
guably psychologically manipulative. I am not suggest- Instead, I am proposing that an interviewing method
ing that any interviewing technique that successfully should generally give interviewees enough (viz., max-
persuades an interviewee to share information is psy- imum) agency to the extent that when vulnerable in-
chologically manipulative. That interpretation is erro- terviewees undergo the method, they too will have the
neous. Theproposalisthatmethodsarepsychologically agencytodecidewhattheywishtoreveal.
manipulative if they undermine interviewees’ agency An illustration may assist in understanding the pro-
whenconvincingthemtoshareinformation. posal. Imagine that the agency a technique provides is
AnAbsoluteStandardBasedontheTwoPrinciples. In- apie. Iamnotsuggestingthataninterviewingmethod
terviewingmethodsshouldbeheldtoanabsolutestan- should ensure that all interviewees get an equal piece.
dard that actively protects all interviewees, especially Equal pieces may still be unacceptable if the pie is too
vulnerable ones, such as children and people with in- small in the first place. For example, by design, a
tellectual disabilities. Broadly speaking, vulnerable in- methodmayofferlittleagencytoanyinterviewee. The
terviewees, for various reasons, are highly suggestible proposed standard calls for a pie big enough so that
and prone to providing information unwittingly (see, evenwhenonegetsthesmallestslice,itwillstillbeac-
e.g., Farrugia and Gabbert, 2020; Gudjonsson, 2005; ceptable. Put differently, interviewing methods should
O’Mahony et al., 2012). Hence, I propose that the provide enough agency such that the levels are suffi-
===== PAGE 9/15 =====
9
cient even when dealing with vulnerable interviewees. • Afriendlyinterpersonalapproach. Thiscomponent
Researchers should be explicit about the boundaries of advocates conversing with the interviewee in a
amethodifitcannotachievethisstandard. Overall,the non-adversarialmanner. Theintervieweeistofeel
proposed standard may allow psychological investiga- relaxed and comfortable, not accused or threat-
tiveinterviewingtechniquestoachievebeneficenceand enedtocomplywithdemands.
nonmaleficence;andrespectforrightsanddignity(viz.,
• Not pressing for information. This component
American Psychological Association, 2002, Principles A
charges the interviewer to refrain from asking di-
andE).
rect questions or badgering the interviewee with
Advancing the Ethics Paradigm: Exploring the questions. Notethataskingdirectquestionsisnot
ScharffTechnique synonymouswithbadgering.
The standard proposed here arguably provides fairly • Creating an impression of omniscience on a topic.
straightforward and actionable guidelines for the de- This component calls on the interviewer to estab-
sign of future interviewing techniques. Nonetheless, lish an illusion of possessing substantial informa-
when it comes to existing methods, it is useful to ex- tiononatopicbypresentingtruthfulinformation.
plore the conditions under which those techniques im- The presentation could be explicit; for example,
pactinterviewees’agencytopromoteorunderminecon- theinterviewercouldtalkopenlyaboutwhatthey
sent worthiness. Illustration may help one understand know,likeacoherentstory. Nevertheless,thegoal
how to engage with the standard when examining a tocreatetheillusionofomnisciencemustbesub-
specific technique’s ethics. In that light, I will exam- tle, leading the interviewee to perceive they are
ine the Scharff technique. Researchers developed the unlikelytorevealanythingnew. Itisworthnoting
Scharff technique by scientifically conceptualizing the that exponents of the Scharff technique advocate
interviewing style of Hanns Scharff; a member of the theuseoftruthfulinformation,notfalseevidence
German Luftwaffe, active during World War II2. See ploys.
Granhag and Hartwig (2015) for the first of such con-
• Confirmations and disconfirmations over direct
ceptualizations(see,also,Oleszkiewicz,2016).
questions. Instead of posing direct questions, the
ChoosingtheScharfftechniqueisarbitrary. Everyin-
Scharff technique recommends theinterviewer to
terviewing technique in the published literature should
present claims in a manner that invites the in-
be the subject of an ethics analysis; for example, the
terviewee to either confirm or disconfirm. Here
variantsofthecognitiveapproachtoliedetection(Vrij,
is an example fashioned after one provided by
Fisher,etal.,2017),thestrategicuseofevidenceframe-
Oleszkiewicz (2016). Suppose an interviewer
work (Granhag & Hartwig, 2015), the tactical disclo-
wanted to know if an event is likely to happen
sure of evidence method (Dando and Bull, 2011), the
at location-x or -y. The interviewer could ask a
verifiability approach (Nahari et al., 2014), et cetera.
directquestion. Willtheeventhappenatlocation-x
Moreover, this analysis of the Scharff technique is pre-
or -y? Alternatively, one could embed the ques-
liminary and not exhaustive; its goal is to encourage
tion in a claim. We know the event is likely to
open discussions about the ethical boundaries of exist-
happen at location-x, not y. The interviewer is to
ing techniques. The objective is not to impugn or be
discern ifthe intervieweeconfirms ordisconfirms
asnaretolabeltheScharfftechniqueasunethical. The
the claim in any way. Drawing on Grice (1975)
stateoftheliteraturewillimprovethroughcollectiveef-
and Luke (2021) notes that the confirmation-
fort,notalienation. Thepresentdiscussionprovidesan
disconfirmation tactic may derive from the archi-
example of a structure and general recommendations.
tectureofconversationalnorms;interlocutorstyp-
The goal is to get the ball rolling for future examina-
ically correct each other’s mistakes if any arise.
tions of the Scharff technique and all other methods in
Oleszkiewiczetal.(2014)mentionthatconfirma-
thepublishedliterature.
ThecurrentconceptionoftheScharfftechniquecom- 2Asonecaninfer,ScharfffoughtforNaziGermany,which
prisesfivecomponentsthatworkinconcerttoelicitin- begsanethicsdiscussionatadifferentlevelofanalysis. Sup-
formation. Thesecomponentsarebestcharacterizedas pose an interviewing method is consent-worthy by the stan-
a way of handling conversations to facilitate the other dard this article proposes. In that case, does it matter who
interlocutor’s disclosure—not a checklist of mandatory or what inspired the method? Are there any conditions that
behaviorstoperforminserialorder. Aninterviewermay ethically justify or should preempt from developing consent-
enacttheScharffiancomponentsinanyorderthatsuits worthy interviewing methods? I am preparing to address
thesequestionsinanupcomingarticle,butseeLuke(2017)
thegoalsathand.
===== PAGE 10/15 =====
10
tionanddisconfirmationalleviatetheresponsibil- forelicitingintelligenceincriminalinvestigations,non-
ityontheintervieweetotaketheinitiativeofshar- criminalinvestigations,orboth.
ing new information. Importantly, the tactic min- Toexaminetheethicsofanyinterviewingmethod,re-
imizes interviewees’ perception of the magnitude searchersmustspecifyitsintendedapplications. Itmay
of their contribution to the interviewer’s knowl- beworthwhiletoapproachthattaskinamanneranalo-
edge. goustothesafeandbalancedprescribingofmedication.
The idea is that medical professionals should strive to
• Ignoring new information. This component rec-
prescribe medicines appropriate to the condition under
ommendstheinterviewertoavoidindicatingthat
treatment with a dosage regimen that minimizes harm
anintervieweehasdisclosedanythingsignificant.
to the patient (Aronson, 2006). Thinking along those
The interviewer may achieve this goal in several
same lines, it is useful for research psychologists to ac-
ways. Examples of those ways include changing
company their recommendations of interviewing tech-
topics after the interviewee discloses something
niqueswithdosageregimensthatpromotejudiciousus-
significant, downplaying the information, or ig-
age and flags plus preempts abuse. Next follows an
noringit. Luke(2021)theorizesthatnotacknowl-
elaborationofhowonecanofferanappropriatedosage
edging new information may complement other
regimenintheinvestigativeinterviewingcontext.
componentslikenotpressingforinformationand
theconfirmation-disconfirmationtactic. Thissym- • (i) One must first identify the categories of inter-
biosismaybolstertheillusionthattheinterviewer viewees from which the method aims to elicit in-
isindeedomniscientontherelevanttopic. formation. One must outline why it is permissi-
bletosubjectthatcategoryofintervieweestothe
TheinterestedreadermayconsultOleszkiewicz(2016) recommendedtechnique. Thereshouldbeempir-
for a more thorough discussion of the Scharff compo- ical evidence or a theoretical discussion describ-
nents. ing how the method provides agency that allows
Overall, the Scharff technique’s current conception therelevantintervieweescontrolovertheirdisclo-
calls for the interviewer to assure that the intervie- sures.
wee experiences a pleasant interview. Interviewers
• (ii)Itisalsoequallyvitaltoidentifypotentialcat-
must strive to view interviewees as persons, not just
egoriesofintervieweesthatshouldnotbesubjects
sources of information (Oleszkiewicz, 2016). Hence,
of the technique. If possible, authors should also
the congeniality should be as authentic as possible,
specify with theoretical examination or empirical
without threats, accusations, emotional manipulation,
evidence why it is not permissible to subject a
or accusatory minimization (Luke, 2021; Oleszkiewicz,
categoryofintervieweestoaproposedtechnique.
2016). Generally speaking, the ethos of the technique
These specifications allow clear identification of
islaudableandrespectsinterviewees’dignity.
a technique’s ethical boundaries. Imagine that
BasedontheextantscientificliteratureontheScharff
thetechniqueseriouslyunderminestheagencyof
technique, one can infer that proponents intend for in-
some relevant category of interviewees, but this
terviewers to use it to elicit information from human
is left unspecified. Suppose the technique pro-
intelligence (HUMINT) interviewees (e.g., Granhag &
vides neurotypical adults agency to decide their
Hartwig, 2015). This specification is a good start, and
disclosures. However, for whatever reason, when
the Scharff technique literature offers more, in that re-
adults with intellectual disabilities undergo the
gard, than say the cognitive approach to lie detection
technique, they mistake the interview for a ca-
(see, e.g., Vrij, Fisher, et al., 2017). In fact, this anal-
sual conversation. Say it is not immediately ap-
ysis is possible because the Scharff technique literature
parent to them that what they are saying are dis-
provides some specifications about the intended target
closuresontherecord. Inthatcase,thetechnique
population. Nonetheless, the Scharff body of work is
fails the inquiry-clarity and disclosure-awareness
silent regarding which HUMINT interviewees can un-
principles. The vulnerable class of interviewees
dergo the technique. For example, is the technique
is not aware that the interviewer is asking for in-
applicable when interviewing children, adolescents, or
formation on the record, and they (i.e., intervie-
adults with intellectual disabilities; or is the technique
wees)arechoosingtodiscloseinformationonthat
designed for interviews with neurotypical adults only?
record.
To be fair, as I mentioned earlier, this issue is pervasive
acrosstheinvestigativeinterviewingliterature; itisnot
• (iii)Finally,authorsshouldaimtoanticipatepos-
specific to the Scharff technique. Furthermore, it is not
sible misapplications and preempt such possibili-
clear whether the Scharff technique is recommended
ties by describing such situations. For example,
===== PAGE 11/15 =====
11
exponents of the Scharff technique try to prevent Further research needs to elucidate how the various
misapplicationbynotingthatinterviewersshould Scharffiancomponentscontributetotheeffectsjustde-
only use truthful information—not false evidence scribed. However, one can infer that taken together,
ploys—tocreatetheomniscienceillusion. the components may lead neurotypical adults to un-
wittingly disclose some information in a HUMINT in-
Proponentsofaninterviewingmethodareunlikelyto terview. The use of the word some is not trivial. The
always be available to chaperone practicing interview- meta-analysis (Luke, 2021) suggests that for certain
ers when they are potentially misusing the proposed questions,theScharfftechniqueobscuresinquiry-clarity
method such that it falls short of consent-worthiness. insofar as interviewees report difficulty understanding
For that reason, leaving the permitted and protected what information the interviewer is after. Additionally,
categories of interviewees unspecified or potential mis- intervieweesdisclosemorenewinformationandunder-
applicationsunaddressedallowsdangerouspossibilities estimate the amount they actually disclose. That re-
for abuse. Without specification, one can justify any sult suggests that the Scharff technique may obscure
usage by claiming the technique is recommended in disclosure-awarenessofsomeitemsofinformation.
the scientific literature and is therefore ethical. Speci- In the worst-case scenario, during a criminal inves-
fying the permitted and protected categories and flag- tigation, for example, when questioning an informant,
gingpossiblemisusewillchallengeresearcherstomore the technique may reduce the interviewee’s agency in
thoroughlyconsiderthepossiblerisksaseeminglynon- deciding whether to reveal or withhold some informa-
coercive technique could be inviting. Exposing those tionitems. Supposethoseitemsarenotbonafidecrim-
risks will lead researchers to take preemptive action inalsecretsbutprivateinformationoutsidethescopeof
bydiscontinuingthetechnique,outliningtheboundary the investigation. In that case, the Scharff technique’s
conditions,orredesigningittobefail-safeifpossible. influence on neurotypical adults’ agency is a cause for
Let us now explore the Scharff technique’s consent- concern. As discussed previously, epistemic limitations
worthiness given what is published concerning (a) the prevent knowing beforehand whether one possesses
category of interviewees from which the method aims bona fide criminal secrets3. Governing entities have a
to elicit information; (b) the associated risks of being monopoly on coercion and could compel people to in-
anintervieweeinthatrelevantcategory; (c)theeffects terviews, at least in criminal investigations. Intervie-
oftheScharfftechniqueonhowintervieweesthinkand wees’ recourse from being excessively compelled is to
behave. Based on the extant research, one can assume decide their disclosures and object to providing infor-
thattheScharfftechniqueispurposedtoelicitinforma- mation if they wish (Skerker, 2010). Proponents must
tion from HUMINT interviewees who are neurotypical address this potential ethical boundary of the Scharff
adults. A recent meta-analysis examined experiments technique when it comes to HUMINT interviewees in
where neurotypical adults underwent the Scharff tech- criminalinvestigations.
niquecomparedtodirectquestioning(Luke,2021). All Similarconcernstotheonejustdescribedarisewhen
things being equal, direct questions arguably reveal a considering Scharffian influence on HUMINT intervie-
questioner’s inquiry clearly. A neurotypical adult an- wees in non-criminal investigations. An example of a
swering those questions is likely to be aware of what non-criminal investigation is a clandestine interview to
theyarechoosingtodisclose. Allthingsbeingequal,di- collectinformationaimedatdirectingforeignpolicy. As
rect questions satisfy the inquiry-clarity and disclosure- discussedearlier,therisksinthoseinterviewsarehighly
awarenessprinciplesinserialorder. Bythestandardthis unpredictable. Typically, there are hardly any codified
article proposes, direct questioning is consent-worthy rules (e.g., constitutions) stipulating the potential out-
when interviewing neurotypical adults in an intelli- comes of disclosure for the interviewee. Those out-
genceinterview. comes could be innocuous or pernicious, but one can-
The meta-analysis indicated that the Scharff tech- not be entirely sure before disclosing the information.
nique generally influences HUMINT interviewees as in- The Scharff technique reduces agency to decide some
tended (Luke, 2021). The method leads interviewees disclosures. Hence,thetechniquemaypreventaninter-
to disclose more new information. Importantly under viewee from withholding what they have not formed a
Scharffian questioning, interviewees underestimate the clearintentiontoshare. Forthoseitemsofinformation,
amount of new information they disclose relative to the Scharff technique falls short of the inquiry-clarity
what they indeed revealed. The technique also makes
interviewees perceive the interviewer as more knowl- 3In a liberal democracy, withholding a criminal secret is
edgeableonthetopicsofdiscussion. Finally,theScharff morally inconsistent with the expectation that governing en-
techniqueleadsintervieweestoreportgreaterdifficulty tities should ensure moral equality when a deviation occurs
(Skerker,2010).
indecipheringtheinterviewer’squestioningobjectives.
===== PAGE 12/15 =====
12
and disclosure-awareness principles. There is a need The field must adopt fairly unambiguous metrics to
to examine the flagged potential ethical boundary that examinetheethicsofinterviewingmethodsauthorsaim
couldariseinnon-criminalinvestigations. to publish. We must relinquish the comforting fiction
As noted previously, the present analysis is prelimi- thattechniquesdevoidofblatantphysicalorpsycholog-
nary. The current conception of the Scharff technique ical coercion are automatically ethical without actively
may change. There is also the need for more research investigatingthosemethods. Indubitablyimmoraltech-
to examine what precisely the Scharffian components niques that take advantage of suggestible interviewees
cause interviewees to disclose. The meta-analysis in- to elicit false confessions or collect information nefari-
dicates that the Scharff technique, compared to di- ouslyshouldnotbethestandardagainstwhichresearch
rect questions, leads interviewees to disclose a higher psychologists determine ethical techniques—this crite-
amount of information (Luke, 2021). Nonetheless, it rionistoolow. Psychologyresearchneedsfurthertheo-
is unclear what information people share in response reticalandempiricalworkthatproactivelyensuresthat
to the technique. The underlying mechanisms of the currentandfuturepublicationsofinterviewingmethods
technique remain largely unknown. Thus, it is uncer- protect various interviewees against potential manipu-
tain which components exert the elicitation influences lation.
and why interviewees reveal the information they do. In addition to thinking about how a method may fa-
Maybe, Scharffian tactics generally elicit information cilitate disclosure, research psychologists must also be
thatintervieweesmustlegitimatelyreveal,forexample, cognizant of the potential misuse or misapplication of
criminalsecrets. Furtherresearchmayalsoindicatethat the techniques they publish. This article’s contribution
the technique leads interviewees to unwittingly share is that it specifies criteria by which to examine the eth-
information irrespective of the information’s character- ical nature of interviewing methods researchers pub-
istics. These questions remain unanswered. Answering lish,reducingambiguityaboutwhatconstitutespsycho-
thependingresearchquestionswillassistinconducting logical manipulation. Investigative interviewing entails
further ethical analysis to comprehensively determine considerable moral risks. Stakeholders must take steps
theScharfftechnique’sconsent-worthiness. to avoid ambiguity about what constitutes consent-
worthy methods of eliciting information from intervie-
ConcludingRemarks wees.
Thisarticlehasproposedanethicsstandardthatmay
AuthorContact
guide the formulation of psychological interviewing
methods. That is, interviewing techniques should pro- DavidA.Neequaye,0000-0002-7355-2784
videinterviewees,particularlyvulnerableones,enough DepartmentofPsychology,UniversityofGothenburg,
agency to freely determine what to disclose. This Sweden
standard is feasible in governances, pertinently, liberal I thank Lorraine Hope and Erik Mac Giolla for pro-
democracies, that arguably respect the natural rights viding immensely useful comments on earlier versions
of the governed and persons in general. Applying the of this work. I am fully and solely responsible for any
principles to develop interviewing methods in immoral errorsinthisarticle.
contexts like totalitarian regimes that do not aim to re- Correspondence to: David A. Neequaye, De-
spect the rights of the governed would be unethical by partment of Psychology, University of Gothenburg.
default. Box 500, 405 30 Gothenburg, Sweden; Email:
Intheirpublications,researchersshouldexplicitlyin- david.neequaye@psy.gu.se
dicate the boundary conditions of a technique if it can-
notachievetheproposedstandard. Journaleditorsand ConflictofInterestandFunding
reviewers should request such discussions. It is worth
Ihavenoconflictofinteresttodeclare.
noting that this proposal does not call for researchers
Ireceivednospecificfundingforthisresearch.
to cease exploring how people think and behave in in-
vestigative interviews. As such, I do not intend for this
AuthorContributions
work to stifle the exploration of interviewing methods.
Itisvitaltounderstandtheenterpriseofinterviewingto David A. Neequaye: Original Conceptualization, In-
facilitatenavigatingitethically. Thesuggestedstandard vestigation, Project administration, Writing – original
tasks research psychologists to be circumspect about draft,Writing–review&editing
recommendingpsychologicaltechniqueswithout(fully)
addressing the ethical boundaries of those methods in
theirpublications.
===== PAGE 13/15 =====
13
OpenSciencePractices Clarke, C. (2001). National Evaluation of Investigative
Interviewing PEACE Course (tech. rep.). Home
This article is purely theoretical and as such did not
Office,London.
receiveanyOpenSciencebadges. Therewasnostatisti-
Cohen, S. (2005). Post-moral torture: From guan-
cal analysis. The entire editorial process, including the
tanamo to abu ghraib. Index on Censorship,
openreviews,ispublishedintheonlinesupplement.
34(1), 24–30. https://doi.org/10.1080/
03064220512331339427
References
College of Policing. (2019). Investigative interview-
Alison,L.,&Alison,E.(2017).Revengeversusrapport: ing. Retrieved June 26, 2019, from https://
Interrogation, terrorism, and torture. American www.app.college.police.uk/app-content/
Psychologist, 72(3), 266–277. https://doi.org/ investigations / investigative - interviewing /
10.1037/amp0000064 #peace-framework
American Psychological Association. (2002). Ethical Dando, C. J., & Bull, R. (2011). Maximising opportuni-
principles of psychologists and code of con- ties to detect verbal deception: Training police
duct. American Psychologist, 57(12), 1060– officers to interview tactically. Journal of Inves-
1073. https://doi.org/http://dx.doi.org. tigative Psychology and Offender Profiling, 8(2),
ezproxy.ub.gu.se/10.1037/0003-066X.57.12. 189–202. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.
1060 1002/jip.145
Aronson, J. K. (2006). Balanced prescribing. British Fallon, M. (2014). Collaboration between practice and
Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 62(6), 629– science will enhance interrogations. Applied
632. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2125. Cognitive Psychology, 28(6), 949–950. https://
2006.02825.x doi.org/10.1002/acp.3091
Bandes,S.A.(2009).Protectingtheinnocentasthepri- Farrugia, L., & Gabbert, F. (2020). Vulnerable suspects
mary value of the criminal justice system book inpoliceinterviews:Exploringcurrentpractice
review. Ohio State Journal of Criminal Law, in england and wales. Journal of Investigative
7(1), 413–438. Retrieved October 11, 2020, PsychologyandOffenderProfiling,17(1),17–30.
from https://heinonline.org/HOL/P?h=hein. https://doi.org/10.1002/jip.1537
journals/osjcl7&i=417 Frith, C. D. (2014). Action, agency and responsibility.
Bayles,M.E.(2012).Proceduraljustice:Allocatingtoin- Neuropsychologia, 55, 137–142. https://doi.
dividuals.SpringerScience&BusinessMedia. org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2013.09.007
Behnke, S. (2006). APA’s Ethical Principles of Psychol- Glasius, M. (2006). The international criminal court :
ogists and Code of Conduct: An ethics code A global civil society achievement. Routledge.
for all psychologists...? Monitor on Psychology. https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203414514
https://www.apa.org/monitor/sep06/ethics Granhag,P.A.,&Hartwig,M.(2015).Thestrategicuse
Bok,S.(1989).Secrets:Ontheethicsofconcealmentand of evidence technique: A conceptual overview.
revelation.Vintage. In A. Vrij & B. Verschuere (Eds.), Deception de-
Burkett, R.(2013). Analternative frameworkforagent tection: Current challenges and new directions
recruitment: From MICE to RASCLS. Studies in (pp. 231–251). John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. https:
Intelligence,57(1),12. //doi.org/10.1002/9781118510001.ch10
Carter,D.L.(1990).LawEnforcementIntelligenceOpera- Grice, H. P. (1975). Logic and Conversation. Speech
tions:AnOverviewofConcepts,IssuesandTerms Acts, 41–58. https://doi.org/10.1163/
|OfficeofJusticePrograms.NationalInstituteof 9789004368811_003
Justice.RetrievedOctober4,2022,fromhttps: Gudjonsson, G. (2005). Disputed confessions and mis-
//www.ojp.gov/ncjrs/virtual-library/abstracts/ carriages of justice in britain: Expert psycho-
law - enforcement - intelligence - operations - logical and psychiatric evidence in the court
overview-concepts-issues of appeal. Manitoba Law Journal, 31(3), 489–
Cassell, P. (2017). Can we protect the innocent with- 522. Retrieved October 25, 2020, from https:
out freeing the guilty? thoughts on innocence //heinonline.org/HOL/P?h=hein.journals/
reforms that avoid harmful tradeoffs. Thoughts manitob31&i=497
on innocence reforms that avoid harmful trade- Haggard, P., & Tsakiris, M. (2009). The experience of
offs. wrongful convictions and the DNA revolu- agency: Feelings, judgments, and responsibil-
tion: Twenty-five years of freeing the innocent ity. Current Directions in Psychological Science.
(p.25).CambridgeUniversityPress. Retrieved October 18, 2020, from https://
===== PAGE 14/15 =====
14
journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467- Mukand,S.W.,&Rodrik,D.(2020).Thepoliticalecon-
8721.2009.01644.x omy of liberal democracy. The Economic Jour-
Hartwig, M., Luke, T. J., & Skerker, M. (2016). Ethi- nal, 130(627), 765–792. https://doi.org/10.
cal perspectives on interrogation: An analysis 1093/ej/ueaa004
of contemporary techniques. In J. Jacobs & J. Nahari, G., Vrij, A., & Fisher, R. P. (2014). Exploiting
Jacobs(Eds.),TheRoutledgeHandbookofCrim- liars’ verbal strategies by examining the verifi-
inalJusticeEthics.Routledge. ability of details. Legal and Criminological Psy-
Hartwig, M., Meissner, C. A., & Semel, M. D. (2014). chology,19(2),227–239.https://doi.org/https:
Human intelligence interviewing and interro- //doi.org/10.1111/j.2044-8333.2012.02069.x
gation: Assessing the challenges of developing Newton, T. (1998). The place of ethics in investiga-
anethical,evidence-basedapproach.InR.Bull tiveinterviewingbypoliceofficers.TheHoward
(Ed.), Investigative interviewing (pp. 209–228). JournalofCriminalJustice,37(1),52–69.https:
Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1- //doi.org/10.1111/1468-2311.00077
4614-9642-7_11 Nozick, R. (1974). Anarchy, state, and utopia
Inbau, F. E., Reid, J., Buckley, J., & Jayne, B. (2001). (Vol.5038).NewYork:BasicBooks.
Criminal Interrogation And Confessions (4th). Oleszkiewicz, S. (2016). Eliciting human intelligence a
AspenPublishers,Inc. conceptualization and empirical testing of the
Kassin, S. M. (2017). False confessions: How can psy- scharff-technique (Doctoral dissertation). De-
chologysobasicbesocounterintuitive?Ameri- partment of Psychology, University of Gothen-
can Psychologist, 72(9), 951–964. https://doi. burg.Göteborg.RetrievedNovember27,2018,
org/http://dx.doi.org.ezproxy.ub.gu.se/10. fromhttp://hdl.handle.net/2077/41567
1037/amp0000195 Oleszkiewicz, S., Granhag, P. A., & Kleinman, S. M.
Kassin, S. M., & Kiechel, K. L. (1996). The social psy- (2014). On eliciting intelligence from human
chologyoffalseconfessions:Compliance,inter- sources: Contextualizing the scharff-technique.
nalization,andconfabulation.PsychologicalSci- Applied Cognitive Psychology, 28(6), 898–907.
ence,7(3),125–128.https://doi.org/10.1111/ https://doi.org/10.1002/acp.3073
j.1467-9280.1996.tb00344.x O’Mahony, B. M., Milne, B., & Grant, T. (2012). To
Luke, T. (2017). The moral backdrop of interrogations challenge, or not to challenge? best practice
[Rabbit tracks]. Retrieved March 22, 2021, when interviewing vulnerable suspects. Polic-
from https://www.rabbitsnore.com/2017/11/ ing:AJournalofPolicyandPractice,6(3),301–
the-moral-backdrop-of-interrogations.html 313.https://doi.org/10.1093/police/pas027
Luke, T. (2021). A meta-analytic review of experimen- Pieck, M. (1960). Witness privilege against self-
taltestsoftheinterrogationtechniqueofhanns incriminationinthecivillaw.VillanovaLawRe-
joachim scharff. Applied Cognitive Psychology, view,5,33.
acp.3771.https://doi.org/10.1002/acp.3771 Porter,S.,Rose,K.,&Dilley,T.(2016).Enhancedinter-
Meissner, C. A. (2021). “what works?” systematic re- rogations:Theexpandingrolesofpsychologyin
viewsandmeta-analysesoftheinvestigativein- police investigations in canada. Canadian Psy-
terviewingresearchliterature.AppliedCognitive chology/Psychologie canadienne, 57(1), 35–43.
Psychology, 35(2), 322–328. https://doi.org/ https://doi.org/10.1037/cap0000042
https://doi.org/10.1002/acp.3808 Rachlew, A. (2017). From interrogating to interview-
Meissner,C.A.,Kelly,C.E.,&Woestehoff,S.A.(2015). ing suspects of terror: Towards a new mindset
Improving the effectiveness of suspect interro- [Penal reform international]. Retrieved August
gations. Annual Review of Law and Social Sci- 24, 2020, from https://www.penalreform.
ence, 11(1), 211–233. https://doi.org/10. org/blog/interrogating-interviewing-suspects-
1146/annurev-lawsocsci-120814-121657 terror-towards-new-mindset/
Moore, J. W. (2016). What is the sense of agency and Ransom, H. H. (2013). The intelligence establishment.
why does it matter? Frontiers in Psychology, 7. HarvardUniversityPress.RetrievedAugust31,
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2016.01272 2020, from https://hup.degruyter.com/view/
Morrison,W.(2013).Whatiscrime?contrastingdefini- title/323605
tionsandperspectives.InC.Hale,K.Hayward, Rawls,J.(1971).ATheoryofJustice.HarvardUniversity
A. Wahidin, & E. Wincup (Eds.), Criminology. Press.
OUPOxford. Read, D., & Craik, F. I. M. (1995). Earwitness iden-
tification: Some influences on voice recogni-
===== PAGE 15/15 =====
15
tion. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Ap- Tierney, J. (2009). Criminology: Theory and context.
plied, 1(1), 6–18. https://doi.org/http://dx. PearsonEducation.
doi.org.ezproxy.ub.gu.se/10.1037/1076- Vrij,A.(2018).Deceptionandtruthdetectionwhenan-
898X.1.1.6 alyzingnonverbalandverbalcues.AppliedCog-
Seidmann,D.J.,&Stein,A.(2000).Therighttosilence nitivePsychology.https://doi.org/10.1002/acp.
helps the innocent: A game-theoretic analysis 3457
of the fifth amendment privilege. Harvard Law Vrij, A., Fisher, R. P., & Blank, H. (2017). A cognitive
Review, 114(2), 430–510. https://doi.org/10. approach to lie detection: A meta-analysis. Le-
2307/1342573 galandCriminologicalPsychology,22(1),1–21.
Skerker,M.(2010).Anethicsofinterrogation.University https://doi.org/10.1111/lcrp.12088
ofChicagoPress. Vrij, A., & Granhag, P. A. (2014). Eliciting information
Snook, B., Barron, T., Fallon, L., Kassin, S. M., Klein- and detecting lies in intelligence interviewing:
man,S.,Leo,R.A.,Meissner,C.A.,Morello,L., An overview of recent research. Applied Cogni-
Nirider, L. H., Redlich, A. D., & Trainum, J. L. tive Psychology, 28(6), 936–944. https://doi.
(2020). Urgent issues and prospects in reform- org/10.1002/acp.3071
ing interrogation practices in the united states Vrij,A.,Meissner,C.A.,Fisher,R.P.,Kassin,S.M.,Mor-
and canada. Legal and Criminological Psychol- gan, C. A., & Kleinman, S. M. (2017). Psycho-
ogy, 26(1), 1–24. https://doi.org/10.1111/ logical perspectives on interrogation. Perspec-
lcrp.12178 tives on Psychological Science, 12(6), 927–955.
Spalek, B. (2016). Crime victims: Theory, policy and https://doi.org/10.1177/1745691617706515
practice. Macmillan International Higher Edu- Wells, G. L., & Olson, E. A. (2003). Eyewitness testi-
cation. mony. Annual Review of Psychology; Palo Alto,
Sukumar, D., Wade, K. A., & Hodgson, J. S. (2016). 54,277–95.https://doi.org/http://dx.doi.org.
Strategic disclosure of evidence: Perspectives ezproxy.ub.gu.se/10.1146/annurev.psych.54.
frompsychologyandlaw.Psychology,PublicPol- 101601.145028
icy,andLaw,22(3),306–313.https://doi.org/ Williamson, T. M. (1993). From interrogation to inves-
10.1037/law0000092 tigative interviewing; strategic trends in police
Tadros,V.(2011).Consenttoharm.CurrentLegalProb- questioning. Journal of Community & Applied
lems, 64(1), 23–49. https://doi.org/10.1093/ SocialPsychology,3(2),89–99.https://doi.org/
clp/cur004 10.1002/casp.2450030203