
===== PAGE 1/14 =====
Opendata:NotApplicable Editedby:RickardCarlsson
Meta-Psychology,2023,vol7,MP.2021.2840 Openmaterials:NotApplicable Reviewedby:ChristinaBergmann,MatthewPage
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2021.2840 Openandreproducibleanalysis:NotApplicable Analysisreproducedby:NotApplicable
Articletype:OriginalArticle Openreviewsandeditorialprocess:Yes AllsupplementaryfilescanbeaccessedatOSF:
PublishedundertheCC-BY4.0license Preregistration:No https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/FG8TZ
An integrative framework for planning and conducting
Non-Intervention, Reproducible, and Open Systematic Reviews
(NIRO-SR)
Marta K Topor*1,2, Jade S Pickering*3, Ana Barbosa Mendes4, Dorothy Bishop5, Fionn Büttner6,
Mahmoud M Elsherif7, Thomas Rhys Evans8, Emma L Henderson2, Tamara Kalandadze9, Faye T
Nitschke10, Janneke P C Staaks11, Olmo R van den Akker12, Siu Kit Yeung13,14, Mirela Zaneva5,
Alison Lam15, Christopher R Madan16, David Moreau17, Aoife O’Mahony18, Adam J Parker19,
Amy Riegelman20, Meghan Testerman21, and Samuel Westwood22,23
1UniversityofCopenhagen,Denmark
2UniversityofSurrey,UK
3UniversityofManchester,UK
4ErasmusUniversityRotterdam,Netherlands
5UniversityofOxford,UK
6UniversityCollegeDublin,Ireland
7UniversityofBirmingham,UK
8UniversityofGreenwich,UK
9ØstfoldUniversityCollege,Norway
10UniversityofNewcastle,Australia
11UniversityofAmsterdam,Netherlands
12TilburgUniversity,Netherlands
13TheUniversityofHongKong,HKSAR,China
14TheChineseUniversityofHongKong,HKSAR,China
15UniversityofLiverpool,UK
16UniversityofNottingham,UK
17UniversityofAuckland,NZ
18CardiffUniversity,UK
19UniversityCollegeLondon,UK
20UniversityofMinnesota,MN,USA
21PrincetonUniversity,NJ,USA
22UniversityofWestminster,UK
23King’sCollegeLondon,UK
*Jointfirstauthors
Most of the commonly used and endorsed guidelines for systematic review protocols
andreportingstandards havebeendevelopedfor interventionresearch. These excel-
lent guidelines have been adopted as the gold-standard for systematic reviews as an
evidence synthesis method. In the current paper, we highlight some issues that may
arise from adopting these guidelines beyond intervention designs, including in basic
behavioural,cognitive,experimental,andexploratoryresearch. Wehaveadaptedand
builtupontheexistingguidelinestoestablishacomplementary,comprehensive,andac-
cessibletoolfordesigning,conducting,andreportingNon-Intervention,Reproducible,
and Open Systematic Reviews (NIRO-SR). NIRO-SR is a checklist composed of two
partsthatprovideitemisedguidanceonthepreparationofasystematicreviewproto-
colforpre-registration(PartA)andreportingthereview(PartB)inareproducibleand
transparentmanner. Thispaper,thetool,andanopenrepositoryosf.io/f3brwprovide
a comprehensive resource for those who aim to conduct a high quality, reproducible,
andtransparentsystematicreviewofnon-interventionstudies.
Keywords: guidelines,non-interventionresearch,openresearch,reproducibility,
systematicreviews,transparency
===== PAGE 2/14 =====
Introduction plain mechanisms, and thus evidence synthesis of such
papersmustbeapproachedfromadifferentperspective.
Systematic literature reviews are a widely used
Research that does not fit the scope of intervention,
method for rigorously synthesising existing evidence to
such as explanatory, experimental, and basic research,
answer research questions and to inform best practice
shouldalsoadoptrigorousandtransparentpractisesof
andpolicy-making. Thequalityofsystematicreviewsis
conducting evidence synthesis, particularly in the con-
contingent uponcomprehensive, systematic, andtrans-
text of the ongoing paradigm shift that places empha-
parent identification of all the relevant literature, fol-
sis on replicable and reproducible research (Munafò et
lowed by a balanced critical evaluation and synthesis
al.,2017). However,researchersconductingsystematic
of the data extracted from that literature. Rigorous
reviews of non-intervention research who wish to fol-
implementation can minimise biases and questionable
low established guidelines must often resort to adapt-
reporting practices that can lead to misleading or in-
ing the criteria of less applicable guidelines to make it
consistent conclusions (Ioannidis, 2016; Moher et al.,
appropriate to assess these types of studies, leading to
2009;Siddawayetal.,2019). However,themostpopu-
ad hoc solutions such as filtering, combining, or cus-
larguidelinesfordesigning,reporting,conducting,and
tomising practices from several sources (Macpherson
critically appraising systematic reviews to date have
and Jones, 2010). For instance, one popular tool is the
been designed for the synthesis of healthcare, medi-
“PICOS”framework(Population,Intervention,Compar-
cal,andintervention-basedresearch. Theseincludethe
ison, Outcome, Study design) which aids the develop-
PROSPERO protocol pre-registration system and tem-
ment of a research question and eligibility criteria for
plate(Boothetal.,2012);thePreferredReportingItems
evidence synthesis. PICOS is an important component
for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA;
of the PROSPERO template, Cochrane guidelines, and
Page et al., 2021); Cochrane Handbook for Systematic
the AMSTAR tool, and it was only recently removed
ReviewsofInterventions(Higginsetal.,2019);andthe
from PRISMA following the 2020 update. This frame-
AssessingtheMethodologicalQualityofSystematicRe-
work cannot always be directly applied to diverse re-
viewstool(AMSTAR;Sheaetal.,2017). Thepopularity
search designs (Bramer, 2015) and many alternatives
of these tools is evident through endorsement- from a
have been developed (Booth et al., 2019); for example
numberofjournals(seePRISMAendorsersforanexam-
theSPIDERframework(Cookeetal.,2012)forsystem-
ple), university libraries, and collaborative groups spe-
aticreviewsofresearchusingqualitativemethods.
cialised in conducting systematic reviews (see the list
More general guidelines which are not limited to in-
of recommended systematic review tools by the EQUA-
tervention designs also exist. In the field of psychol-
TORnetwork). Therefore,thesetoolsarewidelychosen
ogy a comprehensive tool, the Meta-Analysis Report-
by authors of systematic reviews through recommen-
ing Standards (MARS; Appelbaum et al., 2018), was
dations, journal requirements, good findability, and/or
recently proposed by the American Psychological Asso-
greater accessibility. Moreover, they are a likely choice
ciation (APA) Working Group on Quantitative Research
for authors who conduct systematic reviews based on
Reporting Standards. The tool advances standards, but
studies other than interventions who reach for these
there are barriers to its implementation. Not all sys-
tools through similar routes. For instance, some more
tematic reviews include meta-analyses, thus for many
generalandmultidisciplinaryjournalsthatpublishvari-
authorswhodecidenottoincludeameta-analysiscom-
ous types of studies encourage or require that all sub-
ponent, MARS may initially be considered unsuitable.
mitted systematic reviews must follow the PRISMA
In addition, accessibility of MARS as a tool is limited
guidelines intended for intervention studies (e.g. Sys-
because it is not an open-access resource. In fact, the
tematicReviews, PeerJ orPLOSOne), whichmaynotal-
uptake of MARS for evidence synthesis has been very
waysbewellsuited.
limited and described as “non-existent” in a recent re-
Intervention studies focus on assessing the efficacy
view (Hohn et al., 2020). Lastly, MARS is a reporting
or effectiveness of, for example, healthcare interven-
guideline,whichinpracticemeansthatresearchersmay
tions and clinical trials that a priori assign participants
followitretrospectivelyforreportingpurposesonlyand
to different intervention groups (Committee of Medi-
are less likely to use it to inform the design of their
cal Journal Editors, 2021). As conceptualised by Glass
study. Insummary,althoughvaluableresourcesexistfor
(1972), the essential aim of intervention studies is to
guidingthedesignandreportingofsystematicreviews,
evaluatetheproposedinterventionanditseffects. Many
researchers have a limited choice when it comes to se-
other types of research, such as basic, experimental,
lectinganappropriateandaccessibletoolforsystematic
and exploratory research in the social, cognitive, and
reviewsbeyondinterventionalresearch.
behaviouralsciences,donotsharethesameaimsasin-
Theutilityofexistingguidelinesforhighqualitysys-
terventionresearch,andinsteadaimtoexploreandex-
===== PAGE 3/14 =====
2
Table1
Definitionsofterminology
Term Definition
InterventionResearch Astudywhichaimstoevaluatetheeffectsofanintervention,oftenagainst
anotherintervention,onprimaryorsecondaryoutcomesofinterest.
Non-InterventionResearch Astudywhichaimstoprovideanexplanatoryframeworkofanempirical
phenomenon,ortoprovidesupportingevidenceforatheoreticalparadigm
(Glass,1972).
InterventionSystematicReview Asystematicreviewwhichsynthesisesresultsfrominterventionresearch.
Non-InterventionSystematicReview A systematic review which synthesises results from non-intervention re-
search.
SystematicReviewProtocol A protocol (ideally pre-registered, see “Systematic Review Pre-
registration” below) which outlines specific plans for conducting the sys-
tematic review. It may be understood as a ‘recipe’ for the systematic re-
view.
SystematicReviewPre-registration A systematic review can be pre-registered by submitting the finished pro-
tocoltoapre-registrationplatform,suchastheOpenScienceFramework.
SystematicMap Areportoftheongoingresearchactivityonaparticulartopic,informedby
a systematic search and screening strategy, which can be used to identify
gapsinresearch.
MethodologicalSystematicReview Informed by a systematic search, this review summarises methodological
practicesorquestionsinagivenarea.
tematicreviewsislimitedbywhethertheyarecorrectly facilitate transparency and robustness of systematic re-
applied. Generalproblemswithadherencetoguidelines views. For example, protocol pre-registration is one
have been highlighted in the 2009 version of PRISMA of the PRISMA items with a very low adherence rate.
(Page and Moher, 2017) but also in systematic reviews Considering that pre-registration is widely understood
in psychology as a field (Hohn et al., 2020). Page et to be an important measure to constrain reporting bias
al. (2021) and Hohn et al. (2020) suggested that low (Noseketal.,2018),itisofparticularconcernthatthis
adherencecouldberelatedtopossiblelackofguideline item is only adhered to by 21% of systematic reviews
adherencechecksduringpeerreview,relaxeddemands publishedusingPRISMAbetween2010and2017(Page
foradherencebyjournals,orvariationinhowchecklist &Moher,2017). Thislowadherencemaybepartlydue
itemsareinterpretedbythesystematicreviewers. How- totheuncertaintythatsurroundsthewritingofsystem-
ever,adherenceratesmightbesignificantlyimpactedby atic reviews protocols, their pre-registration, and how
the guideline’s appropriateness to specific fields. Prob- to transparently report and justify deviations from pro-
lems with the use of guidelines differ across disciplines tocol when necessary. For example, it is often consid-
and may be driven by discipline-specific interpretation ered unclear how immutable a pre-registered protocol
ofitemswhichcanbefurtherexacerbatedbyambiguity is, and when and how systematic reviewers can appro-
and lack of clarity regarding item wording (Rethlefsen priately deviate from protocol and subsequently report
et al., 2021). This is specifically problematic for fields this transparently (DeHaven, 2017). In addition, sys-
wherenon-interventionresearchiscommon(Gatesand tematicreviewstendnottoreportspecificsearchresults
March, 2016). Therefore, the development of system- (48%),orscreeningandextractionprocedures(abstract
atic review guidelines that cater beyond interventional screening: 18%; full text screening: 20%). Further-
designsandareappropriateforexplanatory,experimen- more, specifically in meta-analyses, systematic reviews
tal, and basic research could help to improve a guide- reportedtheeffect-sizein62%andmoderatorinforma-
line’s adherence rate in fields such as psychology, neu- tion in 58%. Finally, only 11% of systematic reviews
roscience,andeconomics. containedthestatisticalcoderequiredforreproducibil-
The lack of sufficient instructions accompanying ity of the analysis (Polanin et al., 2020). This report-
guidelines may also contribute to the low adherence ing is necessary not only to give context to any addi-
problem especially with regards to items designed to tional decisions made during the analysis, but also to
===== PAGE 4/14 =====
3
give others the information to evaluate key decisions meetings unveiled personal experiences of barriers for
made within the planned review, and improve the re- conducting systematic reviews beyond intervention re-
producibility of evidence synthesis (which is known to search. In addition, many pre-existing tools to guide
below;Maassenetal.,2020). systematic reviews across experimental, behavioural
Given these issues surrounding uptake, adherence, and cognitive fields were shared, forming the first step
accessibility, and relevance of existing guidelines, the for compiling relevant existing tools that would in-
Non-Intervention, Open, and Reproducible Evidence form the development of NIRO-SR. Talks and presen-
Synthesis (NIROES) collaboration was set up to cre- tations given about the project to date can be found
ate a suite of accessible tools designed to facilitate evi- through the project’s Open Science Framework page
dencesynthesisofnon-interventionresearch,whilealso (osf.io/8seby/).
minimising the limitations of existing guidelines. In The initial list of relevant systematic review guide-
particular, it is designed to have high utility amongst lineswasexpandedbytwoauthors(MKTandJSP)who
novice systematic reviewers. This paper presents the conducted a search of existing guidelines for writing,
Non-Intervention, Open, and Reproducible tool for sys- reportingandqualityassessmentofsystematicreviews,
tematicreviews(NIRO-SR),whichisdesignedwiththe systematic maps, and meta-analyses. This was facili-
specific purpose of providing guidelines and a frame- tated through extensive web searches (e.g. “systematic
work for researchers to conduct a systematic review of review checklist”, “systematic review guidelines”, “sys-
non-interventionresearchinlinewithbestpractice. We tematic review reporting”), resources from the EQUA-
believe this to be particularly applicable to the social, TORnetworkwebsiteandfurthercollaborativesessions
cognitive, and behavioural sciences, as those are the withtheNIROESteamuntilwereachedsaturation,i.e.
perspectivesfromwhichthemajorityofco-authorshave we could not find any more relevant tools using this
approached the problem, but the guidelines may well method. Oursearchidentified19guidelines(Appendix
prove useful to a wider range of fields given the non- A) that provided quality assessment and protocols for
specificity of the items. We acknowledge the impor- systematicreviews,withatotalof517items.
tanceofconductingmeta-analysesaspartofsystematic
reviews, however it is not a strictly necessary part of
a systematic review and so this is outside of the scope ItemExtraction.
of the current paper. Our tools provide guidance for
All items and explanatory textwere extracted verba-
creating, planning, and pre-registering a systematic re-
tim from the 19 sourced guidelines to create an item
view protocol (Part A), and conducting and reporting
bank. ThePRISMA2020update(Pageetal.,2020)and
a systematic review (Part B), with the goal of making
accompanyingitembankwerepublishedafterouritem
evidence synthesis as open and reproducible as possi-
bank was compiled and, therefore, was not included in
ble, thereby improving the credibility of the systematic
ouritembank. Wecross-referencedourownwiththose
review and reducing the likelihood of biased outcomes
fromPRISMA2020andidentified55itemsfromvarious
andconclusions.
additional guidelines that added value to the items we
had already included. The final item bank contained
Method
572itemsextractedfromallsources. Theflowchartfor
Itembank thisprocessispresentedinFigure1.
Eligibilitywasdeterminedbytwoauthors(MKTand
SearchandInformationSources.
JSP) who independently coded each item for poten-
The refinement and specification of the aims and tial inclusion as “Yes”, “No” or “Maybe” depending on
the scope of the project (as reflected in the introduc- its broad relevance and application for systematic re-
tion) occurred during conferences and working groups views of non-intervention studies. “Maybe” was de-
that engaged researchers, librarians, and journal edi- fined as having components that were useful but with-
torspredominantlyrepresentingexperimentalandbasic outbeingdirectlyapplicableasawholeitem. Exclusion
behavioural/cognitivefieldsfromJanuarytoDecember criteria included application (e.g., applicable to meta-
2019(e.g. AdvancedMethodsforReproducibleScience analyses and/or to systematic maps only); relevance
Workshop, UK Reproducibility Network 2019; Society (items that were relevant to clinical/intervention re-
for the Improvement of Psychological Science Confer- searchandnotadaptablefornon-interventionresearch
ence, 2019; NIROES Online Collaborative Hackathon, systematicreviews),formattingandpresentation(items
August 2019). Participants were at different career whichsuggestedformattingthatwasnotspecifictosys-
levels and with varied experience of applying system- tematic reviews, for instance, if they referred only to
atic reviews in their work. Discussions during these systematic maps), and ambiguity (e.g., items that had
===== PAGE 5/14 =====
4
Figure1
Flowchartshowingtherecordsidentifiedfromsearching,andtherecordsincluded/excludedduringscreeningthroughout
thedevelopmentofNIRO-SR.
===== PAGE 6/14 =====
5
a lack of clarity or incomplete guidance). Disagree- generalratingsofNIRO-SRusingathree-pointscale(“1
ments were resolved by consensus, and irreconcilable - Not good enough”, “2 - Could be improved” and “3 -
disagreements were re-evaluated at a later stage of the Good”) across five separate categories: clarity (mean
NIRO-SRtooldevelopmentfollowingdiscussionswitha rating = 2.56, SD = 0.53), structure (mean rating =
larger group of collaborators and experts in systematic 2.89,SD=0.33),practicality(meanrating=2.61,SD
reviewmethodology. Thefinalitembank,includingde- = 0.49), relevance (mean rating = 2.86, SD = 0.38),
cisions about the inclusion and exclusion of items, can and simplicity (mean rating = 2.44, 0.52). Comments
befoundintheproject’sOSFrepository(osf.io/p2v34). were overall positive about the tool’s utility, with sug-
gested revisions limited to improvements in clarity and
ItemDevelopment further guidance in a minority of items. All partici-
pants reported that they would want to use this tool
First,eligibleitemswerecategorisedintothesection
whenconductingrelevant systematicreviewsinthefu-
of a systematic review that was most applicable, which
ture. The feedback guided some initial changes to im-
includedabstract,title,protocol,introduction,aims,re-
prove the tool’s clarity for non-expert users, which in-
searchquestion,searchstrategy,screening,dataextrac-
cluded adding an explanation of the purpose and pro-
tion, risk of bias and quality assessment, synthesis, re-
cedures of pre-registration at the beginning of the tool,
sults,transparency,discussion,andmiscellaneousitems
andexplainingitemsinfurtherdetail. Thestudyproce-
(see item bank tab “included items by category”). Sec-
duresinvolvinghumanparticipantshavebeenreviewed
ond, items were further divided to form two parts of
against the guidelines set out by the Ethics Committee
theNIRO-SRtool, theprotocol(PartA)andthereview
of Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University
(Part B). Protocol items were applicable when devising
of Surrey and carried out in accordance with the Uni-
andpre-registeringaprospectivesystematicreviewpro-
versity of Surrey’s Code of Conduct on Good Research
tocolofnoninterventionstudies,andreviewitemswere
PracticeandtheDeclarationofHelsinki.
applicable for guiding the process of conducting a sys-
tematicreviewandwritingareportforpublication. Fi-
FinalEdits;CollaboratorFeedback
nally, eachgroupofitemswaseitherrewrittenforclar-
ity or adapted for general use in non-intervention re- InMarch2020,avirtualhackathonwashostedtoin-
search. This process of rewriting items, splitting com- vite final feedback on the tool from a multidisciplinary
plex items, and merging similar items was conducted team of both existing and new collaborators compris-
iteratively and collaboratively over several months and ingexpertresearchersandlibrariansexperiencedinsys-
alongside other feedback methods (see section 2.3 and tematicreviews,systematicmaps,andmeta-analysesas
section 2.4). The resulting items resemble the original well as more novice researchers with little experience
curateditemsintheme,depth,scope. Anexampleofan of evidence synthesis. Expert researchers revised the
adapted item is provided in Table 2. Please note that tool to ensure that it covered the breadth of knowl-
items addressing the risk of bias and heterogeneity of edge needed to conduct a systematic review, including
reviewed studies were included in the NIRO-SR tool, adding details that were missing based on their own
buttoalimitedextent. Thisisbecauseaseparate,com- experiences of preparing pre-registration protocols and
plementary tool for guiding the assessment of bias and writing non-intervention systematic reviews. Novice
qualityinnon-interventionresearchsystematicreviews contributorsrefinedthetoolwiththeaimofmakingitas
isunderdevelopmentbyNIROES. accessibleandunderstandableaspossibletousersofall
levels of expertise in reporting and conducting system-
InitialFeedback;AccessibilityandUnderstandability atic reviews. In the cases where new items were appli-
cable to only certain types of non-intervention studies,
One aim of NIRO-SR was to make it accessible to
theyweremarkedasoptional.
researchers who had never conducted a systematic re-
Finally,itwasidentifiedthatcertainitemscouldben-
view before. In December 2019, feedback on the ini-
efit from additional illustrative examples, templates, or
tial version of the tool was sought from a convenience
detailedguidance. Theseincluded:
sample of students and staff (N = 9) in the School of
Psychology,UniversityofSurrey(allmaterialsandfeed-
• Afullexampleofasearchstrategy
back available on osf.io/f3brw). None of the partici-
pants had published a systematic review at the time • A decision log template to track the decisions
of response, and they had little previous experience made during the screening and data extraction
withconductingsystematicreviews,relativelylowcon- stages
fidence in this method, and their research areas were
• Anexampleofascreeningmanual
non-interventional. Participants were asked to provide
===== PAGE 7/14 =====
6
Table2
The table below presents an item which guides authors on how to prepare and report systematic review research ques-
tions. On the left, the PICOS framework sourced from the PRISMA statement. On the right, the same framework is
adapted for non-intervention research in NIRO-SR. In the adapted version, the language clearly guides the researchers
to state their dependent and independent variables. “Interventions” are excluded from the item and there is an added
optionalpositionontheconsiderationofcovariates.
PICOS,PRISMAstatement;Moheretal.,(2009) Item3,NIRO-SR(PartA)
Provideanexplicitstatementofquestionsbeingaddressed Whatistheprimaryreviewquestion? Thereviewquestion
withreferenceto: mustbeclearlydefinedandincludethefollowing:
•participants, •Theprimaryoutcomemeasure(s)ofinterest(the
•interventions, dependentvariables(s);DV)
•comparisons, •Theprimaryindependentvariables(IVs)ofinterest
•outcomes, •Thepopulation/participantsofinterest(e.g.,
•studydesign undergraduatestudents,participantswithaspecific
diagnosis,school-agechildrenetc.)
•(optional)Studydesign(s)ofinterest,forexample:
i. observational-measuredvariablesatone
time-point
ii. cross-sectional-measuredvariableswith
differentindividualsatdifferent
timepoints/variables
iii. longitudinal-sameindividualsfollowed
overtime;couldbeprospectiveor
retrospective
iv. experimental-examiningeffectof
specificmanipulation
•(optional)Anycovariatesofinterestorvariables
youwanttocontrolfor(e.g. participantage)
NB.Ifyoufindthatyourresearchquestiondoesnotfitthe
above,forinstanceinexploratoryormethodological
systematicreviews,youshouldstatethisintheprotocolfor
transparency. IfyoucannotoperationalisetheDVandIV
makesuretoclearlydefinethefocus(e.g. methodological
variation)andthecontext(e.g. inworkingmemory
research)ofyourinvestigation.
• Atemplatefordataextractionforms beenusedbyseveralprojectstoinformpre-registration
andtheguidelineshavebeenimplementedinsomecur-
• A risk-of-bias assessment tool to help with
riculums, including the University of Coventry and the
the assessment of credibility of included non-
University of the Philippines Diliman. Feedback from
interventionstudies
users has been very positive, and they provided fur-
ther suggestions to improve the tool and increase clar-
These are outside of the scope of the current pa-
ity. These changes were implemented, and the current
per, but represent the need for further information
paperpresentsthefinalisedNIRO-SRVersion1.1.
and guidance. Following this feedback process, NIRO-
SR Version 0.1 (and version 0.1.1 for subsequent mi-
nor fixes) was uploaded to osf.io/c9wer for any re-
searcher who wanted to use it to guide their system-
atic review projects. The NIRO-SR tool has already
===== PAGE 8/14 =====
7
Results sisontheoperationalisationofvariablesofinterest(e.g.
IVs and DVs) and covariates, whilst still maintaining
NIRO-SRVersion1.0
focus on relevant study designs and participant groups
NIRO-SR comprises two parts (osf.io/c9wer), A and (seeTable2anditemA3).
B. Part A is a guide for pre-registering a systematic re- It is hoped that by providing specific advice for con-
viewprotocolcomposedof30items,ofwhich26items ducting comprehensive systematic reviews of basic re-
are required and 4 items are recommended for best searchinthebehaviouralsciences,NIRO-SRwillhelpto
practice. The items are divided into eight sections: Ti- begin to standardise and improve the contents of non-
tle, Description and Aims, Research Question, Search interventionsystematicreviewsprotocols.
Strategy, Screening, DataExtraction, CriticalAppraisal, NIRO-SRmayhelppreventauthorbias(whichisusu-
Synthesis, and Transparency. Part B is a 38-item guide allyunintentional)throughitsemphasisonthedevelop-
for high standards of reporting for non-intervention mentandpre-registrationofaprotocolbeforeconduct-
systematic reviews with the following sections: Title, ing a systematic review. NIRO-SR does not make the
Abstract, Introduction, Method (Deviations from pro- distinction as to whether the protocol should be pub-
tocol, Search Strategy, Screening Methods, Data Ex- licly available from the outset or upon publication of
traction Method, Critical Appraisal Method, Synthe- thereview(forexample,bypre-registeringwithanem-
sis Method), Results (Extracted Records Results, Crit- bargo period on the Open Science Framework), but it
ical Appraisal Results, Synthesis Results), Discussion, places importance on the availability and transparency
and Transparency. If Part A cannot be completed, re- ofthepublicrecord. NIRO-SRadvisesthattheprotocol
searchers must give a justification why this is the case should be available together with the final review and
and are advised to include as much relevant content includeastatementoftransparencywhichspecifiesthe
from Part A as possible in the final systematic review dateofpre-registrationandpointinthereviewprocess
publication. at which the protocol was pre-registered (e.g., before
the final search was completed, or before data extrac-
Discussion tion began; see item A26). The protocol benefits the
authors as it sets out a detailed and transparent plan
NIRO-SR aims to firstly provide guidelines for con-
for the systematic review, and benefits the reader who
ducting systematic reviews of research that do not
canmore confidentlyreflect onhow differentdecisions
clearly fit the definition of intervention research, such
madethroughouttheprocessofconductingthesystem-
as explanatory, experimental, and basic research. The
aticreviewmayhaveinfluenceditsoutcomes. NIRO-SR
guidelines are intended to be particularly applicable to
also emphasises the importance of reporting all devia-
thebehaviouralsciencesandrelatedfields,butmayalso
tions from the original protocol. We acknowledge that
be used in other fields outside the expertise of the au-
such deviations are often necessary, so we recommend
thors of this paper. Secondly, NIRO-SR aims to place
thattheyarejustifiedandtransparentlydeclaredinthe
emphasisonreproducibility,opennessandtransparency
eventualreportofthesystematicreview(itemB5).
of systematic reviews. Part A provides guidance for de-
NIRO-SR recommends a multiple-author approach
veloping and pre-registering a comprehensive review
when conducting systematic reviews, in line with best
protocol, and Part B guides authors in writing and re-
practicerecommendations(Pageetal.,2021;Wattsand
portingsystematicreviews. Bothpartsoftheguidelines
Li,2019). Forexample,multipleteammembersshould
are designed to be usable on their own, but can also
independently screen the titles and abstracts and full
complementexistingtoolssuchasPRISMA2020.
texts, and have a clear procedure for solving potential
NIRO-SR may particularly benefit psychologists and
disagreementsbetweensystematicreviewers,aswellas
experimental and behavioural scientists who focus on
reportaquantitativemeasureofinter-reviewerreliabil-
non-intervention research in their systematic reviews,
ity (items B13, B14, B18, B20 and B21). This helps fa-
byprovidingspecificadviceonhowtodevelopareview
cilitate reproducibility by increasing the likelihood that
protocol, and to conduct and report a rigorous system-
a separate team of researchers could follow the exact
atic review. It provides guidance to authors on defin-
steps of the original review and reach the same con-
ing primary review questions (item A3), secondary re-
clusions (i.e., same data, same method, same results;
search questions (item A4), hypotheses (item A5), in-
Barba, 2018). Researchers should be able to use the
clusion and exclusion criteria (item A13), and data ex-
same method (i.e., search strategy, screening process
traction processes (items A15 to A17). These are the
andinclusion/exclusioncriteria),onthesamedata(i.e.,
areas where existing systematic review guidelines are
thedatabasesandsearchresults)andarriveatthesame
ofteninapplicablefornon-interventionresearch. NIRO-
results (i.e., the final set of papers and the extracted
SRprovidesaframeworkthatplacesparticularempha-
===== PAGE 9/14 =====
8
data). retainstandardisation,theseareanticipatedtobeinfre-
However, subjective decisions must still be made quent. To facilitate future updates, users of NIRO-SR
throughoutthisprocessandso,wherefullreproducibil- are encouraged to provide feedback to the correspond-
ityisnotpossible,NIRO-SRemphasisestheimportance ingauthors.
of transparency. We recommend that a decision log
is made available that catalogues important decisions ImplicationsandFutureDirections
(itemsB14,B15andB36). Thedecisionlogallowsany-
NIRO-SR addresses an important gap in the avail-
onetryingtoreproducetheresultstoidentifyandeval-
able guidelines to help reviewers produce high qual-
uatethesubjectivedecisionsbehindanydiscrepancies.
ity systematic reviews for research in experimental
NIRO-SR was developed to both alleviate the barri-
and behavioural sciences. The project was conceptu-
ers preventing researchers from conducting systematic
alised through a collaborative effort during multiple
reviewsandtoencouragenoviceresearcherstoconduct
method and metascience oriented meetings including
systematicreviewinfieldswherespecificguidelinesare
the Society for the Improvement of Psychological Sci-
currently lacking. We strived to ensure that NIRO-SR
ence 2019 conference, Advanced Methods for Repro-
iscomprehensive,clear,andopenlyaccessibletoenable
ducible Science 2019 and 2020 workshops and Repro-
researchers to improve their literature review method-
ducibiliTea meetings. The growing demand for the
ologywithasystematicandtransparentapproach.
toolisalsoreflectedthroughmanypresentationsabout
NIRO-SR delivered at psychology-focused or interdis-
MethodologicalLimitations
ciplinary meetings and conferences including The Or-
NIRO-SR was developed without a pre-registered ganisationforHumanBrainMapping2020conference,
protocol or previously published methodological guid- Metascience 2021 conference and UK Reproducibility
ance for the development of such tools, which could Network’s meeting for Open Science Working Groups
introduce biases at the item selection stage of the tool in 2020. A number of pre-registered protocols have al-
development. Unfortunately,thelackofpre-registration ready been completed using NIRO-SR, some of which
wasduetothefactthat––asfarasweareaware––there can be found on the OSF (osf.io/f3brw). Therefore,
was nopre-registration template thatcould serve asan we expect a further increase in use of the NIRO-SR
adequate template for developing NIRO-SR. Our web tool, which we hope will have a significant impact on
searches to identify appropriate guidelines and tools thequalityofsystematicreviewsinnon-interventionre-
were therefore not systematic. We minimised biases search,reducingtheneedforbespokecustomisationsof
with the breadth of the collaboration team and, al- existing guidelines in order to answer specific research
though the sample of nine researchers providing initial questions. A few years after release, we plan to assess
feedback was small, we additionally sought input from the implementation of the NIRO-SR guidelines to fur-
multiple, independent contributors comprising a cross- therunderstandthechallengesofconductingsystematic
discipline mix of academics and librarians with exten- reviewsinourfield,aswellastoinformfutureupdates.
sive experience of conducting and teaching interven- Specifically, we would like to provide an evidence-base
tion or non-intervention research systematic reviews. for whether there is a demand for the tool as we have
Further, we chose to develop NIRO-SR based on exist- anecdotally observed already, and whether reviews us-
ing, peer-reviewed, consensus-based guidelines of ro- ing NIRO-SR are of comparable or greater quality to
bust methods for rigorous and transparent reporting thehighqualitysystematicreviewsthathaveusedother
(seeAppendixA). pre-existingtools.
As with all guidelines, some limitations may only be The further standardisation of systematic reviews
fully known when NIRO-SR has been widely adopted. outside of intervention research will also allow for bet-
Furthermore, whilst the NIROES collaboration repre- ter meta-scientific approaches and comparison of out-
sents multiple disciplines and research fields, the dom- comes across multiple systematic reviews in the future.
inant field of the authors is the experimental and be- Further, NIRO-SR provides a solid basis for conduct-
havioural sciences, which may reduce its applicability ingsystematicreviewswithameta-analysiscomponent.
to some fields. Whilst we believe the tool to be partic- Whilst NIRO-SR does not advise on the methodology
ularlyapplicabletoexplanatoryexperimentalandbasic specific to meta-analyses, it will help to raise the stan-
behavioural/cognitive research, we cannot confidently dard of the systematic approach such as the establish-
assess its use for other fields. This paper accompanies ment of the research question, pre-registration, search
the release of NIRO-SR Version 1.1, and we anticipate strategy, inclusion/exclusion criteria, and logging deci-
that further updates will be necessary and may affect sionmaking.
the structure, content, and wording of the items. To Finally,NIRO-SRistailoredforsystematicreviewsof
===== PAGE 10/14 =====
9
experimental, cognitive and behavioural research, but Acknowledgements
future additions to the project could include “plug-ins”
SpecialthankstotheattendeesoftheSocietyforthe
for the tool that enhance its existing features (released
Improvement of Psychological Science meeting in Rot-
as needed on the OSF page; osf.io/f3brw). For exam-
terdam,Netherlands,July2019,aswellasattendeesof
ple, additional optional items could assist with reviews
the Advanced Methods for Reproducible Science work-
ofotherstudydesignssuchasqualitativestudiesorlon-
shop in Windsor, UK, January 2020. We are also very
gitudinal studies, or specific items could be created for
gratefultoallresearchersattheUniversityofSurreyfor
other approaches to evidence synthesis such as meta-
providingtheirfeedback.
analysesorsystematicmaps. Additionally,extensionsof
Additional thanks to: Katie Corker, Margriet Groen,
the NIRO-SR are currently under development, includ-
Matt Jaquiery, Sayaka Kidby, Emily Kothe, Marta Ma-
ing further guidance for risk of bias and quality assess-
jewska,MarissaMcBride,andJamesMontillaDoble.
ment(related,butnotnecessarilysynonymous,endeav-
ours). There are elements of a study that may not di-
SupplementalMaterial
rectlyintroducebiasbutwhichareneverthelessimpor-
tant indicators of quality, for example incompleteness The NIRO-SR tool is available at osf.io/c9wer. All
in the reporting of the methodology which can lead to dataandsupplementarymaterialshavebeendeposited
problemswithreplicability. inanopenrepositoryontheOpenScienceFramework.
Relevantlinkshavebeenprovidedthroughoutthepaper
Conclusions foraccesstospecificmaterials. Allofthesematerialsare
hosted on the open NIRO-SR OSF page (osf.io/f3brw;
NIRO-SR is a new tool that will allow researchers to
Toporetal.,2023).
followstandardisedguidelinesforsystematicreviewsof
basic cognitive and behavioural research. It fills an im-
ConflictofInterestandFunding
portant gap in methodological standards and we hope
it will contribute to the improvement of the quality of No funding has been received for the realisation of
systematic reviews of research that does not form an this project. Jade Pickering was on the advisory board
intervention. atMeta-Psychologyatthepointofsubmission. Noother
authorsdeclareanyconflictsofinterest.
AuthorContributions
AuthorContact
Theauthorshipforthisprojectwasdeterminedusing
the CRediT Taxonomy and the authorship agreement Corresponding author: Marta K.
for the NIROES collaboration (available on the OSF). Topor, marta.topor@hotmail.co.uk (ORCID:
For the current project, authors were divided into four https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3761-392X). MKT and
relevant tiers as specified in the authorship agreement. JSPcontributedequallyandarejointfirstauthors.
The first tier, “Project Management” specifies the joint
lead authors and project co-leads, M.K. Topor and J.S. OpenSciencePractices
Pickering. Within each subsequent tier, authors were
This article is purely theoretical and as such is not
listed in an alphabetical order as follows: Tier 2 “Ma-
eligible for Open Science badges. The entire editorial
jor Contributions” (data curation, formal analysis, in-
process,includingtheopenreviews,ispublishedinthe
vestigation, methodology, visualisation, writing - orig-
onlinesupplement.
inal draft, miscellaneous input into creating the tool):
A. Barbosa Mendes, D.V.M. Bishop, F.C. Büttner, M.M.
References
Elsherif,T.R.Evans,E.L.Henderson,T.Kalandadze,F.T.
Nitschke, J.P.C. Staaks, O. van den Akker, S.K. Yeung, Appelbaum, M., Cooper, H., Kline, R. B., Mayo-Wilson,
M. Zaneva; Tier 3 “Feedback and Review” (conceptu- E., Nezu, A. M., & Rao, S. M. (2018). Jour-
alisation, writing - review & editing, feedback on the nal article reporting standards for quantitative
tool): A. Lam, C.R. Madan, D. Moreau, A. O’Mahony, research in psychology: The APA publications
A.J.Parker,A.Riegelman,M.Testerman;andTier5“Se- and communications board task force report.
nior Supervision” (in addition to Tier 2 “Major Contri- The American Psychologist, 73(1), 3–25. https:
butions”): S.J.Westwood. //doi.org/10.1037/amp0000191
Barba, L. A. (2018). Terminologies for reproducible re-
search.arXiv.RetrievedOctober30,2020,from
https://arxiv.org/abs/1802.03311
===== PAGE 11/14 =====
10
Booth, A., Clarke, M., Dooley, G., Ghersi, D., Moher, Gates, N. J., & March, E. G. (2016). A neuropsy-
D., Petticrew, M., & Stewart, L. (2012). The chologist’s guide to undertaking a systematic
nuts and bolts of PROSPERO: An international review for publication: Making the most of
prospective register of systematic reviews. Sys- PRISMA guidelines. Neuropsychology Review,
tematicReviews,1,2.https://doi.org/10.1186/ 26(2), 109–120. https://doi.org/10.1007/
2046-4053-1-2 s11065-016-9318-0
Booth,A.,Noyes,J.,Flemming,K.,Moore,G.,Tunçalp, Glass,G.V.(1972).Thewisdomofscientificinquiryon
Ö., & Shakibazadeh, E. (2019). Formulat- education.JournalofResearchinScienceTeach-
ing questions to explore complex interven- ing, 9(1), 1–18. https://doi.org/10.1002/tea.
tionswithinqualitativeevidencesynthesis.BMJ 3660090103
Global Health, 4(Suppl 1), e001107. https:// Haddaway,N.R.,Macura,B.,Whaley,P.,&Pullin,A.S.
doi.org/10.1136/bmjgh-2018-001107 (2018). ROSES RepOrting standards for sys-
Bramer, W. M. (2015). Patient, intervention, compari- tematic evidence syntheses: Pro forma, flow-
son, outcome (PICO): An overrated tool. MLA diagram and descriptive summary of the plan
News,55(2). and conduct of environmental systematic re-
Campbell,M.,McKenzie,J.E.,Sowden,A.,Katikireddi, views and systematic maps. Environmental Ev-
S.V.,Brennan,S.E.,Ellis,S.,Hartmann-Boyce, idence, 7(1), 7. https://doi.org/10.1186/
J., Ryan, R., Shepperd, S., Thomas, J., Welch, s13750-018-0121-7
V., & Thomson, H. (2020). Synthesis with- Higgins, J. P., Thomas, J., Chandler, J., Cumpston, M.,
out meta-analysis (SWiM) in systematic re- Li,T.,Page,M.J.,&Welch,V.A.(Eds.).(2019).
views: Reporting guideline. BMJ (Clinical Re- Cochrane handbook for systematic reviews of in-
search Ed.), 368, l6890. https://doi.org/10. terventions (Version 6). Cochrane. https://doi.
1136/bmj.l6890 org/10.1002/9781119536604
Coeytaux, R. R., McDuffie, J., Goode, A., Cassel, S., Hohn,R.E.,Slaney,K.L.,&Tafreshi,D.(2020).Anem-
Porter,W.D.,Sharma,P.,Meleth,S.,Minnella, pirical review of research and reporting prac-
H., Nagi, A., & John W Williams, J. (2014). tices in psychological meta-analyses. Review of
Criteria used in quality assessment of system- General Psychology, 108926802091884. https:
atic reviews (tech. rep.). Department of Veter- //doi.org/10.1177/1089268020918844
ansAffairs(US).RetrievedMarch3,2021,from Ioannidis, J. P. A. (2016). The mass production of re-
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/ dundant,misleading,andconflictedsystematic
%7BNBK242394%7D/ reviews and meta-analyses. The Milbank Quar-
Collins, A., Vercammen, A., McBride, M., Carling, C., & terly, 94(3), 485–514. https://doi.org/10.
Burgman, M. (n.d.). Reproducibility of system- 1111/1468-0009.12210
atic reviews in environmental and conservation Joanna Briggs Institute. (n.d.). Critical appraisal tools.
science. Retrieved December 2, 2020, from https://
Committee of Medical Journal Editors. (2021). Clini- joannabriggs.org/critical-appraisal-tools
cal trials. Retrieved March 3, 2020, from http: Maassen, E., van Assen, M. A. L. M., Nuijten, M. B.,
//www.icmje.org/recommendations/browse/ Olsson-Collentine,A.,&Wicherts,J.M.(2020).
publishing-and-editorial-issues/clinical-trial- Reproducibility of individual effect sizes in
registration.html meta-analyses in psychology. Plos One, 15(5),
Cooke, A., Smith, D., & Booth, A. (2012). Beyond e0233107. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
PICO:TheSPIDERtoolforqualitativeevidence pone.0233107
synthesis. Qualitative Health Research, 22(10), Macpherson, A., & Jones, O. (2010). Editorial: Strate-
1435–1443. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / gies for the development of international jour-
1049732312452938 nalofmanagementreviews.Wiley.https://doi.
Critical Appraisal Skills Program. (n.d.). CASP system- org/10.1111/j.1468-2370.2010.00282.x
atic review checklist. Retrieved December 2, Methodological expectations of campbell collaboration
2020, from https://casp-uk.net/casp-tools- intervention reviews: Conduct standards (tech.
checklists/ rep.). (2019). The Campbell Collaboration.
DeHaven, A. (2017). Preregistration: A plan, not a https://doi.org/10.4073/cpg.2016.3
prison. Retrieved March 3, 2020, from https: Methodologicalexpectationsofcampbellcollaborationin-
//www.cos.io/blog/preregistration-plan-not- tervention reviews: Reporting standards (tech.
prison
===== PAGE 12/14 =====
11
rep.). (2019). The Campbell Collaboration. itemsforsystematicreviewsandmeta-analyses
https://doi.org/10.4073/cpg.2016.4 (PRISMA)statementandextensions:Ascoping
Miller,J.(2002).Thescottishintercollegiateguidelines review. Systematic Reviews, 6(1), 263. https://
network(SIGN).TheBritishJournalofDiabetes doi.org/10.1186/s13643-017-0663-8
& Vascular Disease, 2(1), 47–49. https://doi. Polanin,J.R.,Hennessy,E.A.,&Tsuji,S.(2020).Trans-
org/10.1177/14746514020020010401 parencyandreproducibilityofmeta-analysesin
Moher,D.,Liberati,A.,Tetzlaff,J.,Altman,D.,&Group, psychology: A meta-review. Perspectives on Psy-
P.(2009).Preferredreportingitemsforsystem- chological Science, 15(4), 1026–1041. https://
atic reviews and meta-analyses: The PRISMA doi.org/10.1177/1745691620906416
statement. PLoS Medicine, 6(7), e1000097. Rethlefsen, M. L., Kirtley, S., Waffenschmidt, S., Ayala,
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed. A. P., Moher, D., Page, M. J., Koffel, J. B., &
1000097 Group, P.-S. (2021). PRISMA-s: An extension
Moher,D.,Shamseer,L.,Clarke,M.,Ghersi,D.,Liberati, to the PRISMA statement for reporting litera-
A., Petticrew, M., Shekelle, P., Stewart, L. A., & ture searches in systematic reviews. Systematic
Group, P.-P. (2015). Preferred reporting items Reviews, 10(1), 39. https://doi.org/10.1186/
for systematic review and meta-analysis pro- s13643-020-01542-z
tocols (PRISMA-p) 2015 statement. Systematic Shea, B. J., Reeves, B. C., Wells, G., Thuku, M., Hamel,
Reviews, 4(1), 1. https://doi.org/10.1186/ C., Moran, J., Moher, D., Tugwell, P., Welch,
2046-4053-4-1 V., Kristjansson, E., & Henry, D. A. (2017).
Munafò, M. R., Nosek, B. A., Bishop, D. V. M., But- AMSTAR 2: A critical appraisal tool for sys-
ton, K. S., Chambers, C. D., du Sert, N. P., Si- tematic reviews that include randomised or
monsohn, U., Wagenmakers, E.-J., Ware, J. J., non-randomisedstudiesofhealthcareinterven-
& Ioannidis, J. P. A. (2017). A manifesto for tions,orboth.BMJ(ClinicalResearchEd.),358,
reproduciblescience.NatureHumanBehaviour, j4008.https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.j4008
1,0021.https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-016- Siddaway, A. P., Wood, A. M., & Hedges, L. V. (2019).
0021 How to do a systematic review: A best practice
NationalHeart,Lung,andBloodInstitute.(n.d.).Study guide for conducting and reporting narrative
quality assessment tools. Retrieved December reviews, meta-analyses, and meta-syntheses.
2, 2020, from https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/ Annual Review of Psychology, 70, 747–770.
health-topics/study-quality-assessment-tools https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-psych-
Nosek, B. A., Ebersole, C. R., DeHaven, A. C., & Mel- 010418-102803
lor, D. T. (2018). The preregistration revolu- Stroup, D. F., Berlin, J. A., Morton, S. C., Olkin,
tion.ProceedingsoftheNationalAcademyofSci- I., Williamson, G. D., Rennie, D., Moher, D.,
ences of the United States of America, 115(11), Becker, B. J., Sipe, T. A., & Thacker, S. B.
2600–2606. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas. (2000). Meta-analysis of observational stud-
1708274114 ies in epidemiology: A proposal for reporting.
Oxman, A. D., & Guyatt, G. H. (1991). Validation of an meta-analysis of observational studies in epi-
index of the quality of review articles. Journal demiology (MOOSE) group. The Journal of the
of Clinical Epidemiology, 44(11), 1271–1278. American Medical Association, 283(15), 2008–
https://doi.org/10.1016/0895-4356(91) 2012. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.283.15.
90160-b 2008
Page, M. J., McKenzie, J. E., Bossuyt, P. M., Boutron, Topor,M.,Pickering,J.S.,BarbosaMendes,A.,Bishop,
I., Hoffmann, T. C., Mulrow, C. D., Shamseer, D. V. M., Büttner, F. C., Elsherif, M. M.,
L., Tetzlaff, J. M., Akl, E. A., Brennan, S. E., Evans, T. R., Henderson, E. L., Kalandadze, T.,
Chou, R., Glanville, J., Grimshaw, J. M., Hrób- Nitschke, F. T., Staaks, J., van den Akker, O.,
jartsson, A., Lalu, M. M., Li, T., Loder, E. W., Yeung, S. K., Zaneva, M., Lam, A., Madan, C.,
Mayo-Wilson, E., McDonald, S., ... Moher, D. Moreau, D., O’Mahony, A., Parker, A. J., ...
(2021). The PRISMA 2020 statement: An up- Westwood, S. (2023). Non-interventional, re-
dated guideline for reporting systematic re- producible, and open systematic review (niro-
views. Systematic Reviews, 10(1), 89. https:// sr)guidelines.RetrievedMarch27,2023,from
doi.org/10.1186/s13643-021-01626-4 https://osf.io/f3brw/
Page, M. J., & Moher, D. (2017). Evaluations of the Watts, R. D., & Li, I. W. (2019). Use of checklists in re-
uptake and impact of the preferred reporting views of health economic evaluations, 2010 to
===== PAGE 13/14 =====
12
2018. Value in Health, 22(3), 377–382. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.jval.2018.10.006
Whiting,P.,Savovi´c,J.,Higgins,J.P.T.,Caldwell,D.M.,
Reeves, B. C., Shea, B., Davies, P., Kleijnen, J.,
Churchill, R., & group, R. (2016). ROBIS: A
new tool to assess risk of bias in systematic re-
views was developed. Journal of Clinical Epi-
demiology, 69, 225–234. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.jclinepi.2015.06.005
===== PAGE 14/14 =====
13
Appendix
ThelistofguidelinesusedtoextractitemsforcurationandpreparationofNIRO-SR.517itemshavebeenextracted
verbatimfromtheguidelinesbelow:
• AMSTARsystematicreviewqualitychecklist(Sheaetal.,2017)
• CASPChecklistforSystematicReviews(CriticalAppraisalSkillsProgram,n.d.)
• CriteriaUsedinQualityAssessmentofSystematicReviews(Coeytauxetal.,2014)
• JoannaBriggsInstituteChecklistforSystematicReviews(JoannaBriggsInstitute,n.d.)
• MECCIR:Conductstandards(MethodologicalexpectationsofCampbellCollaborationinterventionreviews: Con-
ductstandards,2019)
• MECCIR:Reportingstandards(MethodologicalexpectationsofCampbellCollaborationinterventionreviews: Re-
portingstandards,2019)
• MOOSE:ReportingguidelinesforMeta-analysisofObservationalStudiesinEpidemiology(Stroupetal.,2000)
• National Heart Lung and Blood Institute Checklist for Systematic Reviews (National Heart, Lung, and Blood
Institute,n.d.)
• OverviewQualityAssessmentQuestionnaire(OxmanandGuyatt,1991)
• PRISMAProtocols(Moheretal.,2015)
• PRISMAStatement(Moheretal.,2009)
• PRISMA2020updateitembank(Pageetal.,2021)
• PROSPERO(Boothetal.,2012)
• Reproducibilityofsystematicreviewsinenvironmentalandconservationscience(Collinsetal.,n.d.)
• ROBIS:Tooltoassessriskofbiasinsystematicreviews(1.2)(Whitingetal.,2016)
• ROSES(Haddawayetal.,2018)
• SIGNToolbasedonAMSTAR(Miller,2002)
• SPIDER-alternativetoPICOforqualitativeandmixedresearch(Cookeetal.,2012)
• Synthesiswithoutmeta-analysis(SWiM)insystematicreviews(Campbelletal.,2020)
An additional 55 relevant items were extracted from close inspection of the PRISMA 2020 update item bank
(https://osf.io/kbj6v/, Page et al., 2021) which included a number of additional tools and guidelines used across
differentfields.