
===== PAGE 1/20 =====
Opendata:NotApplicable Editedby:RickardCarlsson
Meta-Psychology,2023,vol7,MP.2021.2911 Openmaterials:NotApplicable Reviewedby:PederIsager,JuliaRohrer
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2021.2911 Openandreproducibleanalysis:NotApplicable Analysisreproducedby:NotApplicable
Articletype:OriginalArticle Openreviewsandeditorialprocess:Yes AllsupplementaryfilescanbeaccessedatOSF:
PublishedundertheCC-BY4.0license Preregistration:No https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/CAFU5
Visual Argument Structure Tool (VAST) Version 1.0
Daniel Leising, Oliver Grenke, and Marcos Cramer
TechnischeUniversitätDresden
WepresentthefirstversionoftheVisualArgumentStructureTool(VAST),whichmay
beusedforjointlyvisualizingthesemantic,conceptual,empiricalandreasoningrela-
tionshipsthatconstitutearguments. Itsprimarypurposeistopromoteexactnessand
comprehensivenessinsystematicthinking. Thesystemdistinguishesbetweenconcepts
and the words (“names”) that may be used to refer to them. It also distinguishes
variouswaysinwhichconceptsmayberelatedtooneanother(causation,conceptual
implication,prediction,transformation,reasoning),andallofthesefrombeliefsasto
whether something IS the case and/or OUGHT to be the case. Using these elements,
thesystemallowsforformalizationsofnarrativeargumentcomponentsatanylevelof
vagueness vs. precision that is deemed possible and/or necessary. This latter feature
maymakethesystemparticularlyusefulforattaininggreatertheoreticalspecificityin
the humanities, and for bridging the gap between the humanities and the “harder”
sciences. However, VAST may also be used outside of science, to capture argument
structuresine.g.,legalanalyses,mediareports,beliefsystems,anddebates.
Keywords: Modelling,Formalization,Narrative,Theory,Humanities,Science
Introduction exactlysuchbettertheorizingmaybeachievedislargely
missing,however(Borsboometal.,2021).
Argument structures are ubiquitous and important:
In the present paper, we introduce a tool devised for
We encounter them every day, in newspaper articles,
dealing with those problems. The tool is called VAST
in court rulings, in political and non-political debates
(Visual Argument Structure Tool). The core idea is to
on and off screen, and in our own more informal con-
visuallydisplayallrelevantcomponentsofanargument
versations with other people, and with ourselves. In
structureatonce,whileatthesametimeaimingforex-
an abstract sense, most arguments are about what is
actness. Acomprehensivedisplaywillmakeitharderto
true, why and how things are related to one another,
overlookordownplayrelatedclaimsmadeearlier(e.g.,
and about whether things are good or not. Too often,
because those previous claims do not align well with
however,argumentsseemtorunincircles,endinstale-
more recent ones). Visual displays may also be more
mates,orjustfizzleoutandaregivenupupon,instead
intuitive and easier to digest for most users, especially
of being conclusively resolved. We argue (yes), that
whencomparedtothealternativeofusingalgebraicex-
thesethingshappenbecausepeopletendtolosesightof
pressions. After all, there is a reason why so many ar-
someoftheclaimsthattheyorothershavemadebefore.
ticles in scientific journals as well as in the news me-
Therefore,itisoftenadvisabletoaimforacomprehen-
dia are accompanied by figures illustrating their main
sive analysis of all relevant argument components. An-
points. Furthermore, visual displays tend to be more
otherreasonwhysomanyargumentsremainunproduc-
parsimonious: With formulae, the same variable name
tiveisthatthosewhoarguetendtooverlooktheactual
will have to be written again each time it is used as an
complexityoftheirownandothers’claims,andtherel-
input or output of some new equation. In contrast, a
ativevaguenessofmanyclaims.
visual display may incorporate the variable only once,
Interestingly, the same problems seem to plague
andestablishalloftherelevantrelationshipswithother
muchofthemore“narrative”theorizingthatissocom-
variablesthrougharrowsorlinespointinginvariousdi-
moninthehumanities,andinpsychology. Infact,there
rections. This is how the matter is handled in VAST,
has been no shortage of calls for better (e.g. more for-
andalignswellwiththetypicalapproachesinStructural
malized) theorizing in psychology, precisely to counter
Equation Modelling (SEM), Structural Causal Models
these shortcomings (Devezer et al., 2021; Eronen &
(SCM) and Directed Acyclic Graphs (DAG) (Dablander,
Bringmann, 2021; Fried, 2020; Glöckner & Betsch,
2020; Pearl, 1995; Pearl & Mackenzie, 2018; Rohrer,
2011;Muthukrishna&Henrich,2019;Robinaughetal.,
2018). Thegraphicalstructuringofargumentswasalso
2021;Smaldino,2017,2019). Concreteadviceonhow
inspired to some extent by developments in formal ar-
===== PAGE 2/20 =====
2
Visual Argument Structure Tool (VAST) Version 1.0 1
Table 1. Components of the System
Element Name Meaning Symbolized by Default
Range
Concept A feature that may apply to certain objects Frame with abstract label 0; 1
Name A natural-language label that may be used for a concept Frame with label in quotation marks 0; 1
Higher-Order A specific combination of elements that may - in its Frame containing two or more elements 0; 1
Concept entirety - apply to certain objects
Data A set of actual observations Frame with thick black edge on one side 0; 1
IS How much X is the case Pentagon containing IS in capitals 0; 1
OUGHT How much X ought to be the case Pentagon containing OUGHT in capitals 0; 1
Perspective How much perspective-holder agrees with X Oval connected to IS / OUGHT 0; 1
Containing name of perspective-holder
Naming How appropriate it is to call X by the name Y Arrow accompanied by lowercase letter n -1; 1
Conceptual How much thinking of something as being X also implies Arrow accompanied by lowercase letter i -1; 1
Implication thinking of it as being Y
Causation How reliably X will trigger Y Arrow accompanied by lowercase letter c -1; 1
Transformation How strongly X maps onto Y Arrow accompanied by lowercase letter t -1; 1
Prediction How well Y may be predicted from X Arrow accompanied by lowercase letter p -1; 1
Reasoning How much X is a reason to believe Y Arrow accompanied by lowercase letter r -1; 1
gumentation(seeBaronietal.,2018). TheSystem
VAST overlaps significantly with all of these previ-
In this section, we introduce the different types of
ous approaches, and also incorporates many elements
elements that, taken together, constitute our system in
of formal logic, in particular logical connectives (AND,
itsentirety. Table1listsalloftheseelementsalongside
OR and XOR) from classical propositional logic (Bün-
each other. To facilitate comprehension, we will use a
ing&Lettmann,1999)inthetraditionofBoole(1854)
varietyofexamplesalongthewaytoillustratetheirpo-
and Frege (1879). Given that we allow truth-values
tentialuses.
between 0 and 1 (see below), VAST is also influenced
bycontinuously-valuedlogics(Preparata&Yeh,1972).
Concepts
However,VASTiscomparativelybroaderandmoreinte-
grativeinthatitexplicitlyaccountsforvarioustypesof Concepts are the basic building blocks of cognition.
relationships between concepts (i.e., naming, concep- Notethatconceptsareassumedtoexistbeforelanguage
tual implication, causation, prediction, transformation, isbeingused(seebelow)—theymayexerttheirinflu-
and reasoning). The strength of all of these relation- enceirrespectiveofthewords(“names”,seebelow)that
ships may be expressed in terms of the same metric, areusedtodenotethem. Aconceptassignsvaluestoob-
as we will explain in more detail below. VAST also ac- jects. Thus, concepts are very similar to mathematical
counts for the possibility that concepts may be applied functionsinthattheyproduceanoutputvalueforevery
to different sets of objects, for claims as to whether input(i.e.,object). Inthemostsimplecase,thatoutput
somethingISand/orOUGHTtobethecase,andfordif- will be dichotomous, so the concept will yield a value
ferent perspectives on these issues. We discuss some of of either 0 or 1 for each object. Here, 1 means that
theoverlapanddifferencesbetweenVASTandprevious the object is an exemplar of the concept, and 0 means
toolswithasimilarscopefurtherbelow. that the object is not an exemplar of the concept. For
instance,apersonmaylookatanumberofobjectsand
determine whether any of them are exemplars of the
concept that one would refer to with the word “car”.
===== PAGE 3/20 =====
3
Note,however,thatmanyconceptsarenotdichotomous
but allow for continuous variation of output values. In „Device used „Small, nocturnal
VAST,thisvariationisusuallynormalizedtoarangebe- forhittinga ball flyinganimalwith
in somegames“ leatherywings“
tween0and1,tomakecomparisonsbetweendifferent
conceptseasier. Thisbasicallyincorporatestheso-called
n n
“prototypeapproach”toclassification(Rosch,1978),in
n n
whichanobjectmaybeamoreorlesstypicalexemplar Y „Bat“ X
ofacategory/concept/class.
InVAST,conceptsareusuallydisplayedintheformof
n n
frames bearing abstract labels (e.g., X, Y, or XYZ). It is „Enraged“ Z „Furious“
importanttonotethatthedisplayofaconceptonlysym-
bolisestheassumedexistenceandrelevanceofacogni- Figure1
tive process that would assign certain values to some
objects and other values to other objects. It is agnostic Selected naming relationships. The word "bat" is a
inregardtothedesired,assumed,ormeasureddistribu- homonym for concepts X and Y, whereas the words "fu-
tionofthosevalues. Thequestionofwhethersomething rious"and"enraged"aresynonymsforconceptZ
is or should be the case is the realm of IS and OUGHT
statements,whichwillbeintroducedlater.
Empirical data constitute a special type of concept, an IF-THEN relation: IF an object is an exemplar of the
whichissymbolizedbyaddingathickblackedgetoone respective concept, THEN one may call this object by
side of the respective frame. This is basically the same therespectivename.
distinctionthatismadebetween“manifest”(measured) Figure1displayssomeexamplesofnamingrelation-
and“latent”(imagined)variablesinStructuralEquation ships, including homonyms (the same name is used for
Modelling(seeFigure12andtheaccompanyingtextfor different concepts) and synonyms (different names are
anexample). used for the same concept). Note that both (a) the ap-
propriatenessand(b)thestrengthsoftherelationships
TypesofRelationshipsBetweenConcepts displayedinFigure1aretreatedasirrelevantfornow.
Distinguishing between concepts and their names is
Thenextmajorelementofthesystemistherelation-
often necessary, because idiosyncratic word usage ac-
ship that may exist between concepts. These are basi-
counts for all sorts of problems (e.g., misunderstand-
cally IF-THEN relations: IF one concept does apply (to
ings)ineverydayarguments. Thesameissueisrelevant
some of the relevant objects), THEN another concept
for psychology, which continues to suffer from — often
also applies, at least to some extent. There are differ-
unacknowledged — jingle-fallacies (use of homonymic
entqualitiesofsuchrelationships,however,whichmust
theoretical concepts) and jangle-fallacies (use of syn-
be distinguished from another. In VAST, we explicitly
onymictheoreticalconcepts)(Block,1995).
account for naming, implication, causation, prediction,
transformation, and reasoning relationships, which we
RelationshipType2: ConceptualImplication(i).
consider to be among the most common and relevant
ones. Specifying additional relationship types is also Conceptual implication is about the extent to which
possible, if needed. All of this will now be explained classifying objects as exemplars of one concept implies
inmoredetail. also categorizing the same objects as exemplars of an-
other concept. Figure 2 displays an example. Here,
RelationshipType1: Naming(n). when an object is considered to be a “sun”, the same
object is also somewhat likely to be considered “hot”
Peopletendtousewordstodenotethedifferentways
and “bright”. Conceptual implications are symbolized
inwhichtheythinkaboutobjects. InVAST,thesewords
byarrowsaccompaniedbythelowercaseletteri.
are called“names”. Toclearly distinguish conceptsand
Figure 2 contains three different ways of displaying
their names from one another, VAST uses abstract la-
basically the same information. In the display on the
bels(e.g.,C,R)fortheformerandreallanguagelabels
left-hand side, all concepts and the relevant relation-
inquotationmarks(e.g.,“Cat”,“Rocket”)forthelatter.
ships between them are displayed as a part of one co-
The relationship between a concept and a word denot-
herentwhole. Thisisthedefaultmodethatwesuggest
ing that concept is called a “naming relationship”. It is
forusewithmostVASTanalyses,asitmaximisesparsi-
symbolized by an arrow pointing from the concept to
monywhileretainingalloftherelevantinformation. In
the name, accompanied by the lower letter n. As with
the middle display, the conceptual implications (typei)
all relationship types (see above), the arrow stands for
===== PAGE 4/20 =====
4
n
„Sun“ S „Sun“
n
n
B „Bright“
n
S
H „Hot“
FIMM
i i
S
Sun
H B
i i
n n i i
„Hot“ „Bright“ H B Hot Bright
Figure2
Conceptual implications among three concepts. Left: full (default) mode in which concepts and names are connected
within the same structure. Middle: full (default) mode with concepts separated from their names. Right: Finger-is-
Moon-Mode (FIMM) in which concept labels reference the concepts’ names. The dashed lines symbolise that these are
alternative ways of displaying the same set of concepts, names, and relationships, not three parts of the same VAST
display
amongthethreeconcepts,andthenamingrelationships toolongtobeusedasconceptlabels. Inthesecases,we
(n) have been separated from one another. This way recommend the approach exemplified in the middle of
ofdisplayingthingsmaysometimesbehelpfultoavoid Figure2.
clutter. However, this approach comes at the price of As a next step, we will introduce four more types
somewhatlowerparsimonybecauseeveryconceptnow of relationships between concepts that frequently fea-
has to be displayed twice. In the display on the right- tureinargumentstructures. Figure3displaystheways
handside,weuseconceptlabelsthatdirectlyreference in which they are distinguished from one another (in
theconcepts’names. Thisiswhatwecallthe“Finger-is- terms of lowercase letters accompanying the respective
Moon-Mode”(FIMM),asitabolishestheexplicitdistinc- arrows), along with a very simple example for each
tionbetweensignifierandreferent. Thisconstitutesan- type. Notethat,forsimplicity,thisfigureusesFIMM,as
otherpossiblewayofreducingclutter,butcomesatthe signalledbytheacronymintheupperright-handcorner.
significantriskofoverlookingtheimportanceofseman-
RelationshipType3: Causation(c).
tics, especially (partial) homonymity, synonomity, and
antonymity. For example, another display using FIMM
Many important articles and books have been writ-
could show that the concept Star has the same con-
tenaboutcausation(Eronen&Bringmann,2021;Pearl,
ceptual implications (Hot, Bright) as the concept Sun.
1995; Pearl & Mackenzie, 2018; Rohrer, 2018). In
Here,theuseofFIMMmightobscurethefactthatthisis
VAST, we use a concept of causation that is also re-
thecasesimplybecause“Sun”and“Star”aretwodiffer-
flectedinhowmostexperimentaliststendtothinkabout
entwordsfortheexactsametypeofthing(S).Tohigh-
their research designs. This concept involves temporal
light the risk of semantic ambiguities like this one, we
orderasanecessaryingredient: Causesalwaysprecede
recommend explicating when the FIMM is being used,
effects, but never the other way round. Also, causation
by adding the respective acronym in one corner of the
would become evident if we were able to manipulate
display (see Figure 2). Also, many concept names are
the suspected cause variable and then observe subse-
===== PAGE 5/20 =====
5
thevaluesofX.Notethatthisispossiblewithoutknow-
FIMM
inganythingaboutthemechanismunderlyingtheasso-
c
ciation. For example, type p relationships may ignore
Smoking Lung Cancer
the direction of causal effects, as in the respective ex-
amplein Figure3: Here, aperson’s Heightpredictsthe
Temperaturein t Temperaturein Number of Y Chromosomes that same person has, al-
Celsius Fahrenheit thoughcertainlytheformerisnotthecauseforthelat-
ter. Often, such predictive relationships may be found
and described first (e.g., a certain set of symptoms ap-
p NumberofY
Height pearingtogetherinpatients),andonlylaterbereplaced
Chromosomes
by more specific explanations (e.g., in terms of a virus
causingallofthosesymptoms).
r
X + 4 = 8 X = 4
RelationshipType6: Reasoning(r).
Figure3 This relationship type is about the conclusions that
people draw from certain premises, on purely intellec-
Four more types of relationships between concepts (c = tual grounds. It reflects the idea that if some concept
causation, t = transformation, p = prediction, r = rea- applies (e.g., X + 4 = 8, see Figure 3), one may infer
soning) thatsomeotherconcept(e.g.,X=4,seeFigure3)also
applies. Notethatthisisnotlimitedtoconclusionsthat
wouldgenerallyberegarded“logical”,buttojustabout
quent changes in another variable. Note that all of this any conclusion that someone thinks they may draw. In
concerns the ways in which we (and most people, pre- fact, VAST may be used to first explicate one person’s
sumably)thinkaboutcausation,irrespectiveofwhether line of reasoning and then refute that reasoning based
suchasuspectedcausallinkmayeverbeprovenordis- onsomeotherreasoning. Forexample,Petermaythink
provedintermsofdata. Notealsothatmostcausalrela- that the results of some empirical study clearly suggest
tionshipsbetweenconceptscouldbe—butdonothave that Y is the case, whereas Trudy may think otherwise.
tobe—decomposedintoanumberofinterveningsteps. Such discrepancies may then be explained using VAST,
Forexample,thecausalrelationshipinFigure3reflects byanalysingwhyexactlyPeterandTrudycometosuch
arelativelyproximallinkbetweencause(Smoking)and different conclusions (e.g., because one of them trusts
effect(LungCancer). Itcouldbeamendedbyinserting the authors of the study, whereas the other does not).
TarAccumulationasamediatorthatiscausedbySmok- So-called “logical conclusions” simply constitute a spe-
ingandthatcausesLungCancer. cial case in which certain lines of reasoning are viewed
as(in-)defensiblebyagroupofpeople(e.g.,scientists)
RelationshipType4: Transformation(t).
whoendorsesomesetofreasoningrules. Thatendorse-
mentthenservesasthepremisefordrawingconclusions
This relationship type is used to account for situa-
astowhether“XisreasontobelieveY”ornot—which
tions in which the applicability of one concept may be
isanothertyperrelationship.
deduced from another concept by mere computation.
The respective example in Figure 3 reflects a case in
AdditionalRelationshipTypes.
which one variable (Temperature in Celsius) is basi-
cally rescaled into another variable, by multiplying the In the present paper, we only address those types of
former’s values with a factor (1.8) and then adding a relationships between concepts that we think feature
constant (32). The specific values for the factor and prominently in many arguments — everyday ones as
the constant are not displayed, but could be displayed. well as scientific ones. Needless to say, the selection
The transformation type of relationship may also be is and has to be somewhat subjective. It is relatively
usedtoaccountforscoringprocedures,suchasthespe- easy to come up with examples of other relationship
cific ways in which an operational measure of socio- types that may be useful to employ under certain cir-
economicstatusisderivedfromanumberofindicators cumstances (e.g., metamorphosis (m): when X turns
(e.g.,highestdegreeattained,annualincome). into Y over time; association (a): when thinking of X
makes it likely to also think of Y; element of (e): when
RelationshipType5: Prediction(p).
X is among the ingredients that, together, constitute Y
etc.). We assume that the principles laid out in the
Thistypeofrelationshipisaboutknowingsomething
following(e.g.,regardingrelationshipstrengthandthe
about the values of Y when we know something about
===== PAGE 6/20 =====
6
c „weak“
1) X Y 6) c 1
X
c 0.5
c
2) X Y 2
AND Z
c *
c
3) X Y 3
Y
* Y = 2 sin(X) + 750 X
c 0.3 c
7) X Y
c
4) X OR Y
c 0.3 c <> 0
8) X Y
Z
c 0.3 c 0
9)
X Y
c
5) X * Y
c 0.3 c ?
10)
X Y
* Y = 2.45 X + Z Z
Figure4
Relationshipstrengthsandrelationshippatterns
constructionofhigher-orderconcepts)willstillapplyin approachwilloftenbeappropriatewhentryingtovisu-
these instances. In cases where a relationship between alisethestructureofanexistingargumentthathasbeen
conceptsisassumedtoexistbuttheexactnatureofthat made using the natural language. It may also be the
relationshipis(yet)unknown,werecommendusingthe most useful approach when a numerical specification
letteru. seems not possible (yet). Case 1 in Figure 4 displays
an example. Note that we rather arbitrarily added the
RelationshipStrength letter c (causation) to all the arrows in Figure 4. This
mayeasilybereplacedwithanyotherrelationshiptype,
In VAST, the default interpretation of an arrow that
as everything we say here about relationship strength
pointsfromoneconcept(e.g.,X)toanother(e.g.,Y)is
appliesequallytoalltypes.
thatthisrelationshipisconsideredrelevantandpositive
If a simple numerical quantification of relationship
(i.e.,themoreXthemoreY).Thus,ifanarrowisabsent
strength is wanted, we propose using normalized co-
betweenXandY,thismeansthattherelationshipiszero
efficients ranging from −1 to 1. “Normalized” means
and/or that it is regarded unimportant for the present
thatthesecoefficientsignoretheparticularscalesofthe
analysis. So far, we did not use any further specifica-
conceptsthattheyconnect,butratherquantifyrelation-
tionsofrelationshipstrength,andthisapproachmaybe
ship strength in terms of proportions of these features’
perfectlysufficientinmanycases. Sometimes,however,
ranges. Note that this is only possible if such a range
such specifications will be deemed useful or even nec-
mayreasonablybeassumedtoexist. Basedonourown
essary. VAST allows for the use of verbal labels such as
experience,thisseemstobethecasewithmostpsycho-
“weak”, “strong”, “negative” etc. for this purpose. This
===== PAGE 7/20 =====
7
Coeff= 1.0 Coeff= 0.5
Max(Y) Max(Y)
Min(Y) Min(Y)
Min(X) Max(X) Min(X) Max(X)
Coeff= 1.0 Coeff= 0.5 Coeff= 0.5
Max(Y) Max(Y) Max(Y)
Min(Y) Min(Y) Min(Y)
Min(X) Max(X) Min(X) Max(X) Min(X) Max(X)
Figure5
Relationshipstrengthquantifiedintermsofdefaultcoefficientsrangingfrom-1to1. Uppertwoexamples: relationships
betweentwodichotomousconcepts. Lowerthreeexamples: relationshipsbetweentwoordinalormetricconcepts
logicalconcepts,however. This default coefficient of relationship strength is
The default coefficient of relationship strength that generic enough to be applied to all types of relation-
we propose reflects the increase in Y (expressed as a shipsbetweenconcepts(e.g.,Typep: “wearingglasses”
percentage of the available range of that feature) that makes it 70 percent likely for a person to also be
is associated with a “perfect” or “complete” increase in “smart”; Type r: It is 90 percent reasonable to assume
X(i.e,anincreasethatcoversthewholeavailablerange someone“isinlovewithyou”whenthatperson“giggles
of X, from the smallest conceivable value to the high- alotwhiletalkingtoyou”;Typec: being“obese”makes
est conceivable value). Case 2 in Figure 4 presents an it 50 percent likely for someone to develop “Diabetes
exampleinwhichthecoefficientis0.5. TypeII”asaconsequence).
This type of coefficient may be applied to relation- For non-dichotomous concepts (see the lower three
ships between dichotomous concepts as well as to re- panels of Figure 5), the default coefficient of relation-
lationships between continuous concepts. In the for- ship strength is largely agnostic regarding the distribu-
mer (dichotomous) case, it may be interpreted as the tionsofconcepts’values: Forexample,therelationships
percentage of cases in which a complete change in X displayed in the middle panel and in the panel to the
(from 0 to 1) is accompanied by a change in Y (from righthavethesamestrengthcoefficient(0.5)butinthe
0 to 1). In the latter (continuous) case, the coefficient latter case the relationship is deterministic whereas in
reflects the average increase on the continuous Y scale the former case it is noisier. This difference may also
that accompanies the largest possible increase (from 0 beaccountedforinVAST,aswewilldiscussinthenext
to1)onthecontinuousXscale(againbothexpressedin section("Noise").
terms of percentages of the respective ranges). Figure VAST’s default coefficient of relationship strength is
5containsanumberofexamplesshowcasingthisbroad basedonpercentagesoftherangesoftheconceptsthat
applicability. Negativecoefficientsaretobeinterpreted the relationship connects. Sometimes, however, there
accordingly: the more X is the case, the less Y is the may be good reasons to deviate from the default (e.g.,
case. whenearthquakemagnitudeontheunboundedRichter
===== PAGE 8/20 =====
8
scaleispartofanargument). Insuchcases,usingother
measures of relationship strength (e.g., an exact func-
t1
tiontranslatingXintoY)ispossible. Astheexactfunc- „Temperaturein n n „Temperaturein
TIC TIF
tion connecting certain concepts will often be too long Celsius“ Fahrenheit“
tobewrittenaboveanarrowinitsentirety, wesuggest
t2
placingitsomewhereelseinthedisplayandreferencing n
p1
n
itusinganasterisk(e.g.,Case3inFigure4). „Body height“ BH BW „Body weight“
Diamondsshouldbeusedwhenseveralconceptsare
p2
jointlyrelatedtoanotherconcept. Thisincludeslogical c1
n n
connectives such as AND, OR and XOR (exclusive OR), „Global warming“ GW GM „Glaciersmelting“
as shown in Case 4 in Figure 4. When a more specific c2
formula is needed to derive a joint output from several r1
inputs(e.g.,ascoringprocedure),thediamondandas- „Peter hasno n n
PNA PG „Peter isguilty“
alibi“
terisk elements may be combined, as shown in Case 5.
r2
AdiamondwithANDinsideitmayalsobeusedtosym-
bolisetheinteractioneffectthattwoconcepts(XandY) n
i1
n
„Bird“ B A „Animal“
haveonathirdconcept(Z).Case6inFigure4displays
thispossibilityalongwiththetwomaineffectsofXand
i2
YonZ,sothisisbasicallyaVAST-typedepictionoftwo-
n i 1 n
factorANOVA.WealsouseCase6toshowcasethepos- „Huge“ X Y „Gigantic“
sibility of indexing coefficients (c , c , c ). Doing so is
1 2 3
oftenusefultofacilitatediscussionsamonganalysts.
Figure6
Noise
Relationship arrows connecting concepts both ways. Use
Sometimes, we may not only wish to display the
of two arrows implies that the exact ways in which the
relationship between specific concepts, but acknowl-
concepts are related depend on direction. Use of a bidi-
edge that there are additional unspecified influences
rectionalarrow(asinthelastcase)impliesthatdirection
(“noise”)ontheseconcepts,aswell. Tosymbolisethese
does not matter. The i 1 coefficient in the latter case re-
influences,werecommendusing“noisearrows”similar
flectstheassumptionthatconceptsXandYareidentical
to the ones that are used in Structural Equation Mod-
elling (SEM). A noise arrow always points toward a
givenconcept(i.e.,theonethatisaffectedbythenoise)
RelationshipDirection
but does not originate in a specific concept. Cases 7,
8, 9 and 10 in Figure 4 provide examples. Note that, Arrows in VAST stand for IF-THEN relationships be-
other than in Structural Equation Modelling, noise ar- tween concepts. We will now briefly address the direc-
rowsinVASTdonotstandfortheresidualsthatremain tion into which arrows may point, and how this differs
between observed Y values and the Y values that one betweenrelationshiptypes. Generallyspeaking,ifthere
predicts from X. Rather, they stand for other influences is an arrow pointing from X to Y, there may also be an
apart from X that may move the values of Y toward its arrowpointingfromYtoX.Inmostcases,theshapeof
maximum (default, positive coefficient), or toward its the respective relationship will differ depending on its
minimum(negativecoefficient). Case7displaysthede- direction. If both directions are of interest to the cur-
faultsituationinwhichnoisemayleadtoanincreasein rent analysis, we recommend signalling this difference
conceptY.Ifnoisemaymovethevaluesofaconceptin by using two separate arrows, one for each direction.
eitherdirection,thismaybespecifiedusing“<>0”,as Figure6presentsafewexamples.
shown in Case 8. If it is important to specify that there A few specifics need to be briefly discussed in this
is no noise, this may be expressed using a coefficient regard: First, naming relationships are special in that
of zero, as shown in Case 9. This expresses the idea arrows may only point from a concept to its name but
that the only factor whose values may make a differ- not the other way round. Second, when the strengths
ence with regard to the values of concept Y is concept ofconceptualimplications(typei)betweenXandYdif-
X.Finally,whenaninfluencemayexistandberelevant fer depending on direction, this means that one con-
fortheanalysis,butoneisnotreallysureyet,werecom- cept (the one that is the target of the arrow with the
mend using a question mark as “coefficient” (see Case higher coefficient) is broader and more inclusive than
10inFigure4). theother. Thisishighlyrelevanttoallkindsofconcep-
===== PAGE 9/20 =====
9
capitals. These are connected to one or more concepts
2 0 usingsimplelinesratherthanarrows,inordertodistin-
INC
guish them from relationships between concepts. The
IS OUGHT
specific IS- and OUGHT-values are written next to the
respectivelines. Figure7showsaverysimpleexample.
n
IS and OUGHT are not concepts themselves but
ratherdenotespecificlocationswithintherangeofval-
„ExpectedIncreaseofaverage
ues that a given concept may have. If IS/OUGHT is
global temperaturein thenext
used, specifying the metric of measurement may some-
50 years, measuredin Kelvin“
times be helpful (e.g., Figure 7). If it is not possible
Figure7 orusefultospecifythismetric,werecommendexpress-
ing IS and OUGHT values in terms of fractions of the
AsimpleexamplewithIS-andOUGHT-statementsregard- normalized range (between 0 and 1) of the respective
ingthesameconcept concept. If no specific value is given, we recommend
using “applies more likely than not" (> 0.5) as the de-
faultinterpretation.
Note that IS may be interpreted as a measure of the
tual hierarchies (taxonomies). Third, VAST does allow
respective concept’s central tendency (e.g., the arith-
forcausal(typec)arrowspointingfromXtoYandback.
metic mean). It is possible, however, to provide whole
This is relevant for displaying all kinds of positive and
ranges of IS- or OUGHT-values, if a single value is
negative feedback loops. Note that this diverges from
deemedinsufficient.
recommendations in the literature on Directed Acyclic
Graphs (Rohrer, 2018). Fourth, VAST also allows for
displaysofcircularreasoning(typer),becausethepur-
pose of VAST is not to prescribe rules as to how one „Havinga „Beingin a
should think, but to make visible the ways in which goodday“ goodmood“
someonethinks. Thisincludesthepossibilityofdisplay-
ing beliefs that others may find unconvincing or even
c
irrational. Fifth, we recommend using a bidirectional X Y
arrow with an “i 1” coefficient for expressing the idea
that X and Y are identical (see Figure 6). Likewise, a Concept Name Unit IS OUGHT
bidirectionalarrowwithacoefficientof“i-1”wouldim- M SD M SD
ply that one concept is the exact opposite of the other X „Havinga goodday“ % 50 10 70 10
(e.g., between concept H named “huge” and concept T Y „Beingin a goodmood“ % 65 25 65 10
named“tiny”).
TheISandOUGHTelements Figure8
In many arguments, the extent to which something
An example of how assumed and desired concept features
is considered to be the case and the extent to which
maybedisplayedseparatelyinatable,toavoidclutter
something should be the case play important roles. To
capture these extents, VAST uses two special elements,
Goingfurther,itmaysometimesbehelpfultospecify
called IS and OUGHT. Both denote specific values on
the assumed and/or desired distribution characteristics
a given concept. They are important in a variety of
of a concept even more. In such cases, we recommend
ways: First, disagreements often arise because people
providingtherespectiveinformationinaseparateTable
start from different premises regarding the extent to
on the side, to avoid clutter. An example is shown in
whichsomethingISthecase(e.g.,whethervaccinesare
Figure 8. The example tells us that, if a person (= ob-
safe)ortheextenttowhichsomethingOUGHTtobethe
ject)“hasagoodday”,thatpersonwillbemorelikelyto
case (e.g., whether one should trust the government).
also“beinagoodmood”,andthatthiseffectisacausal
Second, discrepancies between IS and OUGHT-values
one. The table also tells us that (a) it would be good
on the same concept often explain why people decide
if the average percentage of people having a good day
to act in certain ways — often they do so in order to
would increase (from IS: 50 to OUGHT: 70), and that
movetheIS-valueclosertotheOUGHT-value.
(b)thevariation(SD)inthepercentageofpeoplebeing
InVAST,ISandOUGHTaresymbolizedbypentagons
inagoodmoodwouldgodown(fromIS:25toOUGHT:
which include the respective term (IS or OUGHT) in
===== PAGE 10/20 =====
10
it seems necessary to not only visualise a perspective-
Analysts: Daniel, Marcos
holder’s lack of agreement with X but also what else
(Y)theybelievein,thatalternativeviewwillhavetobe
1.0 IS 0 0 IS 0.8 specified,aswell.
Daniel HPW Marcos The specific example given in Figure 9 conveys a
0.9 0 4 0.8 wealthofinformationatoneglance: DanielandMarcos
OUGHT OUGHT
n boththinkthatDanieldoesnotspendanytimestudying
Esperanto. However, Daniel is perfectly certain about
„Hoursper weekthatDaniel
spendsstudyingEsperanto“ that (1.0) whereas Marcos — who cannot really know
for sure — is a little less certain (0.8). Also, Daniel
Figure9 is almost certain (0.9) that he should not take up any
Esperanto-learning, whereas Marcos is also quite sure
Different IS and OUGHT values for different perspective- thatDanielshouldspend4hoursperweeklearningEs-
holders peranto. Making differences such as these visible may
go a long way in explaining the different behavioural
choicesthatpeoplemake.
TheperspectiveelementofVASTincorporatestheim-
10). Thelatter goalmay berooted e.g., in theassump-
portant issue of subjective certainty, which plays a key
tion that it is important to avoid extreme unhappiness
role in scientific theorizing. In fact, if one plotted all
inpeople.
of the possible IS-values (X-axis) against a perspective-
ThePerspectiveElement holder’s subjective certainties (Y-axis) and rescaled the
latter such that their sum is 1, one would basically ob-
Almost by definition, arguments tend to involve dis-
tain a density distribution very much akin to a Bayes
agreements between viewpoints. To account for this,
prior. Outsideofscientifictheorizing,however,inspect-
VAST incorporates a so-called “perspective” element
ingentiredistributionsofpossibleIS-valuesisrelatively
that reflects how strongly a given entity agrees with
rare. Thus,werecommenddisplayingtheIS-valuewith
something. This“entity”isusuallyaperson, butitmay
the highest subjective certainty as a default. If neces-
also be a group of people or something more abstract
sary, alternative IS-values and their respective certain-
likeacorporation.
ties may be displayed in addition. The perspective fea-
The perspective element may only be used to con-
ture may also be used to express someone’s “hunches”
dition IS and OUGHT statements. When used to
(e.g.,thesuspicionthattheremaybeanotheryetunrec-
condition an IS-statement, it reflects the extent to
ognized factor involved in accounting for some effect).
which a perspective-holder agrees that the given level
This also includes suspicions as to what someone may
of the concept applies. When used to condition an
ormaynothavemeantbysayingsomething(i.e.,impli-
OUGHT-statement, it reflects the extent to which the
cations).
perspective-holderagreesthatthisisthemostdesirable
leveloftheconcept. Levelsofagreementmaybequanti- TheAnalystElement
fiedusingvaluesbetween0("doesnotagreeatall")and
Each VAST display has to be created by someone.
1 ("agrees completely"). If a perspective-holder’s level
Notably, the persons creating such displays are respon-
of agreement is left unspecified, we recommend using
sible for arranging the various concepts and their re-
"tendstoagree"(>0.5)asthedefaultinterpretation.
lationships with one another in the most accurate or
If a (part of a) VAST display does not explicate who
helpful ways possible, but not for the actual content
the perspective-holder is, then IS and OUGHT state-
of the respective argument. In fact, it is possible to
ments reflect the view of the analyst who created the
display the structure of an argument with great pre-
display(seenextsection).
cision while at the same time disagreeing wholeheart-
Figure 9 showcases the use of the perspective el-
edlywithmostorallofthepointsthatarebeingmade.
ement in VAST: The name of the perspective-holder
This is why we prefer to call these persons “analysts”
is displayed inside an oval, and the strength of the
rather than “authors”. We recommend naming the an-
perspective-holder’s belief is again expressed using co-
alyst who created a display in a header, as also shown
efficients ranging from 0 to 1. Note that a value of 0
intheupperleftcornerofFigure9. Thepersonsnamed
would only imply a complete lack of agreement with
asanalystsareresponsibleforthedisplayinitsentirety
X, not the belief that the opposite of X is true. This is
(again: irrespective of how much they agree with the
necessary because many of the concepts that we use in
display’s actual content). To make this point clear, we
everyday life do not have clearly defined opposites. If
===== PAGE 11/20 =====
11
Analyst: Peter
Analyst: Imani
Toby c c Tina
1.0 X Y1 Z 0.5 c c
X B Y
IS IS
c c n n n
0.0 X Y2 Z 0.5
Figure10 „Antecedent“ „Black Box“ „Consequence“
Higher-order concepts. Here, IS and OUGHT statements
for different perspective-holders refer to two higher-order
concepts,eachofwhichcontainsanumberofcausalrela-
IS
tionshipsbetweenlower-orderconcepts
i 1
B 1
c
decided to include the same persons (Daniel and Mar- M1 M2
cos)inFigure9,intwodifferentroles: asanalysts,and
as perspective-holders. Altogether, the Figure tells us
n n
thatDanielandMarcos(analysts)agreethatDanieland
Marcos (perspective-holders) have different views on
howmuchtimeDanielshouldspendlearningEsperanto „Mediator 1“ „Mediator 2“
(the specifics of their viewpoints were discussed above
and will not be repeated here). In other words, they Figure11
“agreetodisagree”.
Using higher-order concepts to “zoom in” on a particular
HigherOrderConcepts part of a VAST display. The lower part of the display de-
tailswhatconceptBisabout
After having introduced all of the different ways in
which concepts may be related to one another, as well
as the IS, OUGHT, perspective and analyst elements, it
“zoom in” on certain parts of a display if they wish to
is now time to introduce a final element of great im-
elaborate on its details, or “zoom out” when they de-
portance: In VAST, any combination of elements may
cidetoratherignoresomeofthedetailsforsometime.
itselfbecomea“higher-orderconcept”(HOC)andthus
Figure 11 provides an example: The lower part of the
be related to other (higher-order) concepts or be the
figure“zoomsin”onthemeaningofoneoftheconcepts
subject of IS or OUGHT statements. In this, all of the
(B) that features in the causal chain displayed in the
rulesexplainedsofardoapplyaswell.
upper part of the figure. Specifically, we learn that B
Figure10displaysaverysimpleexample. Here, two
stands for M1 being the case (IS) and M1 eliciting M2.
persons(TobyandTina)areportrayed(byPeter)asdis-
Furthermore,allofthiselicitsY.
agreeinginregardtothequestionofwhetherthecausal
Higher-order concepts may be used to display a hi-
effect of X on Z is mediated by Y1, or by Y2. Toby is
erarchy of concepts that apply to different sets of ob-
certain that the former is the case, whereas Tina is un-
jects. So far, we abstained from explicating the sets of
decided. Similardisplaysmaybeusedtoaccountforall
objects that the concepts in a VAST analysis apply to.
sortsofdifferencesbetweenviewpoints,suchasnaming
Instead, wetacitlyassumedthatthoseobjectswerethe
conventions(i.e.,whatitISthatagivenlabelrefersto,
sameacrossallconcepts. Sometimes,however,specify-
or what that label OUGHT to be used for). Such issues
ingthesetsofobjectstowhichdifferentconceptsapply
are as greatly relevant to contemporary psychology as
isnecessary. WerecommendusingGreeklettersforthis
theyweredecadesago(Block,1995).
purpose.
It is important to note that a higher-order concept
Figure 12 displays a hypothetical example. Here, in-
binds all of its components together in an inseparable
telligence test scores and school grades were obtained
fashion: Thehigher-orderconceptapplies(tosomeob-
fromstudents(τ). Rememberthatthethickblackedges
ject)ifandonlyifallofitslower-ordercomponentsap-
oftherespectiveconceptframessymbolisethefactthat
ply.
these concepts were actually measured. We assume
By using higher-order concepts, VAST users may
===== PAGE 12/20 =====
12
(σ), andthatthisvariationcausallyexplainsthediffer-
Analyst: Pam
encebetweenp1andp2.
SEL(σ) Discussion
In this paper, we presented the first version of VAST,
the Visual Argument Structure Tool. It provides a set
c c
of clear rules by which the ways in which people think
and speak about things may be visually organized, in
order to help understand those ways better. VAST may
HOC1(σ) HOC2(σ)
INT(τ) INT(τ) be used for constructing new arguments, as well as for
analysing,completing,revisingand/or(partly)refuting
existing ones. The system captures some of the key
p 0.5 p 0.2
1 2
types of elements that many everyday arguments and
scientific theories share by means of a relatively small
GRA(τ) GRA(τ) set of graphical symbols. In our view, its appeal lies in
itsintuitivenessandrelativeeconomy, initscapacityto
accountforanydegreeofspecificationorrelativefuzzi-
ness,andinitsapplicabilitytobasicallyanycontentdo-
n
INT(τ) 1 „Students‘ Intelligence-Test Results“ main. In the next section, we give a brief overview of
the system’s possible uses. Depending on the material
n
GRA(τ) 2 „Students‘ Grades“ athand, oneorseveralofthefollowinggoalsmayplay
a more prominent role in a VAST analysis: (a) afford
n
3 comprehensiveness, (b) explicate premises in terms of
SEL(σ) „SelectivenessofSchool“
what IS the case and what OUGHT to be case, (c) clar-
n ifytheviewsthatdifferent(groupsof)peoplehave, in-
4
HOC1(σ) „Effectin School 1“
cluding areas of (dis-)agreement, (d) identify areas of
n under-specification,inconsistencyoroutrightcontradic-
5
HOC2(σ) „Effectin School 2“ tion,(e)deducedefensibleconclusions.
PotentialUsesoftheSystem
Figure12
TheorySpecification.
Useofconcepts(INT,GRA,SEL)andhigher-orderconcepts There is no shortage of complaints that the mainly
(HOC1,HOC2)thatareappliedtodifferentsetsofobjects narrative theories which are so common in the human-
(τvs. σ) ities and in psychology are of limited value because of
their relative fuzziness and under-specification. At the
same time, proposals as to how this situation may be
improved are largely lacking, and the existing ones are
that the students’ intelligence test scores do predict
often relatively unspecific themselves. We think that
their grades to some extent. Note that we use p in-
VASTmayofferasolutiontothisproblem, fortworea-
stead of c relationships in this display, because the two
sons: First, a VAST analysis may help pinpoint those
types of data are empirically related (probably because
partsofanarrativetheorythatmayandshouldbebetter
theybothreflectthestudents’actualcognitiveabilities),
specified, and then aid in the specification process. We
but the students’ test results are not the cause of their
consider this the preferable approach compared to the
grades.
alternativeofrejectingnarrativetheoriesaltogether. By
The figure also tells us that this predictive relation-
specifying a theory better, its “empirical content” (em-
ship is assumed to be different for students in School
pirischer Gehalt; Glöckner and Betsch, 2011; Popper,
1 as compared to students in School 2. We learn this
2002, page 96) and thus ultimately its utility will be
from comparing coefficients p1 and p2, and from how
improved(e.g.,itwillbecomeeasiertorefute).
the two higher-order concepts (HOC1 and HOC2) are
Second, VAST allows for accommodating any level
named. At this point, a new set of objects (σ) has to
of fuzziness that seems acceptable or unavoidable at
be introduced to distinguish the two schools from one
present. This very much aligns with the idea of scien-
another. Wealsolearnthatsomethingelse(SEL)named
tific theory-development as an incremental process of
“selectivity” is assumed to vary across the same objects
===== PAGE 13/20 =====
13
gradually increasing specificity. Furthermore, by being organise the available information in the paper as to
able to incorporate natural-language componentsof an (a)howmanyrelevantconceptsthereare(b)howthey
argument, a VAST display may help bridge the chasm are assumed to relate to one another, (c) how they are
that exists between the humanities and the “harder” named, (d) how they were measured, (e) how well
sciences, with psychology dangling somewhere in be- these measurements reflect the assumed relationships
tween. In the Appendix we provide a somewhat more betweentheconceptsofinterest,andsoon.
complex example, showcasing an attempt to clarify the
UseasaToolforGatheringResearchData.
meaning of a short theory paragraph from a research
paper. The use of VAST may also be helpful when people’s
belief systems (e.g., so-called conspiracy theories) are
NomenclatureIssues.
the research domain of interest. For example, how
Psychologyinparticularhaslongsuffered—andcon- awarearepeopleofthelogical(in-)consistencieswithin
tinues to suffer — from significant jingle- and jangle- theirownworldviews? Whathappensifyoumakethem
problems (Block, 1995): To this day, psychologists of- aware of the existing inconsistencies (e.g., do they add
tenusedifferentwordstodenotethesamething,orthe new components post hoc that mitigate them)? Which
same words to denote different things. Both practices components of people’s belief systems are particularly
areatoddswithscientificidealsofefficiencyandparsi- hard to change (e.g., the ones that are of key im-
mony. VASTmaybeusedtohelpimproveonthepresent portance to several intertwined belief systems)? And:
situation quite a bit by making visible (at a glance), do people find it easier to map arguments they agree
(a) which terms are used, (b) by whom, (c) to denote with,ascomparedtoargumentswithwhichtheydonot
what (including the relationships among the concepts agree?
that the terms refer to). The according displays will
Explicating the Paths from Premises to Conclusions
almost certainly involve naming and implication rela-
(andBack).
tionshipsaswellastheperspectiveelement. Forexam-
ple: Is the thing that is called “narcissism” by author VAST may be used to derive defensible conclusions
A the same as the thing that is called “narcissism” by from a given set of premises, or to elucidate the ways
author B (e.g., in terms of its assumed or shown re- in which a given perceiver seems to draw conclusions
lationships with other concepts)? To what extent are fromsuchpremises. Likewise,VASTmaybeusedtoin-
“arrogance”,“dominance”,and“self-enhancement”just ferthepremisesuponwhichsomeexistingsetofconclu-
differentwordsforthesamething,andisthatthesame sionswasbuilt. Often,perspectivesmaybeofparticular
thingthatisalsocalled“narcissism”bysomescientists? importance in such analyses. This is because believing
Andsoon. different things to be true (IS) or desirable (OUGHT)
goes a long way in explaining wildly different conclu-
FacilitatingScientificDiscourse.
sions(e.g.,intermsofhowoneshouldact).
Throughitsperspectiveelement,VASTanalysesmay
FindingCommonGround.
very well be used to account for the inherently social
nature of all scientific discourse (Oreskes, 2020), as The potential use of VAST for working toward con-
they enable an explicit and comprehensive showcasing sensual viewpoints is not limited to scientists (see
of points of convergence or disagreement between the above). We hope that VAST may just as well be used
views of different scholars studying the same subject. to enable more traceable and rational conversations
We assume that scientific debates may become signifi- amongproponentsofviewpointsthatmayseemirrecon-
cantlymoreefficientwhenmakingsourcesofdisagree- cilableatfirst(e.g.,regardingabortion,secondamend-
mentvisibleandthenworkingthroughthem,oneafter mentrights, vaccinationetc.). Theextenttowhichthis
another, possibly in an iterative fashion. This way, a hope is warranted will have to become the subject of
VASTanalysismayactuallyserveasakindofroad-map futureresearch,however.
to help guide the scientific process (e.g., in systematic
TeachingCriticalThinkingandtheArtofArgumenta-
attemptsatformingconsensus).
tion.
PeerReview.
VAST may be used as a teaching tool, helping teach-
VASTmayalsobeusedasatoolinpeerreview. This ers explain to students the various ways in which con-
seems particularly promising when reviewing a paper ceptsmayberelatedtooneanother,andtheimportant
from a research field that the reviewer is not that fa- roles that IS and OUGHT statements as well as differ-
miliar with. In such cases, it may be helpful to first entperspectivesplayinmanyarguments. Ideally,these
===== PAGE 14/20 =====
14
thingswouldbetaughtbywayofanalysingexistingar- son!Able (Van Gelder, 2002) and others (for an
gumentstogether,orbyjointlydevelopingnewones(cf. overview of argument visualisation approaches, see
Cullenetal.,2018). Okada et al., 2014). These other tools usually enable
userstozoominonanypartsofaverbalargumentand
ComparisonwithRelatedTools deducethelogicalrelationshipsamongthem. Thiscon-
cernsreasonsfordrawingcertainconclusionsaswellas
VAST’s intended domain of use overlaps very signif-
objections to doing so. In VAST, these are captured us-
icantly with those of many other systems, most promi-
ingpositiveornegativetyperrelationships. Manytools
nentlyDirectedAcyclicGraphs(DAG;Pearl,1995;Pearl
account for premises that may lead to certain conclu-
and Mackenzie, 2018; Rohrer, 2018) and Structural
sionseitherbythemselves,orincombination. InVAST,
Equation Modelling (SEM). Major points of conver-
thesewouldbedistinguishedfromoneanotherinterms
gence with these systems are obviously the display of
of separate vs. combined (AND/OR) arrows pointing
concepts or variables (“nodes”), and the display of re-
toward a concept. Several tools also afford the possi-
lationshipsbetweenthem(“edges”). InSEM,numerical
bility of making whole strains of argument (e.g., “X is
coefficientsareoftenusedtoexpressthestrengthsofre-
a reason to believe Y”) the subject of further reasoning
lationships between variables. A similar route is taken
(e.g., “Z is a reason not to believe that X is a reason to
when creating so-called “research maps” summarizing
believeY”). InVAST,thisiscapturedusinghigher-order
thetheoreticalassertionsandtheevidencespeakingfor
concepts. Variants of IS-statements and quantifications
or against them, for a given research field (Matiasz et
of reasoning strength are also found in some existing
al., 2018). From SEM, VAST has further borrowed the
tools (e.g., Reason!Able). However, a major difference
use of “noise arrows” to symbolise additional, unspeci-
between these tools and VAST is that the former deal
fiedinfluences. DivergingfromSEMconventions,how-
exclusivelywithrelationshipsofthereasoning(r)type,
ever, VAST uses a different default meaning for the ab-
whereasthelatteralsoaccountsformanyotherpossible
senceofarrowsbetweenconcepts: WhereasinSEMthis
typesofrelationshipsbetweenconcepts,whilestillcap-
usuallysignalsanunrelatednessofvariables,inVASTit
turingtheirstrengthswiththesame(default)metric.
means“unrelatedornotrelatedinwaysrelevanttothe
currentargument”. Thisisasomewhatmoreliberalap-
LimitationsandOutlook
proach,andmoreinlinewithhoweverydayarguments
arestructured,accordingtoourexperience: Whenpeo- At this early stage in the development of VAST, it is
ple do not talk about relationships between concepts, difficulttopredicthoweagerlyitwillbepickedupand
this usually means that they see no reason for doing eventually be used by others. We have spent signifi-
so, but not necessarily that they assume the respective cant amounts of time over the course of approximately
coefficienttobezero. three years developing, testing, revising and refining
The coverage of VAST exceeds those of DAGs and thesystemthroughnumerousiterations,tryingtomake
SEMs by a wide margin: Like DAGs and SEMs, VAST it work with analyses of diverse sets of examples both
does cover the (measured or unmeasured) features of fromwithinscienceandoutsideofit. Weareconvinced
objects and the relationships (causation and associa- thatthecurrentversiondoesworkreasonablywell,but
tion) among those features. Unlike those other two we certainly expect additional improvements in the fu-
frameworks, however, VAST also covers some more ture. To facilitate these, we encourage our readers to
“psychological”relationshiptypessuchasnaming,con- giveitatry,toputthesystemtouseonwhateverargu-
ceptual implication and reasoning. For this reason, the mentstheyfindinteresting,andtoletusknowaboutthe
default coefficient of relationship strength in VAST ex- experiencestheymake. Newsmediaarticles,statements
pressesthecovariationoftwoconceptsintermsofper- bypoliticalagents(e.g.,partiesoroffice-holders),court
centagesofranges(e.g.,howmuchmorewillIconsider sentences, advertisements, and of course science texts
anobjectto“beacar”ifit“hastires?”). VASTalsogoes are all fair game. Based on our own experiences, we
beyond the aforementioned systems in that it enables predict that, like us, most readers will find this type
an explicit accounting for assumptions as to how much of analysis intellectually challenging. We hope that the
something IS and OUGHT to be the case, and for dif- substantialeffortthattendstobeassociatedwithspeci-
ferencesbetweenpeopleinregardtosuchassumptions. fyingargumentstructuresthiswaywillnotdeterpeople
Allofthisisunquestionablyofkeyimportanceformany fromtrying.
everydayarguments. VAST analyses may be real eye-openers in regard to
The coverage and methodology of VAST overlaps the, well, vast level of complexity that does permeate
considerably with tools developed in philosophy, such manyargumentsbuttendstobeoverlookedwhenstick-
as MindMup (https://maps.simoncullen.org/), Rea- ing to purely narrative ways of formulating them. In
===== PAGE 15/20 =====
15
thisregard,areviewer(JuliaRohrer)alertedustoapo- and episodic context (Davachi et al., 2003; Komorowski
tential conflict of interest, especially for scientists who et al., 2013; Davachi, 2006; Ranganath, 2010) as well
consider using the system: Given the current incentive asintegrationofinformationoverepisodes(Schlichtinget
structureinacademia,theremaybegood(i.e. rational) al., 2015; Davis et al., 2012; Collin et al., 2015; Milivo-
reasonstoavoidgreaterlevelsoftheoryspecification. In jevitchetal.,2015[...]"
fact, low levels of specification may be selected for be- Figure 13 shows a VAST display created by Daniel
cause using them is likely to involve a lower risk of be- (analyst) to reflect the paragraph above. More specifi-
ingprovenwrong. Ill-specifiedtheorieswillalsobeless cally,itshowswhatthisanalystthinkstheauthors(per-
likelytoincurstrongnegativereactionsfromreviewers spective) of the paragraph are saying (IS), which is ev-
and may be easier to “sell” to the public. All of this is erything inside the largest frame. Note that, for sim-
true and may in fact explain part of why weak theoriz- plicity,aminorportionattheendofthenarrativepara-
ingissopersistentinpsychologytothisday. Wedocon- graphwasexcluded,asindicatedbytheuseofbrackets
sideritunlikelythatthepresentpaperwillinciteamass attheend(seeabove).
movementoftheoryspecificationenthusiasts. However, Daniel used the default mode of VAST in which all
based on our own experience with the tool, we do be- concepts and their names are separated from one an-
lieve that for those psychologists who already are gen- other. Heidentified8relevantconceptstobeaccounted
uinelyinterestedinimprovingonthespecificityoftheir for. Five of these (C1 to C5) reflect key sentences
(andothers’)theorizing,usingVASTisdefinitelyworth from the paragraph, as shown in the lower part of the
atry. Considerablygreaterclarityisusuallyachieved. figure where the respective naming relationships are
At present, VAST merely consists of a set of concep- listed. Note that some minor inferences and modifica-
tual distinctions and related rules for how they should tions were necessary to enable each concept name to
bevisualized. Asthisisthecoreofthesystem,complete speak for itself. The other three concepts (L1 to L3)
and satisfactory VAST analyses are already possible us- represent the references to the literature that also fea-
ing any standard graphics tool, or even just paper and ture in the paragraph. These are empirical in nature,
pencil. However, our ultimate goal is to implement the as indicated by the use of thick black edges on the re-
system as a free web resource that will be capable of spective frames. They are also assumed to be given, as
(a) developing VAST displays by asking users the right indicatedbytheuseofISpentagons.
questionsand(b)checkinganygivendisplayforconsis- In this first VAST display, Daniel focuses on what he
tencyandcompleteness. thinks is the reasoning structure in the paragraph. His
use of VAST’s default mode along with his decision to
Appendix: AMoreComplexExample setthenamingrelationshipsasideallowsustofullycon-
centrate on this reasoning structure, without being dis-
The task at hand is to clarify the meaning of the fol-
tractedbytheactualcontentofspecificconcepts. There
lowingtheoryparagraphfromthepaperbyThevesetal.
isnoneedforindexingthenamingrelationshipsinthis
(2020), using VAST. Such a clarification attempt may
context,becausetheywillnotbeindividuallydiscussed.
— and usually does — lead to an identification of ar-
Daniel identified seven relevant relationships of the
eas of underspecification, ambiguity or even contradic-
reasoning type (r to r ): Because L1 is given (IS), we
tion. Note, however, thatthisparticularparagraphwas 1 7
maybelieveC1tobethecase,viar . ThisishowDaniel
pickedfornootherreasonthanbeingarelativelytypical 1
interpretsthefirstcitation. IfC1isthecase,wemayalso
example of narrative theorizing in psychology (and be-
believe C2 to be the case, via r . This is how Daniel in-
causeitdealswiththesubjectof“concepts”,whichplay 2
terpretsthefirst“thus”. Ifallofthisisthecase,wemay
a key role in VAST). We do not consider this a particu-
also believe C3 to be the case, via r . This is Daniel’s
larlyproblematiccase,butratherjustuseittoshowcase 3
interpretation of the second “thus”. However, this (r )
atypicalapplicationofVAST.Thousandsofotherpara- 3
is only true if C4 and C5 are also the case, via r and
graphsmayhavebeenusedjustaswell. Theparagraph 4
r . ThislatterconditioningishowDanielinterpretsthe
from the (Theves et al., 2020) paper (page 7318) goes 5
“due to” in the paragraph. Furthermore, L2 is given,
likethis:
whichisareason(viar ;reflectingthesecondcitation)
"Concepts are organizing structures that define how 6
to believe C4 to be the case. Finally, L3 is also given,
contents are related to each other and can be used to
whichisareason(viar ;reflectingthethirdcitation)to
transfer meaning to novel input (Smith & Medin, 1981; 7
believeC5tobethecase.
Kemp,2010). Theirformationthusinherentlydependson
Notethattheanalysthadtomakenumerousauxiliary
generalizationover,andintegrationofexperiences. Thus,
assumptionsaboutthingsthatwerenotentirelyclearin
a role of the hippocampus in generalization seemed con-
thenarrativeparagraphitself: Forexample,theanalyst
siderable due to its roles in binding elements into spatial
===== PAGE 16/20 =====
16
Analyst: Daniel
IS Authors
r r
r r r 4 C4 6 L2 1
1 1 2 3
L1 C1 C2 C3
IS r 5 r 7 IS
C5 L3 1
n
“Concepts are organizing structures that define how contents are related to
C1 n
each other and can be used to transfer meaning to novel input.”
L1 “Smith and Medin, 1981; Kemp, 2010”
n
C2 “ in[C teo gn rc ae tip ot ns ’ o] ff o er xm pea rt ii eo nn c [ e… s] .” inherently depends on generalization over, and L2 n “Davachiet al., 2003; Komorowskiet al.,
2013; Davachi, 2006; Ranganath, 2010“
n
C3 “[…] a role of the hippocampus in generalization seemed considerable”
n “Schlichting et al., 2015; Davis et al., 2012;
L3
n Collin et al., 2015; Milivojevitchet al., 2015“
C4 “[hippocampus’s role] in integration of information over episodes”
n
C5 “[hippocampus’s role] in binding elements into spatial and episodic context”
Figure13
ReasoningstructureinatheoryparagraphbyThevesetal.(2020),accordingtoDaniel(analyst)
treated all of the papers supposedly supporting a given tent of the largest frame underneath it to be inter-
proposition as a unified whole (i.e., a single concept). changeable. To him, these two concepts have the ex-
Alternatively,hecouldhaveusedaseparateconceptfor act same meaning, as indicated by his using a bidirec-
eachpaper,whichwouldhavemeantthateachpaperby tional implication arrow with coefficient 1 (signalling
itself supports the respective proposition. Also, Daniel identity). WhatDanieldoeshereisspecifythemeaning
treatedr andr astwoentirelyseparatepathsbywhich ofahigher-orderconcept(C1)bybreakingitdowninto
4 5
r issupported. Alternatively,hecouldhaveinterpreted fourcomponents(C6toC9)andsomerelevantrelation-
3
the“aswellas”intherespectivesentencetomeanthat ships (i to i ) between them: Objects that are consid-
2 4
onlythecombinationofC4andC5isareasontobelieve eredexemplarsofC6(named“concepts”)arealsocon-
C3, which he would then have had to express using an sidered exemplars of C7, C8 and C9. Note that these
ANDdiamond. latterimplicationsuseunidirectionalarrowsonly. Note
Needlesstosay,eachoftheseadditionalassumptions, furtherthatallofthisisexpresslyDaniel’sopinion,and
andanyotherelementinthedisplay,maybechallenged notnecessarilysharedbytheauthorsoftheparagraph.
anytime—butonlyiftheyaremadeexplicit, whichis This is because only Daniel is named as the analyst in
the whole point of VAST analyses. By making specifi- thebyline,buttheoriginalauthorsoftheparagraphdo
cation gaps and ambiguities explicit this way, a VAST not appear as perspective-holders anywhere in the fig-
analysismayeventuallyhelpdrivetheorydevelopment. ure.
As a next step, Daniel decides to zoom-in a bit more The second concept that the analyst chooses to
on two of the key concepts in the paragraph. The first “zoom-in” on is C2. Figure 15 showcases the result. As
of these is C1, which he interprets to be mostly about in the previous analysis, Daniel assumes that the con-
conceptual implications. This is how he interprets the tent of C2 and the content of the largest frame under-
word“are”inthisconcept’sname. Figure14showsthe neath it are mutually interchangeable (i ). Again, he
5
outcomeofthiszooming-in: explicatesthemeaningofaconcept(C2)bybreakingit
DanielbelievesthecontentofC1andtheentirecon- down into a few subordinate concepts (C10, C11, and
===== PAGE 17/20 =====
17
“Concepts are Analyst: Daniel
organizing structures “[Concepts’] Analyst: Daniel
that define how formation […]
contents are related to n inherently depends n
C1 C2
each other and can be on generalization
used to transfer over, and integration
mean ii nn pg
u
t to
.”
novel i11 of experiences.” i 5 1
“[Concepts’]
n “Generalization n
C7 “Organizing structures” C10 formation”
i2 over [experiences]”
n
n i3 n “Define how contents ? c 1
“Concepts” C6 C8 are related to each C12
i4 other”
AND c 0
n “Can be used to transfer “Integration of n C11
C9 meaning to novel input” experiences”
Figure14
Figure15
“Zooming-in”inonconceptC1(ignoringcitations)
“Zooming-in”inonconceptC2(ignoringcitations)
C12) and some relationships among them (this time of
thectype,whichishowDanielinterpretstheword"de- AuthorContact
pends"inthetext).
Corresponding Author: Daniel Leising (ORCID:
Daniel’suseofanANDdiamondsignalsthatC12may
0000-00001-8503-5840), Technische Universität Dres-
onlybethecaseifC10andC11arebothgiven,butnot
den,daniel.leising@tu-dresden.de
if only C10 or C11 are given. This is how he interprets
the word "and" in the text. Furthermore, the c 0 in-
ConflictofInterestandFunding
fluence on C12 makes it clear that there are no other
causal pathways by which C12 may come about. This The authors state that they have no conflict of inter-
is how Daniel interprets the word “inherently" in the est to declare. This project was not connected to any
text. However,thequestionmarkabovethethirdarrow particularsourceofthird-partyfunding.
pointing toward the AND diamond signals that Daniel
isnotsurewhetheranotherinfluenceisneededtobring AuthorContributions
aboutC12. ThisisbecausethenameofconceptC2only
Daniel Leising: Conceptualization, Methodology, Vi-
seems to say that C10 and C11 are necessary for C12
sualization, Writing — Original Draft, Writing — Re-
to happen, but not that they are sufficient. Here, the
view & Editing; Oliver Grenke: Conceptualization,
analysispointstoaneedforgreaterspecification.
Methodology, Visualization, Writing — Review & Edit-
Finally, a brief word on the sets of objects that the
ing; Marcos Cramer: Conceptualization, Methodology,
concepts in the three figures pertain to. These are ob-
Visualization,Writing—Review&Editing.
viouslynotthesame. InFigure13,theobjectsarecon-
ceivablerealities: theonethatisdescribedasgiven(in Acknowledgments
which certain rules apply and certain research papers
exist), and possible alternative ones. In Figure 14, the The authors would like to thank Moritz Leistner for
objectsareratherill-defined. Itmaybeusefultothinkof helpwithlayoutingthispaper.
themasbeingvariouskindsofmentalphenomenahere
OpenSciencePractices
(e.g.,perceptions,memoriesetc.). InFigure15,theob-
jectsmaybethoughtofasvariantsofpeople’sdevelop- This article is theoretical and as such is not eligible
mentaltrajectories: OnlyinthoseinwhichC10andC11 for Open Science badges. The entire editorial process,
(and maybe something else, see question mark) take including the open reviews, is published in the online
place, will we also see C12 happening. For simplicity, supplement.
we did not explicitly account for the different sets of
objectsinFigures13,14,and15.
===== PAGE 18/20 =====
18
References A. J. (2018). Researchmaps.org for integrat-
ing and planning research. PLoS ONE, 13(5),
Baroni, P., Gabbay, D., Giacomin, M., & van der Torre,
e0195271. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
L. (2018). Handbook of formal argumentation.
pone.0195271
CollegePublications.
Muthukrishna, M., & Henrich, J. (2019). A problem
Block,J.(1995).Acontrarianviewofthefive-factorap-
intheory.NatureHumanBehaviour,3(3),221–
proach to personality description. Psychological
229. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-018-
Bulletin, 117, 187–215. https://doi.org/10.
0522-1
1037/0033-2909.117.2.187
Okada, A., Buckingham Shum, S. J., & Sherborne, T.
Boole,G.(1854).Aninvestigationofthelawsofthought:
(2014). Knowledge cartography: Software tools
On which are founded the mathematical theo-
andmappingtechniques.Springer.
ries of logic and probabilities (Vol. 2). Walton;
Oreskes, N. (2020). Why trust science? Princeton Uni-
Maberly.
versityPress.
Borsboom,D.,vanderMaas,H.L.J.,Dalege,J.,Kievit,
Pearl,J.(1995).Causaldiagramsforempiricalresearch.
R.A.,&Haig,B.D.(2021).Theoryconstruction
Biometrika, 82(4), 669–688. https://doi.org/
methodology: A practical framework for build-
10.1093/biomet/82.4.669
ing theories in psychology. Perspectives on Psy-
Pearl,J.,&Mackenzie,D.(2018).Thebookofwhy.Basic
chologicalScience,16(4),756–766.https://doi.
Books.
org/10.1177/1745691620969647
Popper, K. R. (2002). The logic of scientific discovery.
Büning, H. K., & Lettmann, T. (1999). Propositional
RoutledgeClassics.
logic:Deductionandalgorithms(Vol.48).Cam-
Preparata, F. P., & Yeh, R. T. (1972). Continuously val-
bridgeUniversityPress.
ued logic. Journal of Computer and System Sci-
Cullen, S., Fan, J., van der Brugge, E., & Elga, A.
ences, 6(5), 397–418. https://doi.org/10.
(2018).Improvinganalyticalreasoningandar-
1016/S0022-0000(72)80011-4
gument understanding: A quasi-experimental
Robinaugh, D. J., Haslbeck, J. M. B., Ryan, O., Fried,
field study of argument visualization. npj Sci-
E. I., & Waldorp, L. J. (2021). Invisible hands
ence of Learning, 3, 21. https://doi.org/10.
and fine calipers: A call to use formal theory
1038/s41539-018-0038-5
asatoolkitfortheoryconstruction.Perspectives
Dablander, F. (2020). An introduction to causal infer-
onPsychologicalScience,16(4),725–742.https:
ence.https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/b3fkw
//doi.org/10.1177/1745691620974697
Devezer, B., Navarro, D. J., Vandekerckhove, J., &
Rohrer, J. M. (2018). Thinking clearly about correla-
Buzbas, E. O. (2021). The case for formal
tions and causation: Graphical causal models
methodology in scientific reform. Royal Society
forobservationaldata.AdvancesinMethodsand
Open Science, 8(3), 200805. https://doi.org/
Practices in Psychological Science, 1(1), 27–42.
10.1098/rsos.200805
https://doi.org/10.1177/2515245917745629
Eronen, M. I., & Bringmann, L. F. (2021). The the-
Rosch, E. (1978). Principles of categorization. In E.
orycrisisinpsychology:Howtomoveforward.
Rosch & B. B. Lloyd (Eds.), Cognition and cat-
Perspectives on Psychological Science, 16(4),
egorization(pp.27–48).LawrenceErlbaumAs-
779–788. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 /
sociates.
1745691620970586
Smaldino, P. (2017). Models are stupid, and we need
Frege,G.(1879).Begriffsschrift:Einederarithmetischen
more of them. In R. R. Vallacher, S. J. Read,
nachgebildete formelsprache des reinen denkens.
& A. Nowak (Eds.), Computational social psy-
VerlagvonLouisNebert.
chology. Routledge. https://doi.org/10.4324/
Fried, E. I. (2020). Lack of theory building and testing
9781315173726
impedesprogressinthefactorandnetworklit-
Smaldino, P. (2019). Better methods can’t make up for
erature. Psychological Inquiry, 31(4), 271–288.
mediocre theory. Nature, 575, 9. https://doi.
https://doi.org/10.1080/1047840X.2020.
org/10.1038/d41586-019-03350-5
1853461
Theves, S., Fernández, G., & Doeller, C. (2020). The
Glöckner,A.,&Betsch,T.(2011).Theempiricalcontent
hippocampus maps concept space, not feature
of theories in judgement and decision making:
space. The Journal of Neuroscience, 40(38),
Shortcomingsandremedies.JudgementandDe-
7318–7325. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1523 /
cisionMaking,6(8),771–721.
JNEUROSCI.0494-20.2020
Matiasz, N. J., Wood, J., Doshi, P., Speier, W., Beck-
emeyer, B., Wang, W., Hsu, W., & Silva,
===== PAGE 19/20 =====
19
Van Gelder, T. (2002). Argument mapping with rea-
son! able. The American Philosophical Associa-
tion Newsletter on Philosophy and Computers,
2(1),85–90.
===== PAGE 20/20 =====
20
CorrectionnoticeforLeisingetal. (2023)
Dateofcorrection: 2026-08-16
CorrectiontoVisualArgumentStructureTool(VAST)Version1.0
ByDanielLeising,OliverGrenkeandMarcosCramer
PublishedinMeta-Psychology,7,2023.
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2021.2911
Thefirstpublishedversionofthisarticlecontains(onpage9)a
mistakeinthetextexplainingFigure8. Thepublishedsentence
reads
“Thetablealsotellsusthat(a)itwouldbegoodiftheaverage
percentageofpeoplehavingagooddaywouldincrease(fromIS:50
toOUGHT:70),andthat(b)thevariation(SD)inthispercentage
wouldgodown(fromIS:25toOUGHT:10).”
Thecorrectversionwouldbe
“Thetablealsotellsusthat(a)itwouldbegoodiftheaverage
percentageofpeoplehavingagooddaywouldincrease(fromIS:50
toOUGHT:70),andthat(b)thevariation(SD)inthepercentageof
peoplebeinginagoodmoodwouldgodown(fromIS:25to
OUGHT:10).”
TheauthorswouldliketothankFelixSchönbrodtforcatchingthis
mistake.
ThisPDFcontainsthecorrectedversion.