
===== PAGE 1/12 =====
Meta-Psychology,2023,vol7,MP.2022.3299 Opendata:Yes Editedby:MalteElson
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2022.3299 Openmaterials:Yes Reviewedby:FrantišekBartoš,EirikStrømland
Articletype:Originalarticle Openandreproducibleanalysis:Yes Analysisreproducedby:LucijaBatinovi´c
PublishedundertheCC-BY4.0license Openreviewsandeditorialprocess:Yes AllsupplementaryfilescanbeaccessedatOSF:
Preregistration:No https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/VD4PN
How Can I Study from Below, that which Is Above? Comparing
Replicability Estimated by z-curve to Real Large-Scale Replication
Attempts
Lukas K. Sotola1
1IowaStateUniversity
Z-curve is an analytic technique with which one can estimate the percent of a set of
studies of interest that would replicate if one were to run actual replication studies.
I compared the estimates z-curve yields to the outcome of real large-scale replication
studies, such as the Open Science Collaboration (2015) work or the various Many
Labs projects (e.g., Klein et al., 2014). I collected p-values from the original studies
examined in six different large-scale replication efforts to the extent possible, ran z-
curvesonalltheoriginalstudies,andcomparedthez-curveresultstotheresultsofthe
actual replication studies. My results show that across 163 replication studies taken
from the six replication efforts, 85 (52.15%) showed statistically significant results
in the expected direction as indicated by the authors of the replication studies. The
outcome of the z-curve of all these studies was accurate, with the midpoint between
the expected replication rate and the expected discovery rate, 50.55%, being almost
exactly the same as the true replication rate. Its replicability estimate was also more
accuratethanthatofp-curveanalysis. Comparisonofz-curveanalysisofstudiesthat
didsuccessfullyreplicatetostudiesthatdidnotdoessuggestheterogeneityintheac-
curacyofitsestimates,however. Theprosandconsofz-curveanalysisarediscussed.
Keywords: z-curve,p-curve,replicability,replicationstudies
Replicability has become a central issue in psycho- monsohn et al., 2014), but recently an extension of
logical science (Nelson et al., 2018). While several andimprovementonp-curvecalledz-curveanalysishas
events in the early 2010s gradually brought replication been created (Bartoš & Schimmack, 2020; Brunner &
to researchers’ attention, the event that is most widely Schimmack, 2020). As z-curve is still relatively new
citedassparkingtheso-calledreplicationcrisisisalarge and researchers may wonder about the accuracy of its
study that attempted to replicate 100 effects in social estimates, the purpose of my current study is to assess
andcognitivepsychologyandshowedareplicationrate the accuracy of z-curve’s estimates of replicability. I do
ofonly36%(OpenScienceCollaboration,2015). Since thisbyapplyingz-curveanalysistostudieswhereactual
then, primary replication studies have become much replication attempts exist and comparing estimates of
morepopular: aPsycINFOsearchforreplicationstudies replicability yielded by z-curve to the replication esti-
yields 290 hits for the period between 2000 and 2011, mates found in actual replication studies. I proceed by
while the same search for studies published after Jan- explainingtoanextenthowz-curveworksasananalytic
uary1st,2011yields999hits. However,itisnotalways technique, including why it uses p-values as the unit of
practicaltoperformalarge-scalereplicationeffort,such analysisinassessingreplicabilityandhowthetechnique
as the Many Labs replication studies (e.g., Klein et al., itself calculates the estimates it yields. I then describe
2014). Sometimestherearesimplytoomanystudiesin theneedforavalidationstudyonitsaccuracyandhow
anareatoreplicatethemall,oronemaywanttoassess Igoaboutconductingsuchastudy.
the estimated replicability of a set of studies before ex-
pendingalotoftimeandeffortandpossiblymoneyon TheRelationshipBetweenp-valuesandReplicability
areplicationeffort.
Z-curve analysis, like p-curve analysis, capitalizes on
Consequently,analytictechniquesforassessingrepli-
the relationship between the distribution of a group of
cabilitywithoutperformingreplicationstudieshavebe-
p-valuesandreplicability(andthepresenceofquestion-
come popular as of late, both as tools in and of them-
ableresearchpractices)initsanalysis(Simonsohnetal.,
selves and as supplements to meta-analyses. The most
2014). Thefundamentalinsightthatunderliesthelogic
popular technique to this point is p-curve analysis (Si-
===== PAGE 2/12 =====
2
of z-curve is that when researchers investigate true ef- In Scenario III, I will assume the same base condi-
fects and conduct studies with strong statistical power tions as in Scenario II: an effect size of d = .30. But in
(Cohen, 1992), then the p-values corresponding to the this scenario, the researchers use sample sizes of 175,
main statistical tests of such studies should tend to be whichprovidesonlyaround50%statisticalpowerwith
disproportionately below p = .01. Further, p-values analphaofp=.05and27%powerwithanalphaofp=
above p = .01 should be relatively rare, although not .01. This means that 50% of all p-values will be below
completely absent (Sellke et al., 2001). On the other .05, and only 27% will be below .01. Therefore, only
hand,whenasetofstudiesareunder-poweredandthe around half of all p-values that are significant will be
investigatorsengageinquestionableresearchpractices, below.01,whiletheotherhalfwillbeatvariousranges
thentherewilltendtobeadisproportionatenumberof between .01 and .05. The studies that show a statisti-
p-valuesabove.01butbelow.05. callysignificantresultwillbetheonesthatarelikelyto
Toillustratewhythisis,Iwilldiscussthreehypothet- get published, and so they are the ones that other re-
ical scenarios (Sotola, 2022). In Scenario I, a number searchers would likely be exposed to. But those would
of researchers study a phenomenon where there is no alsobethestudiesmostlikelytohaveoverestimatedthe
trueeffect—thatis,thenullhypothesisistrue. Forsim- true effect size (Gelman & Carlin, 2014), meaning that
plicity’ssake,Iwillassumethattheeffectinquestionin theeffectsizesthatgetpublishedwilltendtobelarger
all three of my scenarios is a mean difference between than d = .30. Accordingly, if other researchers attempt
a treatment and control group. In this scenario, if the replicationstudieswiththeinflatedeffectsizeestimates
p-values yielded by the studies such researchers con- inmindwhileconductingaprioripoweranalyses,they
ducted were plotted as a histogram, they would form arelikelynottofindthatthepreviouslypublishedfind-
aflatplane,becauseallp-valueswouldbeequallylikely ingsreplicateatanidealrate.
to occurin the studiesthese researchersconducted. By Comparing these three scenarios illustrates why one
extension, this means that 5% of the p-values these re- can make inferences about the replicability of stud-
searchers find would be below .05. Assuming the in- ies based on the distribution of p-values. The studies
vestigators in question use the conventional threshold yielded by Scenario I. are unlikely to replicate success-
forstatisticalsignificanceofp=.05andassumingthat fully simply because the underlying effect is null, and
journals tend to prefer publishing studies showing sta- the published studies are based entirely on researcher
tistical significance (Rosenthal, 1979), they could get degreesoffreedom(Simmonsetal.,2011). Thestudies
these5%ofstudiespublishedandarguebasedonthem yieldedbyScenarioIIarelikelytoreplicate,becausethe
thattheyhavediscoveredatrueeffect. However,those underlyingeffectisatrueeffect,andtheoriginalstudies
effects would only replicate at the same rate as the were conducted with strong statistical power. Finally,
chosenthresholdfordeterminingstatisticalsignificance the studies yielded by Scenario III are likely to repli-
(=.05). Put differently, one would expect only 5% of cate at a slightly more favorable rate than those from
thestudiestoreplicatesuccessfully. Scenario I, but still are likely not to replicate at the
In Scenario II, another group of researchers all in- same rate as in Scenario II. These three scenarios are
vestigate an effect where the true effect is small but of course extreme, and the reality in the field is likely
not zero. Let us assume that the effect is around Co- somevariationonallthreedependingonthesizeofthe
hen’s d=.30. Let us further assume that these investi- true effects being studied, whether there is a true ef-
gators are good about conducting studies with strong fect, the practices of the researchers, and the practices
statistical power. Thus, they conduct all of their stud- ofthejournalstowhichtheresearchersinquestiontend
ieswithsamplesizesof580,providingresearcherswith to submit their work. They do, however, make it clear
statistical power of around 95% at an alpha level of whythedistributionofp-valuescanprovidecluestothe
p=.05. Under these conditions, 95% of the p-values replicabilityofthestudiesinquestion.
theseresearchersobtainwillbebelowp=.05. However,
crucially, a sample size of 580 also yields around 85% Z-curveAnalysis
powerwhenoneusesanalphalevelofp=.01,meaning
This relationship between p-values and replicability
that 85% of all p-values should fall below .01, while
is what z-curve capitalizes on (Bartoš & Schimmack,
only 10% should fall between .01 and .05. If one were
2020). z-curveanalysisisanextensionofandimprove-
to plot these p-values as a histogram, one would find a
ment on the now-popular p-curve analysis. It uses the
right-skewedhistogram,oronewheremostvalueswere
inferences one can make based on the distribution of
extremelylow,andonlyafewwerehigher(Simonsohn
p-values to estimate the replicability of the studies that
et al., 2014). Moreover, one would expect that such
generated the p-values entered into the analysis. This
studieswouldreplicateratherwell.
makes it similar to p-curve, except that in p-curve, p-
===== PAGE 3/12 =====
3
values are analyzed directly, whereas in z-curve, the p- mack, 2020; Schimmack, 2020; Sotola, 2022). This is
values are converted to two-tailed z-statistics. Further, understandable because it is relatively new compared
z-curve analysis assumes that each p-value comes from top-curve. However, somemayremainskepticalofthe
a different population of studies, whereas an assump- accuracy of its estimates, specifically, about whether its
tionofp-curveanalysisisthatthestudiesthatgenerated estimates correspond to the actual percentage of stud-
the p-values entered are from the same population of ies that would replicate if one were hypothetically to
studies. Therefore, z-curve performs better under con- run replication studies. I thought it would help to con-
ditions of effect size heterogeneity (Brunner & Schim- vince people of the validity of z-curve analysis to apply
mack,2020). ittostudiesforwhichactualreplicationattemptsexist.
The unit of analysis in z-curve, then, is the afore- Moreover, it would be another mark in z-curve’s favor
mentioned two-tailed z-statistics converted from the if I could show that its estimates corresponded well to
p-values extracted from the studies of interest. The actualreplicationattempts.
z-statistics are actually the absolute values of the z- To do this, I select several large-scale replication
statistics, because one cannot know for certain the di- efforts—studies like the Open Science Collaboration
rection of the effect tested in the original study. There- (2015) and the Many Labs replication studies (e.g.,
fore, there are no negative z-statistics entered into a Kleinetal.,2014;Kleinetal.,2018)—andapplyz-curve
z-curve. Also, only significant p-values—or z-statistics totheoriginalstudiesforwhichreplicationstudieswere
above 1.96—are entered into the analysis, so the z- conducted. This allows me to compare the estimated
statisticsanalyzedaretruncatedatavalueof1.96. Afi- replicationrateandestimatediscoveryratethez-curves
nitemixturemodelestimatedusingthesevaluesisthen yieldtothereplicationrateshowninthereplicationef-
estimated. Effectively, what this does is allow one to fortsasawayofassessingtheaccuracyofz-curve’sesti-
look at a set of studies as they appear after selection mates. Itakeseverallarge-scalereplicationefforts,code
for significance and fill in the empty part of the distri- thep-valuesfromtheoriginalstudiestotheextentthat
bution, or the complete distribution of z-statistics one thatispossiblebasedontheinformationtheauthorsof
would see if one had access to all studies conducted, the replication studies provide, and I apply z-curve to
publishedorunpublished. Forthoseinterestedinlearn- eachindividualreplicationeffortforwhichIcouldcode
ingmoreaboutthetechnicalsideofwhatz-curvedoes, 10 or more p-values. I use 10 as a threshold, because
they should seek out the original z-curve paper (Brun- the z-curve package in R does not allow the analysis
ner & Schimmack, 2020), and I would highly recom- to run if there are fewer than 10 significant p-values
mend seeing Figure 1 in Bartoš and Schimmack (2020, entered. Further, z-curve’s estimates become extremely
p.9),asitmakeswhatz-curvedoesmoreintuitive. inaccurate with fewer p-values, and well more than 10
Once the complete distribution of z-statistics is esti- isusuallyrecommendedforrunningaz-curveanalysis.
mated, one can assess the average power of the origi- Doingthisallowsmetocomparetheestimatedrepli-
nal studies (that were statistically significant) and the cationrateandestimateddiscoveryratetotheoutcome
percent of the original studies that one would have ex- of each individual replication effort. In addition, I ag-
pectedtoshowstatisticalsignificancegiventheaverage gregate across all of the replication efforts from which
power of the original studies (Brunner & Schimmack, I drew data (including those for which I was unable to
2020). The average power of the original studies is runanindividualz-curve),andperformasingleoverall
taken as an estimate of the percent of studies one ex- z-curve of all of the studies included in all of the repli-
pects to replicate if one were to conduct the studies in cation efforts I include. This allows me to do a single,
exactly the same way. This value is called the expected overall comparison of the replication rate suggested by
replication rate. The percent of studies that one would primaryreplicationstudiesandthereplicationratethat
have expected to show statistical significance given the z-curve predicts. This last analysis is the most reliable,
average power of all original studies—including hypo- becauseitincludesthemostp-values.
theticallymissingstudiesthatmaynotbepublished—is In addition, I make a few ancillary comparisons.
called the expected discovery rate. The distinction be- First, I z-curve studies where the replication study was
tween the estimated replication rate and the estimate successful and studies where the replication study was
discoveryrateisthattheformeristheaveragepoweres- unsuccessfulseparately. Idothistocomparetheperfor-
timatedfortheoriginalstudiesenteredintothez-curve, mance of z-curve’s estimates in the aggregate—across
whilethelatterisestimatedbasedonthecompletedis- allreplicationstudies—anditsperformanceinnarrower
tribution,includinghypotheticallymissingstudies. circumstances. Arguably, one of the weaknesses of z-
To my knowledge, z-curve has so far only been used curve analysis is that it is difficult to comment on the
afewtimesinthepublishedliterature(Bartoš&Schim- degree to which its results are meaningful for the out-
===== PAGE 4/12 =====
4
come of any one replication study. Applying z-curve moreaccuratethanthoseyieldedbyp-curveanalysis.
analysis to studies where one already knows the out-
comeofanactualreplicationstudymayrevealunderly- Method
ingheterogeneityintheaccuracyofz-curve’sestimates
ReplicationStudySelection
that is masked by aggregating across all possible stud-
ies. ThesecondancillarycomparisonImakeisbetween I decided to use widely cited and well-known repli-
z-curve analysis and p-curve analysis. z-curve analysis cation efforts. These were: the Open Science Col-
builds upon p-curve analysis and is meant to be an im- laboration’s (Open Science Collaboration, 2015) repli-
provement on it (Bartoš & Schimmack, 2020; Simon- cation studies of 97 psychological studies; Camerer
sohn et al., 2014). Indeed, past work has shown that et al. (2018)’s replication studies of 21 social science
p-curve overestimates the average statistical power of studies published in the journals Nature and Science;
thestudiesincludedrelativetoz-curveanalysis. Thisis Soto (2019)’s Life Outcomes of Personality Replica-
because an underlying assumption of p-curve analysis tion (LOOPR)Project, which ranreplication studiesfor
isthatallofthep-valuesenteredcomefromeffectsthat 78 correlations between the Big Five personality traits
arealltestingasingleeffect. Inotherwords,p-curveas- and significant life outcomes; and the Many Labs 1-3
sumeseffectsizehomogeneity. However,z-curveanaly- projects (Ebersole et al., 2016; Klein et al., 2014; Klein
sis assumes heterogeneity: that each study could come et al., 2018). The Many Labs 1 project ran replication
from a different population of studies. To add to the studies for 13 classic and contemporary psychological
comparisons others have made in this regard, I com- findings; Many Labs 2 ran replication studies for 28
pare the outcome of a p-curve analysis to the outcome classic and contemporary psychological findings; and
ofaz-curveanalysis, bothfortheoverallanalysisofall Many Labs 3 ran replication studies for 10 psycholog-
replication studies and for the comparison of success- ical findings each. I did not include the Many Labs 4
fullyreplicatedtonotsuccessfullyreplicatedstudies. study,becauseitonlyfocusedonreplicatingasingleef-
Ipredictedthattheestimatedreplicationrateofeach fect—the mortality salience effect (Klein et al., 2018).
z-curve would be a slight overestimation of the actual I also did not include the Many Labs 5 study (Eber-
replication rate, and that the estimated discovery rate sole et al., 2020), because it re-ran replication studies
wouldbeaslightunderestimationoftheactualreplica- that originally had replication attempts included in the
tion rate. As the creators of z-curve have pointed out, OSC’s work, so I did not want to include some studies
the estimated replication rate tends to be an overesti- in the analyses twice. So my evaluation was based on
mation of the percent of studies that are actually pre- sixdifferentreplicationefforts.
dictedtoreplicate(Bartoš&Schimmack,2020). Thisis
because the estimated replication rate is estimated un- DataExtractionMethod
dertheassumptionthattheoriginalstudiescanbecon-
In coding p-values to include in my z-curves, I relied
ductedunderexactlythesameconditionsastheoriginal
exclusively on the exact test statistics from the original
study was conducted. This assumption is rarely true,
studies that the authors of the replication efforts re-
which means that the actual replication rate will end
ported either in the body of the paper they published
up being lower than the estimated replication rate due
or in supplemental materials. I used the test statis-
to both alterations in the conditions under which the
tics I extracted to find exact p-values at the following
replication studies are done and regression toward the
link: Quick Statistics Calculators (socscistatistics.com).
mean. On the other hand, one can take the estimated
If I computed a precise p-value from a test statistic re-
discovery rate as a slight underestimation of the per-
ported that was slightly above .05 but that the authors
cent of studies one would expect to replicate. This is
claimed was statistically significant, then I coded it as
because the estimated discovery rate is the percent of
.049999sothatitwouldstillbeincludedinthez-curve
studies—including studies that hypothetically may not
when I ran the analysis. I assumed that if a replication
havemadeitintopublishedformdueeithertopublica-
study was being run on an effect, then it must have at
tion bias or QRPs—that one would originally have ex-
least been treated as statistically significant in the orig-
pectedtoshowstatisticalsignificance. Thisisestimated
inal study, even if the exact p-value was slightly above
with both the original studies entered into the z-curve
.05. In addition to coding test statistics from each to-
andthehypotheticalunpublishedstudies. Furthermore,
be-replicatedstudy,Ialsocodedwhethertheauthorsof
I predicted that z-curve analysis will yield more favor-
the replication study indicated that the study success-
able replicability estimates for the studies that success-
fullyreplicated. Allthecodingfrommyextractionpro-
fully replicated as compared to those that did not; and
cess is posted on the Open Science Framework (OSF;
I predicted that z-curve analysis’s estimates would be
https://osf.io/uge5r) page for this study. I now discuss
===== PAGE 5/12 =====
5
the coding process for each replication effort individu- that were reported as Pearson’s r, because it is not pos-
ally, because I had to use slightly different methods to sible to compute an exact p-value using only a stan-
extractdataformyanalysesfromeachreplicationstudy dardizedregressioncoefficient,evenifonehasthesam-
Iselected. ple size. Furthermore, there were cases in which the
LOOPRProjectranreplicationstudiesofseveraleffects
OpenScienceCollaboration
that came from a single original study. In z-curve, as
in p-curve (Simonsohn et al., 2014), the p-values one
Open Science Collaboration (2015) did not include
analyzes must be independent of one another. That is,
test statistics or effect sizes or sample sizes from the
they must be from separate samples. Therefore, I only
original studies in their published paper. However, on
coded the first effect size listed in the table from each
theirOSFpage,theypostedreplicationreportsforeach
study from which the LOOPR Project drew multiple ef-
replication study that they completed and reported in
fect sizes to replicate. It was not indicated specifically
theirpaper. Thesereportswerewrittenupbyeachsep-
which effects the LOOPR Project replicated were from
arateteamofresearcherswhoraneachindividualrepli-
the same study in their table or their supplementary
cation study. Many of them listed the test statistic cor-
materials, but I assumed that if two or more effects in
respondingtothefindingfromtheoriginalstudywhich
their table were listed alongside the same exact sam-
they hoped to replicate. This is where I extracted the
ple size that they were from the same original study. I
test statistics to be included in my analyses. If there
computed exact p-values from the test statistics at the
were multiple effects which the replication study was
samelinkIusedforCamereretal.(2018)’swork. This
meanttoreplicate,Icodedtheonethattheymadeclear
extraction process resulted in 33 p-values I could ana-
was the crucial finding they hoped to replicate. If they
lyze. I coded whether each study replicated using the
didnotmakeitclearwhichfindingwasthemostcrucial,
“Replication success rate” column in Soto’s Table 1. If
Icodedthefirstonethattheauthorsofthereportlisted.
the success rate was 100%, I coded it as successfully
Inall, 66ofthe98replicationreportsincludedenough
replicated, and if it was anything below 100%, I coded
informationformetoextractteststatistics,fromwhich
itasunsuccessful.
I could extract exact p-values. Near the end of each
report, the authors summarized whether they believed
ManyLabs1
theyhadorhadnotsuccessfullyreplicatedthefindingin
question,andthisishowIcodedwhethertheindividual TheManyLabs1effortdidnotlistinformationfrom
studiesreplicated. which I could compute p-values in their published pa-
per (Klein et al., 2014). However, they posted a sup-
Camereretal.(2018)
plemental document in which they reported the origi-
nal test statistics for six out of the 13 effects from the
Camerer et al. (2018) included effect sizes in the
original studies for which they ran replication studies.
form of Pearson correlation coefficients and sample
I only included cases where the authors provided the
sizes from the original studies for which they ran repli-
test statistics reported in the original study reports, as
cation studies in Table 3 of their supplementary ma-
that was the only way that I could find exact p-values
terials. I used these correlation coefficients and sam-
fromtheoriginalstudies. Icodedthesesixteststatistics
ple sizes to extract exact p-values at the following link:
andextractedexactp-valuesusingthecalculatorsatthe
https://www.socscistatistics.com/pvalues/
followinglink: https://www.socscistatistics.com/tests/.
pearsondistribution.aspx. Further to the right in the
I coded whether the replication study was successful
sametable,therewasacolumnindicatingwhethereach
basedontheoverallresultreportedinthefar-rightcol-
studysuccessfullyreplicatedwithasimple“yes”or“no,”
umn of Klein et al. (2014)’s Table 2 (p. 148). I note
andIusedthistocodewhethereachstudyhadsuccess-
herethatz-curveanalysisdoesnotruniffewerthan10
fully replicated. Thus, I was able to get p-values from
p-values are entered for analysis, so I could not run an
all21studiesforwhichCamereretal.(2018)ranrepli-
individual analysis on the Many Labs 1 studies. How-
cationstudies.
ever, I include these six studies in my overall z-curve
TheLifeOutcomesofPersonality(LOOPR)Project analysis.
(Soto, 2019) included effect sizes and sample sizes ManyLabs2
from the original studies in Table 1 of the paper (p.
Many Labs 2 ran replication studies for 28 studies,
714). Most of these effect sizes were reported as Pear-
andtheylistedteststatisticsfromalltheoriginalstudies
son correlation coefficients, but some were reported as
in the text of their article, followed immediately by the
standardizedregressioncoefficients. Ionlycodedthose
outcome of their own replication studies (Klein et al.,
===== PAGE 6/12 =====
6
2018, ps. 453-467). I extracted the test statistics from will be done under the exact same conditions as the
the original studies and used them to compute exact p- original study, a condition that is extremely difficult to
values. Icodedforwhetherthereplicationstudieswere achieve. Therefore, the actual percent of studies that
successful based on what the authors wrote about the would replicate should be slightly lower than the ERR.
outcome of their replication study in the text immedi- TheEDR,ontheotherhand,isaslightunderestimation
atelyaftertheyreportedtheteststatisticfromtheorig- ofthepercentofstudiesonewouldexpecttoreplicate,
inalstudy. SoforManyLabs2,Iwasabletocodeall28 because it is based on the average power of all stud-
studiesformyanalysesandhadenoughp-valuestorun ies(hypothetically)conducted,includingthosethatdid
anindividualz-curve. not show statistical significance. To compare z-curve’s
estimates to the results of actual replication studies, I
ManyLabs3
compare the replication rates in the actual replication
studies to the EDR and the ERR. I compute the differ-
For the Many Labs 3 effort, I was able to extract p-
ence between each z-curve estimate and the percent of
values in the same way as for Many Labs 2, as the au-
studies that successfully replicated in reality to assess
thors also reported test statistics from nine out of the
howcloseeachestimatecomes,andIalsocomputethe
10 original studies for which they ran replication stud-
midpoint between the EDR and the ERR. Presumably,
ies (Ebersole et al., 2016, ps. 73-77). I used these test
the midpoint between the ERR and EDR should be the
statistics to find exact p-values, and coded for whether
mostaccurateestimateofreplicability,sincetheEDRis
eachstudysuccessfullyreplicatedbylookingatthenull
aslightunderestimationandtheERRisaslightoveres-
hypothesis significance tests reported in the far-right
timation of the replication rate. I refer to the replica-
columnoftheirTable3(p. 73). Thus,Iwasabletocode
tion rates obtained in the replication efforts as the Ac-
ninep-valuesfromthisreplicationeffort,meaningthatI
tual Replication Rate (ARR) from now on for the sake
alsocouldnotrunanindividualz-curveonit. However,
ofbrevity.
likewithManyLabs1,Iincludeitinmyoverallz-curve
analysis.
Results
AnalysisPlan
IhavedisplayedallcrucialresultsinTable1. Itshows
thenumberofp-valuesIcodedfromeachreplicationef-
I ran individual z-curves on those replication efforts
fort,thenumberofthosep-valueswheretheauthorsde-
forwhichIwasabletoextractatleast10p-values. Fur-
claredthattheirreplicationattemptwassuccessful,the
ther, I aggregated across all replication efforts and ran
ARR,theERR,theEDR,thedifferencebetweenbothz-
az-curveincludingallp-valuesextractedfromallstud-
curveestimatesandtheARR,andthemidpointbetween
ies for which replication studies were run in one of the
the EDR and the ERR. I computed the differences be-
replication efforts from which I extracted data. I used
tweentheEDRandERRandtheARRbysubtractingthe
thez-curvepackageinR(Bartoš&Schimmack,2020)to
ARRfromthez-curveestimate. Thus,positivenumbers
runmyanalysis. Whilez-curveyieldsseveralestimates,
indicate that z-curve overestimated the replication rate
Iwillfocusontwo: theexpectedreplicationrate(ERR)
and negative numbers indicate that z-curve underesti-
and the expected discovery rate (EDR). The former is
matedthereplicationrate. Thez-curveofallp-valuesI
effectivelytheaveragepowerofthestudiesincludedin
codedisdisplayedinFigure1.
the z-curve. The average power of the statistically sig-
nificant studies is taken as an estimate for the percent-
age of the studies that one would expect to replicate if
one were to do the studies again in exactly the same
way. This is because statistical power is the probability
that one will find a statistically significant effect if one
studies a true effect (Cohen, 1992). The EDR is the
percent of statistical tests that one have expected to be
significant based on the average power of the original
studies. The rest of the output from all of my z-curve
analysesispostedontheOSFpageforthisproject.
I focused on these two estimates, because they are
theprimaryestimatesofreplicabilitythatz-curveyields.
ERR is a slight overestimation of the percent of stud-
ies one would expect to replicate, because it is com-
putedundertheassumptionthateachreplicationstudy
===== PAGE 7/12 =====
7
Table1
ComparisonofReplicationRatesinActualReplicationStudiestoEstimatesofz-curve
ReplicationStudy No. of No. Percent ERR EDR ERRdiff EDRdiff ERR-EDR
p-values Successfully Successfully Midpoint
Extracted Replicated Replicated
(ARR)
Soto(2019) 33 25 75.75% 94.30% 75.10% 18.55% -0.65% 84.70%
[77.60%,100.00%] [41.70%,100.00%]
Camereretal.(2018) 21 12 57.14% 58.70% 42.10% 1.56% -15.04% 50.40%
[29.20%,89.70%] [5.00%,90.60%]
Kleinetal.(2014) 6 4 66.67% NA NA
Kleinetal.(2018) 28 14 50.00% 46.20% 13.60% -3.80% -36.40% 29.90%
[25.10%,75.40%] [5.00%,64.80%]
Ebersoleetal.(2016) 9 2 22.22% NA NA
Open Science Collaboration 66 28 42.42% 58.30% 44.30% 15.88% 1.88% 51.30%
(2015) [39.00%,77.30%] [7.00%,71.30%]
AllCombined 163 85 52.15% 62.20% 37.90% 10.05% -14.25% 50.55%
[46.80%,73.80%] [9.60%,65.30%]
Note. ERR = expected replication rate, EDR = expected discovery rate, ARR = actual replication rate, ERRdiff = the ARR subtracted from the
ERR,EDRdiff=theARRsubtractedfromtheEDR,ERR-EDRMidpoint=theexactmidpointbetweentheEDRandERR.
===== PAGE 8/12 =====
8
As I expected, in all but one case, the ERR did, in- as did the full p-curve, z = 21.75, p > .999. The p-
deed, overestimate the ARR, and, again in all but one curveofonlystudieswherethereplicationstudieswere
case, the EDR underestimated the ARR. In the four in- successful suggested evidential value both for the half
dividual z-curves that I was able to run, at least one of p-curve, z = -30.06, p < .001, and the half p-curve, z
the two z-curve estimates were within five percentage = -31.7, p < .0001. The analysis yielded an estimated
pointsoftheARR.TheEDRwasmostaccurateforSoto power of 99% [99.00%,99.00%]. The p-curve of stud-
(2019, EDR = 74.10%, ARR = 75.75%), the ERR was ieswherethereplicationstudieswereunsuccessfulsug-
most accurate for Camerer et al. (2018) (2015; ERR = gested evidential value for both the half p-curve, z =
58.70%, ARR = 57.14%); the ERR was most accurate -12.85, p < .001, and the full p-curve, z = -13.69, p
forKleinetal. (2018;ERR=46.20%,ARR=50.00%); < .001. The analysis yielded an estimated power of
and the EDR was most accurate for the Open Science 85.00%[78.00%,91.00%].
Collaboration(2015,EDR=44.30%,ARR=42.42%).
While the outcomes for the z-curves of individual Discussion
replication efforts are quite variable, both in terms of
My results suggest that, overall, z-curve analysis
theconfidence intervalsthey yieldedand howaccurate
yields accurate replicability estimates, especially when
each estimate was, this is not surprising, as z-curve’s
one considers both the estimated replication rate and
estimates can be highly variable when few p-values are
estimated discovery rate. This provides evidence for z-
entered.
curve’s real-world applicability: if one seeks to repli-
Thus, the overall z-curve analysis including all the
cate a set of studies of interest, one can use z-curve to
studies I coded is the one to take most seriously. It
estimate the percent of those studies that will actually
shows that the overall ARR of 52.15% falls almost at
replicateifoneweretorunreplicationstudiesthatmim-
the exact midpoint between the ERR of 62.20% and
ickedthemethodandconditionsoftheoriginalstudies
theEDRof37.90%—50.55%. Putanotherway,z-curve
as closely as possible. z-curve’s estimate of replicability
analysis was only two percentage points off from the
is also much more accurate than the most immediately
actual percent of studies that successfully replicated in
available alternative, p-curve analysis. My p-curve of
real replication studies across 163 different replication
thesamesetofteststatisticsyieldedanestimatedaver-
studies.
age power for the same set of studies of 99%, suggest-
ingthat99%ofthemwouldsuccessfullyreplicate. This
Comparing Studies that Did Replicate to Those that
ismuchmoreinaccuratethantheestimatedreplication
DidNotReplicate
ratefromz-curveanalysisof62.20%,andisinlinewith
A z-curve on only the studies where the replication other work showing that p-curve tends to overestimate
studiesweresuccessful(N=86)revealedanestimated averagepowerinthepresenceofeffectsizeheterogene-
replication rate of 77.40% [60.00%,88.10%], an esti- ity (Brunner & Schimmack, 2020). So this should en-
mated discovery rate of 54.70% [16.20%,82.50%], a courage z-curve to be used more widely to assess the
Sori´c false discovery rate of 4.40% [1.10%,27.30%], replicabilityofdifferentareasofpsychology.
andafiledrawerratioof0.83[0.21,5.19]. Az-curveon That said, my comparison of only studies that suc-
only studies where the replication studies were unsuc- cessfully replicated and only studies that did not suc-
cessful(N=77)revealedanestimatedreplicationrate cessfullyreplicatedoes revealsomevariationintheac-
of 37.90% [24.20%,57.80%], an estimated discovery curacy of z-curve. Specifically, the accuracy of the z-
rate of 22.20% [5.00%,44.50%], a Sori´c false discov- curve of studies that did not successfully replicate and
eryrateof18.50%[6.60%,100.00%],andafiledrawer the z-curve of studies that did successfully replicate
ratioof3.51[1.25,19.00]. were not wholly desirable. Among the studies that did
successfully replicate, the actual replication rate was
Comparingz-curveResultstop-curveAnalysis 100%,andforthestudiesthatdidnotsuccessfullyrepli-
cate,theactualreplicationratewas0%,asindicatedby
A p-curve analysis run using the p-curve app (The p-
actual replication studies. The corresponding z-curve
curve app 4.06) with all of the studies coded yielded
analyses showed expected replication rates of 77.40%
an estimated statistical power for the studies submit-
and 37.90%, respectively. While the trend of these two
ted of 99.00% [98.00%,99.00%], and the p-curve it-
replicabilityestimatesisintherightdirection—thestud-
self is shown in Figure 2. The half p-curve of only
ies that successfully replicated showed a much higher
p-values below .025 suggested evidential value, z = -
estimated replication rate than the studies that did not
30.87, p < .001, as did the full p-curve, z = -32.15,
successfully replicate—the estimates were, indeed, off
p < .001; and the half p-curve suggested that statisti-
by not unsubstantial margins. Therefore, while the
cal power was higher than 33%, z = 30.32, p > .999,
===== PAGE 9/12 =====
9
Figure1
Plotofthez-curveIncludingAllCodedp-values
overallestimatedreplicationratewasroughlyaccurate, fectsizeofinterestwaswhatwasbeingtested(Brunner
thismaymaskheterogeneityinz-curve’saccuracy. & Schimmack, 2020). The heterogeneity tested in that
This finding speaks to some reasonable reservations study regarded variation in a single main effect of in-
about z-curve’s usefulness. While it may be effective terest,andnottheheterogeneitythatcomesfrommany
at providing an aggregate assessment of replicability studies designed to test (in some cases) wildly differ-
acrossaheterogeneoussampleofstudies,aggregatees- ent phenomena. I may tentatively suggest, then, that
timatesofreplicabilitymaymaskvariationintherateat z-curve’s replicability estimates may be most accurate
whichreplicationstudiesaresuccessfulandvariationin when the studies reviewed are from the same area or
theaccuracyofz-curve’sestimatesacrossstudieswithin testthesameeffect,evenifthereisheterogeneitywithin
different areas. I believe my comparison of z-curves of the studies (cf. Sotola, 2022). They may be less accu-
the studies that did and did not replicate hints at this, rate if the studies reviewed are from a wide variety of
although a more comprehensive test of this is beyond areas(cf. Schimmack,2020). Ifonedoesrunaz-curve
the scope of my study. I will note here that past work analysis of a wide variety of studies, then one should
testing the accuracy of z-curve’s replicability estimates notethelimitationsinherentinsuchananalysis.
with simulation methods still assumed that a single ef- Moreover,thereisstilllittletoindicatethatz-curve’s
===== PAGE 10/12 =====
10
Figure2
p-curveofAllStudiesCoded
replicabilityestimatesaremeaningfulwhenone’sfocus mentinquestion.
iswhetheranindividualstudywillreplicatesuccessfully But even then, interpretation of replicability esti-
or not. Because z-curve’s replicability estimates are al- mates would be complicated. If a researcher is focused
ways aggregate, they do not say much about the repli- on a single main effect of some treatment, and runs a
cability of any single effect one is interested in. If a z-curveontheeffectsfromameta-analysisofthattreat-
researcherisinterestedinasingleeffectofatreatment, ment, and finds an estimated replication rate of, say,
andaz-curveofstudiesonthattreatmentalongsideun- 40%,itmightnotbestraightforwardforthatresearcher
relatedstudiesisrun,theestimatedreplicationratethat todecidehowtoproceed. Itisunclearifthe40%repli-
z-curveyieldsdoesnotnecessarilyspeaktothereplica- cation rate means that they should just proceed with
bility of the effect that that particular researcher is in- their study but make sure the study is highly powered;
terested in. Possibly the only case in which z-curve’s whethertheyshouldrunareplicationstudybeforerun-
estimates might be meaningful in this way is if the ningfollow-upstudiesbecausetheestimatedreplication
studies included in the z-curve all test the exact same rate is below 100%; or if they should simply abandon
effect—for example, if studies included in the z-curve thatareaofresearchaltogetherduetolowreplicability
wereonlythestudiesfromameta-analysisofthetreat- estimates. Probablysomecombinationoffactorswould
===== PAGE 11/12 =====
11
go into this hypothetical researcher’s decision: the cost readilyavailablealternative,onecantakethatasarec-
in both time and money of running a study on the ef- ommendation for the new method. z-curve seems to
fect; the real-world importance of the effect (e.g., one meet this criterion, at least when compared to p-curve
of theoretical importance vs. a treatment that might analysis. Perhapsitisnotperfect,butitseemstobesu-
save lives); and the predicted size of the effect (cf. An- periortothemostreadilyavailableandpopularalterna-
vari et al., 2022). A comprehensive discussion of these tive for estimating replicability without running actual
issuesisbeyondthescopeofmyworkhere,butitisan replicationstudies.
importantissuethatresearchersshouldponder.
Finally,Ishouldalsonotethat,wheninterpretingthe ConflictofInterest
outcome of a z-curve analysis, one should be sure to
Ihavenoconflictofinteresttodeclare.
examineboththeestimatedreplicationrateandthees-
timateddiscoveryrate. Myresultsshowedthatinsome
Funding
ofmyindividualz-curves,theestimatedreplicationrate
wasmoreaccurate,andinsomeofthem,theestimated Ididnotreceiveanyfundingtohelpwiththisproject.
discovery rate was more accurate. So when evaluat-
ingtheoutcomeofz-curveanalyses,oneshouldnotfix- AuthorContributions
ate on either individually, but consider both, and, ide-
The first author conceived of the project idea, con-
ally, take note of the midpoint between the two values.
ceived of the methodology, did all the coding, did all
In my overall z-curve, which should have yielded the
theanalyses,andwroteandrevisedthemanuscript.
most accurate results because it had the most p-values
included, the actual percent of studies that replicated OpenSciencePractices
was almost the exact midpoint between the estimated
replicationrateandestimateddiscoveryrate. Inasmuch
as the former is an overestimation and the latter is an
underestimationoftheactualpercentageofstudiesthat
arelikelytoreplicate,Imighttentativelyclaimthatthe
ThisarticleearnedtheOpenDataandtheOpenMa-
estimatedreplicationratefunctionsasanupperthresh-
terials badge for making the data and materials openly
oldforpredictedreplicabilityandtheestimateddiscov-
available. It has been verified that the analysis repro-
ery rate functions as a lower threshold for predicted
duced the results presented in the article. The entire
replicability. Therefore, one should take the midpoint
editorial process, including the open reviews, are pub-
between them as the best estimate of the percent of
lishedintheonlinesupplement.
studies that will actually replicate—an assertion which
oneofthecreatorsofz-curvehasendorsed(i.e.,Schim- References
mack,2022).
Anvari, F., Kievit, R. A., Lakens, D., Pennington, C. R.,
ThereservationsIhavepointedoutnotwithstanding,
Przybylski, A. K., Tiokhin, L., Wiernik, B. M.,
there is good reason to take z-curve’s replicability esti-
& Orben, A. C. (2022). Not all effects are in-
matesseriously(withcaveats),evenwhenoneincludes
dispensable:Psychologicalsciencerequiresver-
studiesfromawidevarietyofareasintheanalysis. The
ifiable lines of reasoning for whether an ef-
replicability analysis of only studies that successfully
fect matters. Perspectives on Psychological Sci-
replicated and those that did not replicate also reveals
ence, 18, 503–507. https://doi.org/10.1177/
that z-curve once again outperforms its most widely-
17456916221091565
known competitor—p-curve analysis. p-curve analysis
Bartoš, F., & Schimmack, U. (2020). Z-curve.2.0: Es-
yieldedanestimatedaveragepowerof99%forthestud-
timating replication rates and discovery rates.
ies that did replicate, and 85% for studies that did not
https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/urgtn
replicate. While the former is more accurate, the lat-
Brunner, J., & Schimmack, U. (2020). Estimating pop-
ter is much more inaccurate than the estimated repli-
ulation mean power under conditions of het-
cation rate yielded by z-curve analysis. I point this out
erogeneityandselectionforsignificance.Meta-
here, because in assessing the merit of a new method,
Psychology, 4. https://doi.org/1.15626/MP.
itisimportantnotonlytocompareittowhatwouldbe
2018.874
ideal performance of the method—which one assumes
in this case would be 100% accuracy of the estimated
replication rate—but also to compare it to other avail-
ablemethods. Ifthenewmethodoutperformsthemost
===== PAGE 12/12 =====
12
Camerer, C. F., Dreber, A., Holzmeister, F., Ho, T. H., Many labs 2: Investigating variation in replica-
Huber, J., Johannesson, M., Kirchler, M., Nave, bility across samples and settings. Advances in
G., Nosek, B. A., Pfeiffer, T., Altmejd, A., But- Methods and Practices in Psychological Science,
trick,N.,Chan,T.,Chen,Y.,Forsell,E.,Gampa, 1(4), 443–490. https://doi.org/10.1177/
A., Heikensten, E., Hummer, L., Imai, T., ... 2515245918810225
Wu, H. (2018). Evaluating the replicability of Nelson, L. D., Simmons, J., & Simonsohn, U. (2018).
social science experiments in nature and sci- Psychology’srenaissance.AnnualReviewofPsy-
ence between 2010 and 2015. Nature Human chology, 69(1), 511–534. https://doi.org/10.
Behavior,2,637–644.https://doi.org/1.1038/ 1146/annurev-psych-122216-011836
s41562-018-0399-z OpenScienceCollaboration.(2015).Estimatingthere-
Cohen, J. (1992). A power primer. Psychological Bul- producibility of psychological science. Science,
letin, 112(1), 155–159. https://doi.org/10. 349(6251), 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1126/
1037//0033-2909.112.1.155 science.aac4716
Ebersole, C. R., Atherton, O. E., Belanger, A. L., Skul- Rosenthal, R. (1979). The file drawer problem and tol-
borstad,H.M.,Allen,J.M.,Banks,J.B.,Baran- erance for null results. Psychological Bulletin,
ski, E., Bernstein, M. J., Bonfiglio, D. B. V., 86(3), 638–641. https://doi.org/10.1037/
Boucher,L.,Brown,E.R.,Budiman,N.I.,Cairo, 0033-2909.86.3.638
A. H., Capaldi, C. A., Chartier, C. R., Chung, Schimmack, U. (2020). A meta-psychological perspec-
J. M., Cicero, D. C., Coleman, J. A., Conway, tive on the decade of replication failures in so-
J. G., et al. (2016). Many labs 3: Evaluating cial psychology. Canadian Psychology/Psycholo-
participant pool quality across the academic gie Canadienne, 61(4), 364–376. https://doi.
semester via replication. Journal of Experimen- org/10.1037/cap0000246
tal Social Psychology, 67, 68–82. https://doi. Schimmack, U. (2022). 2022 replicability rankings of
org/10.1016/j.jesp.2015.10.012 psychology journals. https://replicationindex.
Ebersole, C. R., Mathur, M. B., Baranski, E., Bart- com/2022/01/26/rr21/
Plange, D., Buttrick, N. R., Chartier, C. R., Sellke, T., Bayarri, M. J., & Berger, J. O. (2001). Cal-
Corker,K.S.,Corley,M.,Hartshorne,J.K.,IJz- ibration of ρ values for testing precise null
erman, H., et al. (2020). Many labs 5: Test- hypotheses. The American Statistician, 55(1),
ing pre-data-collection peer review as an in- 62–71. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1198 /
tervention to increase replicability. Advances in 000313001300339950
Methods and Practices in Psychological Science, Simmons,J.P.,Nelson,L.D.,&Simonsohn,U.(2011).
3(3), 309–331. https://doi.org/10.1177/ False-positive psychology: Undisclosed flexibil-
2515245920958687 ity in data collection and analysis allows pre-
Gelman,A.,&Carlin,J.(2014).Beyondpowercalcula- senting anything as significant. Psychological
tions:Assessingtypes(sign)andtypem(mag- Science, 22(11), 1359–1366. https://doi.org/
nitude)errors.PerspectivesonPsychologicalSci- https://doi-org.proxy.lnu.se/10.1177/
ence,9(6),641–651.https://doi.org/10.1177/ 0956797611417632
1745691614551642 Simonsohn,U.,Nelson,L.D.,&Simmons,J.P.(2014).
Klein,R.A.,Ratliff,K.A.,Vianello,M.,Adams,J.,R.B., P-curve: A key to the file-drawer. Journal of
Bahník,Š.,Bernstein,M.J.,Bocian,K.,Brandt, ExperimentalPsychology:General,143(2),534–
M. J., Brooks, B., Brumbaugh, C. C., Cemal- 547.https://doi.org/1.1037/a0033242
cilar,Z.,Chandler,J.,Cheong,W.,Davis,W.E., Soto, C. J. (2019). How replicable are links between
Devos, T., Eisner, M., Frankowska, N., Furrow, personality traits and consequential life out-
D., Galliani, E. M., et al. (2014). Investigating comes? the life outcomes of personality repli-
variationinreplicability:A“manylabs”replica- cation project. Psychological Science, 30(5),
tionproject.SocialPsychology,45(3),142–152. 711–727. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 /
https://doi.org/10.1027/1864-9335/a000178 0956797619831612
Klein, R. A., Vianello, M., Hasselman, F., Adams, Sotola, L. K. (2022). Garbage in, garbage out? evalu-
B. G., Adams, J., R. B., Alper, S., Aveyard, ating the evidentiary value of published meta-
M., Axt, J. R., Babalola, M. T., Bahník, Š., Ba- analyses using z-curve analysis. Collabra: Psy-
tra, R., Berkics, M., Bernstein, M. J., Berry, chology, 8(1). https://doi.org/10.1525/
D. R., Bialobrzeska, O., Binan, E. D., Bocian, collabra.32571
K., Brandt, M. J., Busching, R., et al. (2018).