
===== PAGE 1/6 =====
Opendata:NotApplicable
Meta-Psychology,2023,vol7,MP.2023.4020 Openmaterials:NotApplicable
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2023.4020 Openandreproducibleanalysis:NotApplicable Editedby:RickardCarlsson
Articletype:GuestEditorial Openreviewsandeditorialprocess:NotApplicable Reviewedby:NotReviewed
PublishedundertheCC-BY4.0license Preregistration:No Analysisreproducedby:NotApplicable
A Plea to Psychology Professional Societies that Publish Journals:
Assess Computational Reproducibility
D. Stephen Lindsay1
1DepartmentofPsychology,UniversityofVictoria
Keywords: editorial,computationalreproducibility,meta-psychology
MyBonaFides data, are the results the same as those the authors
report? Publishing scientific articles without testing
I believe that psychology professional societies (e.g.,
computational reproducibility is like selling health
theAmericanPsychologicalAssociation,theAssociation
remedieswithoutknowwhat’sinthem.
for Psychological Science, and the Psychonomic Soci-
ety)addvaluetoscientificpublishing. Ihavededicated
manythousandsofhoursofefforttoaddtothatvalue. I
PuttingYourMoneyWhereYourMouthIs
servedasAssociateEditorofJournalofMemory&Lan-
guage,EditorinChiefofJournalofExperimentalPsychol- The American Psychological Association is a major
ogy: General(2002-2007),andEditorinChiefofPsycho- publisher, and many other psychological professional
logical Science (2015-2019). I also served on the Gov- societies publish with giants of the industry such as El-
erning Board of the Psychonomic Society and Chaired sevier, Sage, Springer, and Wiley-Blackwell. Compared
their Publication Committee when that society transi- to self-publishing, partnerships with commercial pub-
tioned from self-publishing to publishing with Springer lishers benefit professional societies’ journals in mul-
(see Lindsay et al., 2023, for an account of that tumul- tiple ways: wider distribution, larger volume, higher
tuoustime). impact,reducedpublicationlag,higher-qualityproduc-
Iputstockinwell-managedpeerreview. Iappreciate tion,andbetterwebsupport. Revenuefromlargecom-
judiciousstylisticeditingandhigh-qualityformatting. I mercial publishing partners supports psychological so-
like word-count limits on intros and discussions. I es- cieties in many ways (e.g., funding summer institutes,
pecially prize the curatorial dimension of journal pub- workshops, travel bursaries, subsidized article process-
lishing: Scientificallywisefilteringthroughpeerreview ing charges for open-access articles, merit awards, in-
canbeapowerfulforceforgood. Ifthecoinoftherealm creasedinternationalization,publicoutreachforscience
becomesthepreprint(akadraft),aspromotedbysome advocacy,lobbyinggovernmentdecisionmakers,larger
(e.g., Yarkoni, 2012), I predict many problems. Peer and better-catered meetings, enhanced web presence,
reviewed journals are imperfect, but I believe that they etc.). Those benefits may in turn increase membership
can and often do improve the quality of psychological in the societies. So there is much to be said for part-
science(Lindsay,2020). nershipsbetweenprofessionalsocietiesandcommercial
Yet journals fall far short of their potential in many publishers, and many professional societies would face
ways. HereIargueforoneparticularpotentialimprove- drasticcut-backsandlossofimpactwithoutthem.
ment: Checking the computational reproducibility of Still, the aims of commercial publishers do not al-
statistical analyses before publication (González- ways align with scientific ideals (Brembs et al., 2023;
Beltrán et al., 2015). It is shocking that in 2023 Buranyi, 2017). Publishers create barriers to accessing
scientific journals publish empirical articles without research, charge shockingly high institutional subscrip-
checking to see if the analyses are computationally tions, and may be motivated to hype flashy findings on
reproducible. That is, if the statistical analyses that hot topics and to avoid owning up to errors. The big
the authors report having done are run on the authors’ commercial publishing companies focus on generating
income for their shareholders. And they succeed, with
very high profit margins. A lot of their income comes
from tax payers (who fund schools that pay subscrip-
I thank Tom Hardwicke, Alex Holcombe, Helene Intraub, tion fees and pay researchers who sometimes pay arti-
David Mellor, Daniel Simons, and Simine Vazire for helpful
cleprocessingfeestopublishopen-accessreportsofre-
commentsonearlierdrafts. Flawsaremyownresponsibility.
search funded by taxes). Partly for those reasons, early
===== PAGE 2/6 =====
2
career researchers increasingly extol the virtues of free Schiller signed off on Chalkia et al.’s Registered Report
“preprints” (e.g., on PsyArXiv.com) as superior to com- planforadirectreplication. Butearlyindatacollection
mercial journals. Academic social media seems awash Chalkiaetal. noticedthatfewoftheirsubjectsmetthe
inscornforpay-walledjournals. exclusion rules. That led them to attempt to reanalyze
the original data (which arguably they should have
WeHaveAnotherProblem done first – see Larsen, 2020; Nuijten et al., 2016).
QuotingMcIntoshandChambers(2020):
Scientists are ethically obliged to provide their data
to other scientists for verification. Data files provided
for verification should be complete, accurate, and in- The authors repeat[ed] the critical analy-
terpretable. The reported statistical analyses should ses from Experiment 1, using the exclu-
be reproducible given specification of the same model sioncriteriastatedintheoriginalNaturepa-
(Cooper&Guest,2014). per (Schiller et al., 2010), or the criteria
But psychological scientists often fall short in these stated in the recent addendum (Schiller et
regards. Kidwell et al. (2016) found that, among al.,2018),ornoexclusioncriteria,ortheid-
psychology articles explicitly claiming data availability, iosyncratic set of exclusions based on qual-
data were rarely available, correct, usable, and com- itative judgements that the original study
plete. Obelsetal.(2020)attemptedtoreproduceanaly- [reportedly]actuallyused. Onlythelastsce-
sesfrom62psychologyarticlespublishedbetween2014 nario yielded a pattern of results at all con-
and2018;foronly21ofthoseweretheyabletoobtain sistent with the conclusions of that paper;
the data and the analyses and successfully re-run the andevenherethecriticalinteractiontotest
reported analyses to reproduce the main finding. This for differences in the reinstatement of fear
isparticularlyworrisomegiventhatthesewereallReg- between groups was not statistically signifi-
isteredReports. cant.
Closer to home (for me), Crüwell et al. (2023) re-
ported a study of the first-ever issue of the journal Psy- An episode of the excellent Black Goat (Srivastava et
chological Science in which every empirical paper had al., 2020) podcast released in August 2020 dedicated
received a data badge. Crüwell et al. (2023) reported 40minutestothisfiascoandotherevidenceoferrorsin
that“all14articlesprovidedatleastsomedataandsix thedata/analysesofarticlespublishedinpeer-reviewed
provided analysis code, but only one article was rated psychology journals. The Black Goat hosts bemoaned
to be exactly reproducible, and three were rated as es- this state of affairs and speculated as to its origins. It
sentially reproducible with minor deviations.” Patricia was only in the last minutes of the program that they
Bauer, who succeeded me as Editor of Psych Science, mentioned the possibility that journals could take re-
published with this article an Editor’s Note in which sponsibility for vetting the computational reproducibil-
she correctly noted that criteria for a data badge did ity of the claims they publish: “In a decent world, that
not specify inclusion of analytic code, just data. Bauer should be good for the journal too,” observed Sanjay
also noted that Crüwell et al. set a rather high bar in Srivastava. CohostSimineVazireagreed,saying“Seems
thatthescientistswhoattemptedtoreproduceanalyses like a good way for journals that charge a shit-ton of
didsowithoutanycontactwiththeoriginalresearchers. money... tospendthatmoney.”
Both of those are valid points, but in my view their im- During my term as Editor of Psychological Science
portisthataseparatebadgeforanalyticcodeisneeded. (2015-2019) serious errors were discovered in several
Happily, just now an open analytic code badge is being data sets that authors of articles published in Psych
introduced. Science had posted online. These authors knowingly
A few years ago the journal Cortex introduced a linked their articles to data files that could not with-
new article category: Verification Reports (Chambers, stand scrutiny. Some of these cases ultimately led to
2020). As initially proposed by Sanjay Srivastava retraction (others to Corrigenda). It would have been
(2018), a verification report describes an effort to better for all concerned had the errors been caught be-
reproduce the analyses of a published study or to foreratherthanafterpublication.
analyze the data of a published study in a new way. Somejournalsinotherfieldsprovidein-housechecks
The inaugural Verification Report in Cortex, by Chalkia on statistical rigour and reproducibility before publica-
et al. (2020), described an arduous journey that began tion1. For example, The Odum Institute for Research
asanefforttoreplicateafamousexperimentpublished in Social Science at the University of North Carolina,
in Nature by Schiller et al. (2010). As described in
1ThankstoDavidMelloroftheCentreforOpenSciencefor
a Cortex editorial by McIntosh and Chambers (2020),
providingmostoftheseexamples.
===== PAGE 3/6 =====
3
Chapel Hill, employs graduate students to conduct re- analysesofarticlespublishedinCognition,andreported
producibilitychecksfortheAmericanJournalofPolitical that most manuscripts demanded several hours of ex-
Science. The American Economic Association employs pert work (some as many as 25 hours, with multiple
data editors to do similar work for their nine journals. back-and-forths with the corresponding author). Vil-
The British Medical Journal Open Science has dedicated huber (2019) summarized the considerable challenges
staffwhocheckadherencetotheirdata-sharingpolicies. of his role as the first Statistical Editor for the Ameri-
The Center for Open Science currently lists 25 journals canEconomicsAssociation. Becausetheproposedstudy
that do this. See also The Journal of Development Eco- would be difficult and expensive, undertaking it would
nomics’ReplicationPolicy. likely require the society to reduce expenditures that
promotepsychologicalscienceinotherways.
AModestProposal The proposed feasibility study would also involve
non-pecuniarycosts. Someauthorswouldbeputoffby
Major psychology professional societies that get sub-
requeststoprovidedataandscripts. TheStatsAdviser’s
stantial sums from large commercial presses should, I
inputwouldprobablyincreaseeditoriallaganditmight
believe, invest some of that money into ensuring that
sometimes add to the action editor’s workload. Some
the analyses they publish are computationally repro-
authors might dispute the Stats Adviser’s assessment.
ducible. Arguablythisisalowbar—butitisanachiev-
Overall, it would probably be a major pain in the ass.
able one. This is not a matter of policing submissions.
The only way it would be easy is if the Stats Adviser
Likepeerreviewandcopyediting,theaimistoimprove
rarelyhaddifficultyreproducinganalyses. Findingthat
scientificquality.
out (and being able to advertise it) seems to me to be
Somemightarguethatpeerreviewersshoulddothis
quitevaluable.
work. Some peer reviewers do look at the data and
Ensuringcomputationalreproducibilitywouldexem-
scripts (as per Richard Morey’s Peer Reviewers’ Open-
plify and amplify the value of the society’s journals
ness Initiative, “Peer Reviewers’ Openness Initiative,”
and help justify their cost. If in-house assessment of
2014,September13). Thatislaudable. Butitisservice
computationalreproducibilityofstatisticalanalysesbe-
above and beyond the call of duty of peer reviewers. It
came standard, it is likely that the non-reproducibility
is already difficult to recruit reviewers; adding to the
rate would soon plunge2. More and more researchers
demandsonthemwouldnothelp.
would double check their data files and scripts be-
I propose that a professional society in psychology
foresubmissionandusedatabuddies(Morey&Morey,
thatpublishesjournalsconductapilotstudyofthecosts
2016) and/or workflows to facilitate reproducibility
andbenefitsofprovidinganin-houseStatsAdviser(see
(seeClyburne-Sherinetal.,2018).
Appendix for some suggestions as to how to conduct
suchafeasibilitystudy). Ifthatstudyindicatesthatseri-
ALowBar
ousproblemsarerare,thenthesocietymightjudgethat
there is no need to check computational reproducibil- Amoreambitiousproposalmightcallforrigorousas-
ity. If that happens, I will post a video of me eating sessment of the formal appropriateness of the reported
sweetened desiccated coconut (one of the few foods I analyses (e.g., does the dataset meet the assumptions
despise). of the statistical tests?). Some have argued in favour
I hereby preregister my prediction that the proposed of multiverse analyses. Others have proposed that re-
study would reveal many problems with data files and searchers have multiple independent statisticians make
analysis scripts. Opaque variable names. Missing data. judgments as to how best to analyze the data (Wagen-
Unreported variables, data exclusions, and transforma- makers et al., 2021). An argument can be made for
tions. Incorrectly specified models. Scripts that yield also vetting procedural reproducibility (i.e., extent to
resultsinconsistentwiththosereported. Scriptsthatdo which the authors provide direct access to information
not run at all. Some of the problems would be minor and materials that enable other scientists to replicate
andeasilyfixable. Fixingthemwouldbegood. Someof a procedure). I can see arguments for all of those ap-
theproblemswouldbegutting. Knowingaboutserious proaches,butmyproposalismodest.
problemsbeforeratherthanafterpublicationwouldbe
good. 2When Psychological Science first began using Statcheck,
about 20% of manuscripts scanned included at least one in-
Conducting a costs/benefits study would be expen-
ternally inconsistent inferential statistical test report (e.g., t,
sive. To succeed in the role, the Stats Adviser would
df,andpthatdonotgotogether). Wetoldauthorstheirwork
havetobeahighlyqualifiedexpertdueagoodpayrate.
wouldbescannedbyStatCheckandthaterrorratedwindled
And the amount of time required might be substantial.
toalmostnothing
Hardwicke et al. (2018) tried to reproduce statistical
===== PAGE 4/6 =====
4
The call here is for a professional society to conduct placingacademicjournals.https://doi.org/10.
a short-termpilot studyto assess thecosts andbenefits 5281/zenodo.7643806
of providing in-house support aimed at ensuring that Buranyi, S. (2017). Is the staggeringly profitable busi-
whentheanalysestheauthorsreporthavingconducted ness of scientific publishing bad for science?
arerunonthedatatheauthorsreporthavinganalyzed, https://www.theguardian.com/science/
thereportedresultsarereproduced. Thegoalismerely 2017/jun/27/profitable-business-scientific-
to ensure that other researchers can take the authors’ publishing-bad-for-science
data and run the authors’ analyses and obtain the au- Chalkia, A., Schroyens, N., Leng, L., Vanhasbroeck, N.,
thors’results. Zenses,A.-K.,VanOudenhove,L.,&Beckers,T.
This is akin to asking a company that sells dietary (2020).Nopersistentattenuationoffearmem-
supplements to conduct independent assays to ensure oriesinhumans:Aregisteredreplicationofthe
thattheproductstheysellinfactcontaintheadvertised reactivation-extinctioneffect.Cortex,129,496–
substances in the claimed amounts. As explained near 509. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2020.
theoutsetofthispaper,therearereasonstobelievethat 04.017
many submissions to psychology journals would not Chambers,C.D.(2020).Verificationreports:Anewar-
easilypassthattest. Ifitturnsoutthatallormostsub- ticle type at cortex. Cortex, 129, A1–A3. https:
missions are easily computationally reproducible, then //doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2020.04.020
the society in question could announce thathappy out- Clyburne-Sherin, A., Fei, X., & Green, S. A. (2018).
come and dispense with the idea of providing in-house Computational reproducibility via containers
assessments of computational reproducibility, having in social psychology. Open Science Framework,
shownittobeunnecessary. 3(1).https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/mf82t
A critic might argue that ensuring reproducibility is Cooper, R. P., & Guest, O. (2014). Implementations
of little value in and of itself. Indeed, some have ar- arenotspecifications:Specification,replication
gued against efforts toward methodological reform on and experimentation in computational cogni-
thegroundthatwhatreallymattersisthedevelopment tive modeling. Cognitive Systems Research, 27,
of formal theories (e.g., Devezer et al., 2019; Flake 42–49.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cogsys.2013.
and Fried, 2020; Jamieson and Pexman, 2020; Szol- 05.001
losi et al., 2019; Yarkoni, 2019). These thinkers argue Crüwell, S., Apthorp, D., Baker, B. J., Colling, L., El-
cogently that a narrow focus on cleaving to the rules son,M.,Geiger,S.J.,Lobentanzer,S.,Monéger,
of statistical inference and prioritizing the replicability J., Patterson, A., Schwarzkopf, D. S., Zaneva,
ofempiricalphenomenoncannot,initself,advanceour M., & Brown, N. J. L. (2023). What’s in a
understanding of psychology. Rocks reliably plummet badge? a computational reproducibility inves-
to the ground when dropped, but establishing that fact tigation of the open data badge policy in one
tellsuslittleaboutphysics. issueofpsychologicalscience.PsychologicalSci-
If an effect or phenomenon replicates, that does not ence, 34(4), 512–522. https://doi.org/10.
tell us why. If an effect or phenomenon fails to repli- 1177/09567976221140828
cate, that likewise does not tell us why. And what we Devezer,B.,Nardin,L.G.,Baumgaertner,B.,&Buzbas,
ultimatelywanttoknowisWHY.Computationalrepro- E. O. (2019). Scientific discovery in a model-
ducibility is an even lower standard than replicability, centricframework:Reproducibility,innovation,
so what I am proposing here cannot, in itself, produce andepistemicdiversity.14(5).https://doi.org/
better theories. I do not argue against calls for theory 10.1371/journal.pone.0216125
development, difficult as that ambition seems to me to Flake,J.K.,&Fried,E.I.(2020).Measurementschmea-
accomplish. But surely journals roil the waters when surement:Questionablemeasurementpractices
they publish papers that report findings that cannot be and how to avoid them. Advances in Meth-
reproduced when the same data are submitted to the ods and Practices in Psychological Science, 3(4),
same analyses as the original authors reportedly con- 456–465. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 /
ducted. Reproducibility is not sufficient for progress in 2515245920952393
scientificpsychology,butitseemsnecessary. González-Beltrán, A., Li, P., Zhao, J., Avila-Garcia,
M. S., Roos, M., Thompson, M., Horst, E. v. d.,
References Kaliyaperumal, R., Luo, R., Lee, T.-L., Lam,
T., Edmunds, S. C., Sansone, S.-A., & Rocca-
Brembs, B., Huneman, P., Schönbrodt, F., Nilsonne, G.,
Serra, P. (2015). From peer-reviewed to peer-
Susi, T., Siems, R., Perakakis, P., Trachana, V.,
reproduced in scholarly publishing: The com-
Ma, L., & Rodriguez-Cuadrado, S. (2023). Re-
===== PAGE 5/6 =====
5
plementaryrolesofdatamodelsandworkflows (2016). The prevalence of statistical reporting
in bioinformatics. 10(7). https://doi.org/10. errorsinpsychology(1985–2013).BehaviorRe-
1371/journal.pone.0127612 searchMethods,48(4),1205–1226.https://doi.
Hardwicke, T. E., Mathur, M. B., MacDonald, K., Nil- org/10.3758/s13428-015-0664-2
sonne,G.,Banks,G.C.,Kidwell,M.C.,Hofelich Obels,P.,Lakens,D.,Coles,N.A.,Gottfried,J.,&Green,
Mohr,A.,Clayton,E.,Yoon,E.J.,HenryTessler, S.A.(2020).Analysisofopendataandcompu-
M.,Lenne,R.L.,Altman,S.,Long,B.,&Frank, tational reproducibility in registered reports in
M. C. (2018). Data availability, reusability, and psychology. Advances in Methods and Practices
analytic reproducibility: Evaluating the impact in Psychological Science, 3(2), 229–237. https:
of a mandatory open data policy at the jour- //doi.org/10.1177/2515245920918872
nal cognition. Royal Society OpenScience, 5(8), Peer reviewers’ openness initiative. (2014, September
180448.https://doi.org/10.1098/rsos.180448 13).https://www.opennessinitiative.org/
Jamieson, R. K., & Pexman, P. M. (2020). Moving be- Srivastava, S. (2018). In the same spirit as the pottery
yond20questions:We(still)needstrongerpsy- barn rule. call them verification reports. one-
chological theory. https://doi.org/https://doi. pager online reports linked from the original,
org/10.1037/cap0000223 where you can report you reran the analyses to
Kidwell, M. C., Lazarevi´c, L. B., Baranski, E., Hard- verify the numbers in the paper, + possibly ran
wicke, T. E., Piechowski, S., Falkenberg, L.-S., other analyses to verify strength of conclusions
Kennett, C., Slowik, A., Sonnleitner, C., Hess- [tweet].
Holden, C., Errington, T. M., Fiedler, S., & Srivastava, S., Tullett, A., & Vazire, S. (2020). The
Nosek, B. A. (2016). Badges to acknowledge black goat [audio podcast]. https : / / www.
open practices: A simple, low-cost, effective theblackgoatpodcast.com/posts/does-not-
method for increasing transparency. PLOS Bi- compute/
ology, 14(5), e1002456. https://doi.org/10. Szollosi, A., Kellen, D., Navarro, D., Shiffrin, R., Rooij,
1371/journal.pbio.1002456 I. v., Zandt, T. V., & Donkin, C. (2019). Is pre-
Larsen, E. G. (2020). Reproduce before you replicate. registrationworthwhile?PsyArXiv.https://doi.
https://erikgahner.dk/2020/reproduce-before- org/10.31234/osf.io/x36pz
you-replicate/ Vilhuber, L. (2019). Report by the aea data editor. AEA
Lindsay,D.S.(2020).Journalscanandoftendoenhance Papers and Proceedings, 109(May), 718–729.
psychological science [Accessed on September https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1257/
13, 2023]. https://onlineacademiccommunity. pandp.109.718
uvic.ca/lindsaylab/2020/03/21/journals-can- Wagenmakers, E.-J., Sarafoglou, A., Aarts, S., Albers,
and-often-do-enhance-psychological-science/ C.,Algermissen,J.,Bahník,Š.,vanDongen,N.,
Lindsay, D. S., Ross, B. H., & Hunt, R. R. (2023). Hoekstra,R.,Moreau,D.,vanRavenzwaaij,D.,
Psychonomic society publications: A par- Sluga, A., Stanke, F., Tendeiro, J., & Aczel, B.
ticipants’ account of the transition from (2021).Sevenstepstowardmoretransparency
self-publishing to partnering with springer instatisticalpractice.NatureHumanBehaviour,
[Manuscript submitted for publication]. 5(11), Article 11. https://doi.org/10.1038/
https://onlineacademiccommunity.uvic.ca/ s41562-021-01211-8
lindsaylab/wp-content/uploads/sites/4861/ Yarkoni, T. (2012). Designing next-generation plat-
2023/09/Lindsay-Ross-Hunt-Psychonomic- formsforevaluatingscientificoutput:Whatsci-
Publishing-16-May-2023.pdf entists can learn from the social web. https://
McIntosh, R. D., & Chambers, C. D. (2020). The three doi.org/10.2139/ss.
r’s of scientific integrity: Replicability, repro- Yarkoni,T.(2019).Thegeneralizabilitycrisis.PsyArXiv.
ducibility, and robustness. Cortex, 129, A4–A7. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2020.04.019 io/jqw35
Morey, R. D., & Morey, C. C. (2016). Habits
and open science. Association for Psychologi- Appendix
cal Science - APS Observer. https : / / www.
To assess the costs and benefits of verifying compu-
psychologicalscience.org/observer/habits-and-
tational reproducibility in a professional society’s jour-
open-science
nal articles, I would focus on a journal that is mostly
Nuijten, M. B., Hartgerink, C. H. J., Van Assen,
empirical,ethicallybenign,andanalyticallystraightfor-
M. A. L. M., Epskamp, S., & Wicherts, J. M.
ward(e.g.,forthePsychonomicSociety,Memory&Cog-
===== PAGE 6/6 =====
6
nition). I would recruit a PhD with sophisticated stat- low:
s/programmingchops,wideknowledgeofresearchpsy- __ Yes, I have or will provide de-identified
chology, excellent communication skills, cultural sensi- dataandscriptsifrequested.
tivity,andastrongrecordforreliability/punctualityetc. __Sorry,no,Iwouldnotdothatforsomeor
Iwouldpaythatpersonwellfora6-monthperiod. Two all of the reported studies for the following
months before that person was due to arrive, I would reasons: [typeexplanationhere]
addsomethinglikethefollowingtothesubmissionpor-
Once the Statistical Adviser was in place and
talfornewsubmissions:
manuscriptsthatmeetstatsreviewcriteriastartedcom-
TheXSocietyisexploringthecostsandben-
ing in, the Adviser would request data and scripts for
efits of providing in-house statistical sup- as many experiments as they could handle3. Maybe
portwiththeaimoffosteringcomputational
after three or four months they would have obtained
reproducibility (see x for details). If your
data/scripts from 50 experiments. They would then
manuscript is sent for review and the out-
stop adding new ones and focus on resolving as many
come of that initial review is encouraging,
of the selected cases as possible over the remaining
then you may be invited to provide (if you
monthsoftheirterm.
had not already done so) de-identified ver-
TheStatsAdviserwouldbeinstructednottonit-pick
sionsofthedatafilesuponwhichthestatis-
minor matters (especially ones on which folks can rea-
ticalanalysesinyourmanuscriptwerebased
sonablydisagree). TheStatsAdviserwouldaimtocome
andstatisticalanalysisscriptsthatwoulden-
acrossasasupporterandenablerratherthanasacop.
able an expert to reproduce your analyses.
It is worth considering turning this into an exper-
If your manuscript is selected to be part of
iment, with half of eligible submissions randomly as-
this feasibility study, then a Statistical Ad-
signed to get support from the Stats Adviser. The out-
viser will try to reproduce your analyses. If
comemeasurewouldbehoweasilyotherpsychologists
thatpersonhasdifficultydoingso,theywill
couldreproducetheanalysesinthearticle.
work with you to figure out the source of
the difficulty. The outcome of this process
3ItmightseemmoreefficienttoreservetheStatsAdviser’s
will be shared with you, the action editor,
review for accepted manuscripts. But once a manuscript has
and, if appropriate, with reviewers of your been accepted, the social dynamics of the situation shift. I
manuscript, but will otherwise be kept con- suspect that this would lead to reduced benefits of statistical
fidential. Please tick one of the options be- review.