
===== PAGE 1/22 =====
Meta-Psychology, 2019, vol 3, MP.2018.880, Open data: Yes Edited by: Rickard Carlsson
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2018.880 Open materials: Yes Reviewed by: Lee Jussim, Åse Innes-Ker, Ulrich Schimmack
Article type: File drawer report Open and reproducible analysis: Yes Analysis reproduced by: Tobias Mühlmeister
Published under the CC-BY4.0 license Open reviews and editorial process: Yes All supplementary files can be accessed at the OSF project page:
Preregistration: No https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/Z6SDM
In Search of Experimental Evidence for Secondary Antisemitism :
A File Drawer Report
Roland Imhoff
Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz, Germany; Social Cognition Center Cologne, Germany
Mario Messer
Social Cognition Center Cologne, Germany
In 1955, Adorno attributed antisemitic sentiments voiced by Germans to a paradox projection:
The only latently experienced feelings of guilt were warded off by antisemitic defense mecha-
nisms. Similar predictions of increases in antisemitic prejudice in response to increased Holo-
caust salience follow from other theoretical apparatuses (e.g., social identity theory as well as
just-world theory). Based on the – to the best of our knowledge – only experimental evidence
for such an effect (published in Psychological Science in 2009), the present research reports a
series of studies originally conducted to better understand the contribution of the different
assumed mechanisms. In light of a failure to replicate the basic effect, however, the studies
shifted to an effort to demonstrate the basic process. We report all studies our lab has con-
ducted on the issue. Overall, the data did not provide any evidence for the original effect. In
addition to the obvious possibility of an original false positive, we speculate what might be
responsible for this conceptual replication failure.
Keywords: file drawer; secondary antisemitism; victim blaming; guilt defense; replication
Back in 2007, we conducted an experimental study responding was futile as we would detect such lies. All
to test the widespread notion that ongoing reminders of built-in validity checks almost made perfect sense. We
Jewish suffering due to Nazi crimes will evoke some had never seen such a pretty data pattern before (and
kind of prejudicial reaction in Germans, a defensive never thereafter) and were very happy when others
“secondary” antisemitism. The (in hindsight severely agreed and the paper got accepted for publication in
underpowered) study “worked” perfectly: Reminding Psychological Science (Imhoff & Banse, 2009). Fueled
German participants of ongoing Jewish suffering led to by this success, we applied for and received a grant to
an increase in antisemitism (compared to baseline), but explore this fascinating effect in more detail. The origi-
only if they felt that untruthful (but socially desirable) nal plan to infer the underlying theoretical process by
identifying moderators and mediators failed, however,
as we could not even replicate the basic effect. The fol-
The reported research and preparation of this paper was
lowing is the tale of a long series of (mostly conceptual)
supported by a Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG)
non-replications. We will summarize the theoretical
grant (IM147/1-1) awarded to Roland Imhoff. We thank
Claudia Beck, Maren-Julia Boden, Lena Drees, Laura Melzer, background of our original study, explain the goals we
Nanette Münnich, and Ben Sturm for help with data collection had with an expansion of the line of research, and de-
and Amanda Seyle Jones for help in editing the manuscript. scribe a total of eight studies intended to replicate and
Correspondence should be addressed to Roland Imhoff via ro-
land.imhoff@uni-mainz.de.

===== PAGE 2/22 =====
2
IMHOFF & MESSER
expand the original findings (Studies 1 and 2) or em- construing victims as negative and undeserving helps to
pirically address the failure to replicate the basic finding uphold the illusion that the world is a just place (Cor-
(Studies 3a to 5). reia & Vala, 2003; Friedman & Austin, 1978). Likewise,
The notion of secondary antisemitism is a highly from a social identity perspective, derogating outgroup
popular concept across several disciplines. Although victims is functional to attenuate threats to the moral
there are nuances in how exactly it was conceptualized, value of the ingroup (Branscombe, Schmitt, & Schiff-
most definitions encapsulate the idea of an antisemitism hauer, 2007; Castano & Giner-Sorolla, 2006). System
not despite but because of the Holocaust. Briefly after Justification Theory (Jost, Banaji, & Nosek, 2004) inte-
World War II (WWII) and the Nazi’s efforts to literally grates many of these tenets to postulate that rationaliz-
annihilate Jews all over Europe, Peter Schönbach ing the status quo (e.g., the ongoing suffering of Holo-
(1961) observed remarkable levels of antisemitism in caust victims by finding fault in their character) may
German youths. This seemed to be puzzling as the now help reduce guilt, dissonance, and discomfort (Jost &
widespread awareness of the antisemitic atrocities com- Hunyady, 2002).
mitted only a few years earlier should have served as a Despite these many theoretical lines allowing the
potent warning sign against all forms of antisemitism. same prediction, the very core idea of secondary anti-
He thus proposed that the adolescents knew about their semitism had never been experimentally tested. Exist-
parents’ complicity (guilt by either action or omission) ing work on the issue was predominantly non-psycho-
in the actions of the Nazi regime and had to somehow logical and based on secondary antisemitism as a rhet-
cope with this knowledge or – psychologically speaking oric rather than a process. These studies invited re-
– the experienced dissonance of loving their parents but spondents to indicate their agreement with statements
associating them with such horrific actions. To do so, that encapsulated what researchers understood as sec-
they – according to Schönbach – were more or less ondary antisemitism. Prominent examples are items like
forced to rewarm the Nazi regime’s antisemitic propa- “Jews should stop complaining about what happened to
ganda to generate justifications for their parents’ de- them in Nazi Germany” (Selznick & Steinberg, 1969),
meanor. Adorno (1955) made similar observations in “The Jews exploit remembrance of the Holocaust for
his interpretation of group discussions organized by the their own benefit” (Heitmeyer, 2006), or “I am tired of
Frankfurt Institute for Social Research and his explana- continuously hearing about German crimes against
tion was also similar: The participating adults, so he ar- Jews” (Bergmann, 2006). Although such utterances
gued, had feelings of latent guilt for what happened may well reflect what has been conceptualized as sec-
during the Holocaust and had to – psycho-dynamically ondary antisemitism, agreement with them is not indic-
speaking – project this guilt onto the victims (Jews) to ative of the underlying process. It is, for instance, con-
alleviate these feelings. Although this version of anti- ceivable that a respondent just dislikes Jews in general,
semitism as a defense mechanism is the most common without any specific emphasis on the Holocaust. This
interpretation of Adorno’s reasoning (as also reflected respondent will certainly agree with these statements as
in synonyms like “Schuldabwehrantisemitismus”, a de- they communicate the negativity he or she sees in Jews,
fense-against-guilt-antisemitism; Bergmann, 2006), but this agreement will not be the result of the need to
Adorno’s writing also point to another explanation (that alleviate guilt or defend one’s ingroup’s moral value. In
he never explicates as an alternative mechanism): an fact, the very same argument could be made regarding
identity management account. Over the years, these the original participants in the studies by the Frankfurt
identity concerns moved to the core of current under- Institute for Social Research. Maybe they were antise-
standing of secondary antisemitism as an antisemitism mitic during WWII and continued to be antisemitic
borne out of the outrage that Jews’ insistence on re- thereafter without any indirect mediation via latent
membering what happened spoils the positive identity guilt or the need to justify their parents. The fact that
of being German. This has been most famously coined subscales tapping into agreement with traditional forms
in a quip (ascribed to Israeli psychoanalyst Zvi Rex): of antisemitism (e.g., “Jews have too much power and
“The Germans will never forgive the Jews for Ausch- influence in this world”; Weil, 1985) and secondary an-
witz” (Buruma, 2003). tisemitism correlate up to r = .84 at a latent level (Im-
Of course, this mechanism is not only a well-estab- hoff, 2010) adds further fuel to this fire.
lished figure in the political arena but makes a lot of We thus aimed to provide experimental evidence for
sense against the background of a plethora of psycho- secondary antisemitism as a process rather than a rhet-
logical theories. Blaming innocent victims is a central oric. As a way to induce feelings of (collective) guilt or
aspect of just-world theory (Lerner, 1980), whereby uneasiness about German atrocities, we aimed to make

===== PAGE 3/22 =====
IN SEARCH OF EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE FOR SECONDARY ANTISEMITISM : A FILE DRAWER REPORT 3
Holocaust victims‘ ongoing suffering salient with the ex- people). Thus, instead of derogating the victims to alle-
pectation that the salience should increase antisemitism viate guilt, they just refused to even take note of the
as a form of victim derogation (to alleviate guilt or see ongoing suffering. The remaining 48 participants, how-
the world as just or one’s group as moral). Something ever, showed exactly the pattern we expected (Figure 2,
about this prediction, however, did not feel right. left panel). Without mention of ongoing suffering, the
Clearly, telling people how much a certain group suffers level of antisemitism stayed more or less the same (op-
should somehow increase the threshold to devalue the erationalized as standardized residuals of predicting
group, as suffering is expected to evoke sympathy (Hei- Time 2 antisemitism from Time 1 antisemitism; r =
der, 1958) rather than derogation. We aimed to resolve .89). Mentioning ongoing suffering, however, de-
this by reaching into the bag of tricks of social psycholo- creased the expression of antisemitic prejudice in the
gists: Maybe people did have this sentiment but did not control condition but led to an increase when attached
express it because social norms prevented them from to a bogus pipeline. The results were even significant
doing so. So all we needed was a way to block the in- despite the small sample, but clearly, the strategy of
fluence of such norms. If people had a feeling that we controlling for baseline antisemitism made our measure
could know what they actually felt, then socially desir- very sensitive. There were more details in the data that
able (but dishonest) responding was futile since we added to the picture of a perfect study: The correlation
would not only find out about their prejudice anyway, between implicit and explicit antisemitism was inde-
but would also see that they are liars (a double norm pendently moderated by the bogus pipeline condition
violation). This sums up the logic of bogus pipeline pro- and a Time 1 measurement of the motivation to control
cedures, which allegedly detect dishonest responding prejudiced reactions (Banse & Gawronski, 2003), fur-
and thus lead participants to respond truthfully to avoid ther validating the experimental procedure and the data
the double norm violation described above. in general.
So, this was how we proceeded: We asked as many Presenting this study at conferences in the following
of our undergraduate psychology students as we could months was awarded with a lot of positive feedback that
find (a whopping 70 participants) to indicate their boosted our confidence to reach high with this one: We
agreement with 29 statements of antisemitism as part submitted to Psychological Science and received the
of a larger paper-and-pencil test (your infamous “mass happy news roughly 11 weeks later: “In both its subject
testing”). Three months later, they were invited to par- matter as in its empirical approach, your paper is (in my
ticipate in individual testing sessions and 63 of them humble opinion) a prototypical Psychological Science
agreed and showed up for an experiment involving two paper: It reports on a phenomenon that many people
independent variables manipulated between subjects: think or have heard about but does so in a way that
Was the suffering of Holocaust victims described as hav- makes this phenomenon more worthwhile, more im-
ing ongoing negative consequences for them and their portant, and much more consequential than lay psy-
descendants (Ongoing Suffering: yes/no)? Were partic- chology would have predicted.” Sure, the reviewers still
ipants hooked up to (slightly outdated) EEG machinery had critical comments; None, however, referred to sam-
and a hand palm electrode with the information that ple size. We resubmitted the manuscript within 10 days
this would help us detect untruthful responding (Bogus and it was accepted shortly thereafter.
Pipeline: yes/no)? Afterwards, participants wrote down In light of the positive feedback we got, it seemed
all the thoughts they had while reading the text, then only logical to follow up on this line of research. The
completed a measure of implicit antisemitism, the same many theoretical lines that converged in predicting the
antisemitism scale as three months earlier, and a ma- effect we found were a plus in making a convincing ar-
nipulation check item to make sure that they had indeed gument. On the flipside, however, this also meant that
read the initial text (“Please briefly recall the introduc- we had not one but several candidates for the underly-
tory text. Did it mention ongoing consequences for the ing psychological process responsible for this mecha-
victims?”). nism. Our project sought to tackle this. Specifically, we
When we finally looked at the results, they were expected three distinct, not necessarily mutually exclu-
beautiful – everything looked exactly as it “should”. We sive, processes to be potentially involved (Figure 1).
had an unexpectedly large number of failed manipula- Building on originally psycho-dynamic reasoning, we
tion checks (15 people), but the pattern made perfect reasoned that the mediating mechanism rested on the
sense (in hindsight): Almost all of these wrong re- process that (latent) feelings of guilt that were fought
sponses came from the ongoing suffering conditions (13 off by derogating the victims and or interpreting their
suffering as deserved. The implication would be that

===== PAGE 4/22 =====
4
IMHOFF & MESSER
this mechanism should be restricted to victims of one’s address the plausibility of each of the three theoretical
own group (as feeling guilty for atrocities committed by possibilities outlined above by three strategies. First, all
another seemed unlikely), should be moderated by pro- three accounts propose different moderators for the ef-
pensity to feel guilty, mediated via feelings of guilt, and fect: guilt proneness, defensive national identification,
should be reduced if this guilt was alleviated in any just-world beliefs. Second, the boundary conditions of
other way. the effect should also be informative. Whereas the first
The second alternative was built on the notion of so- two accounts would predict the effect to be limited to
cial identity and individuals’ motivation to see their own victims of the ingroup, the last would make a general
group as moral (Branscombe, Ellemers, Spears, & prediction for any (innocent) victim. Third, all three
Doosje, 1999) and defend its positive identity (Brans- theories allow predictions of the specific kind of alter-
combe, Schmitt, & Schiffhauer, 2007). Here also the ef- native means that could serve as an alternative means
fect should be restricted to victims of the ingroup (as to alleviate the discomforting feelings of guilt, ingroup
there exists no motivation to see outgroups as moral) threat, or just-world threat. Washing one’s hands, we
and should be particularly prominent among people reasoned, should alleviate guilt; re-affirming the moral-
who identify (defensively) with their ingroup. The me- ity of one’s nation should alleviate concerns about one’s
diating mechanism would be the perceived threat to the group’s morality; and providing examples of fair and
ingroup’s moral image and any alternative means to re- just procedures should re-establish a sense of justice in
pair this image might reduce the effect. this world. As an additional possibility, we planned to
The final distinct possibility was that victim deroga- explore indirect effects via measured mediators (e.g.,
tion here was a means to restore one’s illusion of the latent guilt). Below we describe the first two studies
world as a just place (e.g., Correia & Vala, 2003; Fried- from that line of research, which could not even estab-
man & Austin, 1978; Godfrey & Lowe, 1975; Lerner & lish the basic effect let alone a moderation. In light of
Simmons, 1966; Miller, 1977; Simmons & Piliavin, this, we refrained from conducting additional studies
1972). The strong need to see the world as a place with experimental moderators (e.g., washing hands).
where everyone gets what they deserve and deserves Instead, all other reported studies describe efforts to
what they get (Lerner, 1980) should prompt the desire find evidence for the basic process of an increase in an-
to generate reasons why Jewish suffering was actually tisemitic prejudice by making the history of the Holo-
deserved, likely leading to victim blaming. Importantly, caust salient (not necessarily ongoing victim suffering).
this mechanism is not exclusive to one’s own victim but We employed more subtle measures of prejudice (Stud-
should be a general process independent of who ies 3a-3c), less egalitarian samples (Studies 4a and 4b),
brought about the suffering. People with a greater need or more modest forms of negativity, like reduced empa-
to see the world as just should be more prone to show thy (Study 5). None of these succeeded in providing
the effect and re-establishing a sense of the world as just such evidence.
by alternative means should reduce the effect.
Study 1
In the first study, we aimed to replicate Imhoff and
Banse’s (2009) study and to test the role of latent guilt
as a potential mediating process. We utilized an adap-
tation of the Implicit Positive and Negative Affect Test
(IPANAT; Quirin, Kazén, & Kuhl, 2009), which served
as an indirect measure of guilt. We examined whether
a) ongoing Jewish suffering increases implicit guilt,
whether b) implicit guilt is positively correlated with
Figure 1. Potential pathways from perception of ongo-
antisemitism under bogus-pipeline conditions, and
ing victim suffering to increased prejudice.
whether c) implicit guilt mediates the effect of ongoing
Jewish suffering on antisemitism. To maximize our
The present research. chances of finding subtle effects, we took an earlier
baseline measurement of our central dependent varia-
We planned a research program that sought to rep- ble.
licate the basic finding of secondary antisemitism and

===== PAGE 5/22 =====
IN SEARCH OF EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE FOR SECONDARY ANTISEMITISM : A FILE DRAWER REPORT 5
Method more positive attitudes (e.g., 9 items tapping into col-
lective guilt and regret; Imhoff, Bilewicz, & Erb, 2012;
Participants. An a priori power analysis suggested a
5 items on contact and contact intention, 5 items on
required sample of N = 120 to find an interaction of a
reparation intentions). The actual antisemitism scale
size of f = .30 (effect size was f = 0.36 in Imhoff &
consisted of 29 items measuring modern antisemitism
Banse, 2009) with 90% power. As we expected substan-
(e.g., “Jews have too much influence on public opin-
tial dropout, we sought to oversample at t1. Specifi-
ion”; 4 reverse-coded; Cronbach’s α = .91).
cally, we circulated an invitation to participate in a
As a second measurement approach, participants in-
study consisting of two parts (45-minute online study,
dicated how warm (5 items, e.g. “good-natured”,
15-minute lab experiment) via an e-mail to individuals
Cronbach’s α = .92) and competent (4 items, e.g. “com-
who had signed up as interested in study participation.
petent”, Cronbach’s α = .77; Fiske, Cuddy, Glick, & Xu,
To enhance participation at both measurement times,
2002) they perceived Jews to be using a list of 20 ad-
we offered 12 EUR that would be given in cash after
jectives (including 11 filler items) on the same scale.
completion of the second, lab-based experiment. De-
Guilt proneness. We assessed disposition to experi-
spite this incentive and three invitation e-mails, only
ence strong feelings of guilt using two instruments: the
109 individuals (34 men, 74 women, 1 missing; mean
Test of Self-Conscious Affect-3 (TOSCA-3; German ver-
age: 27.05, SD = 6.70) participated in the online study.
sion by Rüsch & Brück, 2003; 5-point scale) and the
Upon completion (roughly 3 months after the first invi-
Guilt and Shame Proneness Scale (GASP; German trans-
tation to the online study), participants were contacted
lation by Cohen, Wolf, Panter, & Insko, 2011; 7-point
individually to make appointments for the lab study. A
scale). Both measures ask participants to imagine vari-
total of 83 participants (29 men, 54 women; mean age:
ous scenarios and to indicate how likely it is for them to
27.71, SD = 7.22; drop-out: 23.9%) were successfully
experience guilt (among other possible reactions) in
recruited to show up for the lab study. This equipped us
these situations. Cronbach’s α was .47 for the TOSCA-3
with 77% power to detect the estimated effect of f =
guilt scale and .60 for the guilt – negative behavior eval-
.30. The data of one additional participant in the lab
uation scale of the GASP.
study had to be excluded because he or she provided a
National identification. National identification was
participant code not included in the dataset of the pre-
measured in two ways so that the impact of the defense
test.
form of national identification (i.e., glorification con-
Online testing.
trolled for attachment, collective narcissism) could be
The purpose of the online test was twofold. First, we
isolated. We measured attachment to the national
needed a baseline measure of antisemitism to control
group (8 items; e.g., “Being a German is an important
for a t2. This would reduce the noise due to stable indi-
part of my identity”; Cronbach’s α = .90) and glorifica-
vidual differences and thus isolate the proportion of the
tion of this group (8 items; e.g., “Germany is better than
variance that was not due to such individual differences
other nations in all respects”; Cronbach’s α = .82) on
and was therefore in principle susceptible to experi-
seven-point scales ranging from 1 (totally disagree) to
mental manipulation. Second, we included a long list of
7 (totally agree) with items by Roccas, Sagiv, Halevy,
moderators predicted by the different theoretical mod-
and Eidelson (2008) that were adapted and translated
els outlined above. The overarching goal was to identify
to German. As an additional measure of defensive na-
systematic patterns across a series of studies to bolster
tional identification, we included a measure of collec-
the robustness of one specific theoretical approach. Spe-
tive narcissism, the exaggerated belief that one’s own
cifically, we included measures of guilt proneness, na-
national group is superior to other groups, on the same
tional identification, and just-world beliefs. Some addi-
scale. To this end we used the German translation of
tional measures were added on a purely exploratory
nine items (Cronbach’s α = .85) of the Collective Nar-
base.
cissism Scale (e.g., “I wish other groups would more
Antisemitism. Explicit antisemitism was assessed us-
quickly recognize authority of the Germans”; Golec de
ing Imhoff’s (2010) scale for the measurement of pri-
Zavala, Cichocka, Eidelson, & Jayawickreme, 2009).
mary and secondary antisemitism on seven-point scales
Belief in a just world. We used Dalbert’s (2001) Gen-
ranging from 1 (totally disagree) to 7 (totally agree). In
eral Belief in a Just World Scale that consists of six items
order to attenuate reactance and as in the original
(e.g., “I think basically the world is a just place”;
study, these items were preceded by a filler item (“I
Cronbach’s α = .72). The items of this scale were an-
think the relationship between Germans and Jews is still
swered on a six-point scale ranging from 0 (totally dis-
influenced by the past.”). Additionally, among the
agree) to 5 (totally agree).
clearly negative items we included items that indicated

===== PAGE 6/22 =====
6
IMHOFF & MESSER
Additional variables. We measured right-wing au- or with a lie”. Participants in the control condition un-
thoritarianism (RWA; Funke, 2005), social dominance derwent measurement of heart rate as well but did not
orientation (SDO; von Collani, 2002), the Big Five (BFI- have electrodes attached to their hands. Importantly,
10; Rammstedt & John, 2007), conspiracy mentality participants in this condition were informed that physi-
(Imhoff & Bruder, 2014), and the coping modes vigi- ological measures were obtained merely in order to ex-
lance and cognitive avoidance (Mainz Coping Inven- plore whether physiological parameters correlate with
tory, ABI; Egloff & Krohne, 1998) using German ver- information processing in reading.
sions of the scales. Measures.
Procedure. After giving informed consent, partici- Implicit guilt. We used an adaptation of the Implicit
pants completed all scales in a fixed order (TOSCA-3, Positive and Negative Affect Test (IPANAT; Quirin,
Belief in a Just World, Collective Narcissism, Glorifica- Kazén, & Kuhl, 2009) that assesses anger, fear, happi-
tion and Attachment, Antisemitism, Conspiracy Mental- ness, and guilt (IPANAT-4-EM) to measure implicit
ity, Right-Wing Authoritarian, Social Dominance Orien- guilt. Participants were asked to judge the extent to
tation, Mainz Coping Inventory, GASP, BFI-10, de- which artificial words (e.g., “VIKES”) express each of
mographics) before generating the individual code three emotional qualities per emotion cluster. Guilt was
needed to match their pretest data with the lab study represented by the emotion words “guilt”, “regret”, and
data. “shame”, Cronbach’s α = .88.
Lab Study. Explicit guilt. The same emotions that were meas-
All participants who participated in the online study ured with the IPANAT-4-EM in an indirect way were
and left contact details were invited via e-mail to par- also assessed using a self-report measure. Participants
ticipate in the lab study. Upon arriving at individually indicated to what extent they felt anger, fear, happi-
arranged sessions they were randomly assigned to one ness, and guilt (“guilty”, “regretful”, and “ashamed”) at
of the four conditions resulting from a 2 (ongoing con- that moment, Cronbach’s α = .81.
sequence: yes vs. no) by 2 (bogus pipeline: yes vs. no) Antisemitism. Participants completed the same scale
design. as in the online study, α = .93.
Information on ongoing consequences. Participants Heart rate variability. We collected heart rate varia-
read a text, ostensibly taken from a history book, which bility data for exploratory purposes using heart rate
described the German atrocities committed against monitor watches by Polar.
Jews in the Auschwitz concentration camp. This text
was identical to that used by Imhoff and Banse (2009). Procedure. After an interval ranging between seven
The last paragraph contained the manipulation of on- days and three months between the online survey and
going consequences. Participants either read that the participation in the lab study (Time 2), participants
suffering of the Jewish victims was part of a terrible his- were randomly assigned to one of four experimental
tory that has no direct implications for Jews today (no conditions in a 2 (ongoing consequences vs. no ongoing
ongoing consequences) or that even today Jews are suf- consequences) × 2 (bogus pipeline vs. control) factorial
fering either as Auschwitz survivors or as their descend- design. The session started with the bogus pipeline ma-
ants because of “secondary traumatization” (ongoing nipulation and the physiological device set up. After a
consequences). two-minute baseline measurement of heart rate varia-
Bogus Pipeline. The implementation of the bogus bility, participants read a text about the German atroci-
pipeline differed from the original study (Imhoff & ties in the Auschwitz concentration camp, which in-
Banse, 2009) because we initially intended to explore cluded the manipulation of consequences for present-
physiological reactions to both versions of the text day Jews. The individual paragraphs of the text moved
about the Holocaust. In the bogus pipeline condition, across the screen over a period of 140 seconds to allow
the electrode belt of a heart rate monitor watch was ap- for a mapping of physiological reactions to specific parts
plied to participants’ chests. In addition, electrodes of the text. After the reading task, participants were
were attached to the palmar surfaces of the participants’ asked to write down on a piece of paper the thoughts
index and middle fingers and to the back of their hands, they had had while reading the text. Subsequently, they
supposedly to measure galvanic skin response. Partici- completed the IPANAT-4-EM, which included our meas-
pants were informed that physiological data were meas- ure of implicit guilt, and filled in the measure of explicit
ured because “previous research has shown that we can guilt. Finally, they again answered the same antisemi-
detect quite well whether someone answers truthfully tism questionnaire that they had completed at Time 1

===== PAGE 7/22 =====
IN SEARCH OF EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE FOR SECONDARY ANTISEMITISM : A FILE DRAWER REPORT 7
and indicated whether the text presented to them be- and the no ongoing consequences condition (M = 3.06,
fore contained information about ongoing negative con- SD = 0.90), t(81) = 0.93, p = .354, Hedges’s g = 0.20,
s
sequences for Jews today as a manipulation check 95% CI [-0.23, 0.64]. In contrast to our hypothesis, im-
(“yes” or “no”). plicit guilt was not positively correlated with antisemi-
tism under bogus pipeline conditions, r(44) = .12, p =
Results .451. In order to test the moderator hypotheses, we per-
formed separate hierarchical multiple regression anal-
Antisemitism showed high stability between both
yses using the standardized residual change scores in
measurements, r(83) = .89, p < .001. We followed the
antisemitism as a dependent variable. Product terms
strategy of the original study (Imhoff & Banse, 2009) in
representing the three-way interactions among both ex-
analyzing the effect of the information on ongoing con-
perimental factors and the potential moderator varia-
sequences on antisemitism. Time 1 antisemitism scores
bles were entered as predictors in a third step after the
were entered as a predictor of Time 2 antisemitism
simple predictors and all possible two-way products.
scores in a regression analysis and standardized resid-
None of these regression analyses revealed evidence for
ual change scores were used as an index of change in
a moderation effect of collective narcissism (see Table
antisemitism. The resulting residual change scores were
Osm.1 on our OSF project page), national glorification
subjected to a 2 (ongoing consequences vs. no ongoing
(see Table Osm.2), just-world beliefs (see Table
consequences) × 2 (bogus pipeline vs. control) analysis
Osm.3), or guilt proneness (see Table Osm.4).
of variance (ANOVA). In contrast to our hypothesis and
the results of the original study, no evidence was found
Discussion
for an interaction between the information on ongoing
negative consequences for Jews and the bogus pipeline Study 1 provided no lead on the research question
manipulation, F(1, 79) = 0.28, p = .602, η 2 = 0.003 of which psychological processes are plausibly respon-
p
(Figure 2, right panel). Likewise, none of the experi- sible for increased prejudice in light of ongoing suffer-
mental factors showed a main effect, Fs < 1. Confront- ing, predominantly because it failed to replicate this
ing German participants with ongoing negative conse- finding. Although descriptively the mean scores were in
quences for present-day Jews did not result in increased the predicted direction, this trend was far from signifi-
antisemitism, even when participants thought that un- cant. Several reasons appeared conceivable for this. As
truthful responses could be detected by the experi- always, the non-significant findings could be a false-
menter. negative and due to too little power. We failed to collect
data from 120 participants as planned based on a priori
power analyses and these analyses might already have
been biased by an effect size estimate that was too op-
timistic, taken from the original study. Alternatively, the
bogus pipeline manipulation might not have worked as
it did in the original study. We had used different equip-
ment (a heart rate monitor plus hand electrodes instead
of forehead electrodes plus hand electrodes) in a differ-
ent setting (neutral, almost empty room instead of a
Figure 2. Change in explicit antisemitism (standardized slightly messy laboratory with many cables lying
residuals) from Time 1 to Time 2 as a function of the around) and sampled from a different population (via a
information on ongoing consequences and bogus pipe- volunteer participant e-mail list instead of first-year un-
line manipulations in the original study (Imhoff & dergraduates) with different incentives (cash payment
Banse, 2009; left panel) and in Study 1 of the current instead of course credit). Potentially, any of these fac-
research. Error bars represent standard errors of the tors or their combination undermined the credibility of
mean. our bogus pipeline manipulation. In fact, unlike the pre-
vious study, we have no evidence for the validity of the
procedure. In our original study, we had included an
Despite this lack of support for the basic effect, we
Affective Misattribution Procedure (Payne, Cheng, Go-
analyzed whether ongoing Jewish suffering increases
vorun, & Stewart, 2005) as a measure of implicit anti-
implicit guilt. A t-test for independent samples revealed
semitism. As we expected, this measure correlated sub-
no significant difference in implicit guilt between the
stantially with the explicit measure under bogus pipe-
ongoing consequences condition (M = 3.25, SD = 0.95)
line conditions (i.e., participants really self-report what

===== PAGE 8/22 =====
8
IMHOFF & MESSER
they “feel”), but not under control condition (where Cronbach’s α = .72) that could be modified to assess
they corrected their responses in a socially desirable prejudice against Chinese (e.g., “Chinese have too much
way). We had eliminated the indirect measure between influence on public opinion”; Cronbach’s α = .80). The
the ongoing suffering manipulation and the dependent prejudice items were supplemented by four items on
variable in an effort to streamline the procedure. Nev- collective guilt (e.g., “I can easily feel guilty for the neg-
ertheless, we continued as planned with Study 2. ative consequences that were brought about by Ger-
mans [Japanese]”, Cronbach’s α = .83 and .62, respec-
tively) and, for participants that read about the Holo-
Study 2
caust, by two items on primary and five items on sec-
ondary antisemitism for exploratory purposes. Study 2
In Study 2, we aimed to test the just-world theory as
included the same measures of potential moderators
an explanation of the effect of ongoing Jewish suffering
and additional variables as in Study 1 except that we
against the hypotheses of guilt-defense and the protec-
excluded the TOSCA-3 (but kept the GASP as a measure
tion of a positive social identity. We did so by introduc-
of guilt proneness), the in-group attachment and glori-
ing a condition in which just-world theory would make
fication scales (but kept the measure of collective nar-
a different prediction than guilt-defense or social iden-
cissism), and the ABI (measuring anxiety coping styles
tity theory. Just-world beliefs should be threatened by
that might be related to the tendency to avoid – and
unjustly suffering victims in any case, irrespective of
therefore misremember – threatening information). In
who the perpetrator is. In contrast, not every case of in-
addition, we included the following measures on a
justice should result in increased guilt or in a threatened
purely exploratory basis: a response latency-based
positive social identity. Only if the perpetrators are
measure of prejudice (adapted from Vala, Pereira, Eu-
members of the in-group (in this case Germans), one
gênio, Lima, & Leyens, 2012), a rating of Jews and Chi-
should be motivated to derogate the victims. Accord-
nese on eight warmth-related traits, and a feeling ther-
ingly, we manipulated group membership of the perpe-
mometer assessing feelings towards these groups
trators.
(among other groups). The BIOPAC system that had the
main purpose of serving as a bogus pipeline setup (see
Method
below) was also used to record electrodermal activity
Participants. We again aimed for a final sample of data for exploratory purposes. We did not analyze phys-
120 participants. One hundred and eighty-five first-year iological data, but the raw data can be obtained from
psychology students (27 men, 158 women; mean age: the authors.
22.29, SD = 4.88) from the University of Cologne, Ger- Independent variables. We manipulated group
many, participated in an online study at the first meas- membership of the perpetrators by presenting partici-
urement. Seventy-eight participants dropped out be- pants with either a text about the Holocaust (which was
tween the first and the second measurement occasion the same as in Study 1) or about the ongoing suffering
(42%). The post-test data of two participants had to be of Chinese victims of the Nanking massacre committed
excluded because they provided participant codes not by Japanese troops. In both conditions, the last para-
included in the dataset of the pretest. We excluded nine graph stressed the ongoing negative consequences for
participants before running the analyses because they present-day Jews or Chinese, respectively. Presentation
did not remember that the historical text they had read of the text differed from Study 1 in that the whole text
contained information about ongoing negative conse- was shown on the screen at once, whereas the individ-
quences for the victims or because they did not remem- ual paragraphs moved across the screen in Study 1.
ber who the perpetrators had been. The remaining sam- In contrast to Study 1 and more similar to the origi-
ple of N = 96 (86 women, 10 men) ranged from 17 to nal study (Imhoff & Banse, 2009), we operationalized
39 in age (M = 21.55, SD = 4.11). Participants received the bogus pipeline manipulation as measuring electro-
12 EUR for their participation (approx. 7.50 EUR per dermal activity under the pretext of lie detection vs. no
hour). physiological measurement at all. Participants in the bo-
Measures. The main dependent variable in Study 2 gus pipeline condition were informed that “specific pa-
was explicit prejudice against the victim group partici- rameters of electrodermal activity allow us to detect
pants read about during the experiment. Depending on whether someone answers truthfully or with a lie”. Sub-
experimental condition, participants responded to items sequently, the experimenter attached the electrodes of
measuring prejudice against Jews or Chinese. We chose a BIOPAC system to the palmar surfaces of the partici-
ten items from the antisemitism scale (Imhoff, 2010; pants’ index and middle fingers. In order to increase

===== PAGE 9/22 =====
IN SEARCH OF EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE FOR SECONDARY ANTISEMITISM : A FILE DRAWER REPORT 9
credibility of the bogus pipeline, the experimenter con- Results
tinued with an alleged calibration that required partici-
The stability of antisemitism was lower than in
pants to follow some instructions while the experi-
Study 1, r(44) = .57, p < .001. The stability of preju-
menter was monitoring the physiological parameters at
dice against Chinese was r(52) = .72, p < .001. Preju-
another computer behind a room divider. Specifically,
dice against the victim group was analyzed as change in
participants were instructed to take a deep breath and
prejudice between both measurement occasions exactly
hold the breath for a moment. After that, the experi-
as in Study 1. The standardized residual change scores
menter asked participants to memorize a number be-
were subjected to a 2 (group membership of the perpe-
tween one and six printed on a card (which was a 4 in
trators: in-group vs. out-group) × 2 (bogus pipeline vs.
every case). Analogous to a concealed information test,
control) ANOVA. Results neither revealed a significant
the experimenter then read a series of numbers that
main effect of the bogus pipeline manipulation, which
could have been on the card, and participants were in-
would have been predicted by just-world theory, F(1,
structed to answer “yes” to every number, whether ac-
92) = 0.05, p = .830, η 2 = 0.00, nor an interaction
curate or not. After a few seconds, participants were in- p
effect, which would have been predicted by guilt-de-
formed that the apparatus was working properly and
fense and social identity theory, F(1,92) = 0.01, p =
that they were ready to start with the study. Participants
.919, η 2 = 0.00. The only significant experimental ef-
in the control condition received no treatment at all. p
fect was a (hard-to-explain) main effect of victim group,
Procedure. The first measurement of explicit preju-
F(1, 92) = 15.74, p < .001, η 2 = 0.17: Whereas anti-
dice against the victim group alongside assessment of p
semitic prejudice showed a relative decrease compared
the potential moderator variables was obtained in a
to t1, the opposite was true for anti-Chinese prejudice
classroom testing session (Time 1). After an interval of
(Figure 3). Separate moderator analyses confirmed this
five or six months, participants were invited to the la-
result for participants high in collective narcissism (see
boratory for an individual session (Time 2). Participants
Table Osm.5), just-world beliefs (see Table Osm.6), and
were randomly assigned to one of four groups in a 2
guilt proneness (see Table Osm.7).
(group membership of the perpetrators: in-group vs.
out-group) × 2 (bogus pipeline vs. control) design. Af-
ter the bogus pipeline manipulation had been adminis-
tered, participants gave demographic information and Control
Bogus Pipeline
read a neutral text about the history of an abandoned
1,0
town, which served as a control task for the assessment
of electrodermal activity, involving reading but without
injustice-related content. In the bogus pipeline condi- 0,5
tion, this reading task was preceded by a three-minute
baseline measurement of electrodermal activity. After
0,0
this initial reading task, participants were given two
minutes to write down on a piece of paper their
thoughts about the text. After a one-minute rest period, -0,5
participants were presented with the critical text that
contained the manipulation of the perpetrators’ group
-1,0
membership and again wrote down their thoughts. Sub-
sequently, participants completed 48 trials of the re-
Jewish Victims of Ingroup Chinese Victims of Outgroup
sponse latency-based measure of prejudice and an-
Suffering Manipulation
swered the prejudice questionnaire. Finally, they were
Figure 3. Change in explicit prejudice against the victims
asked whether the text contained information on ongo-
(standardized residuals) from Time 1 to Time 2 as a
ing negative consequences for the victims (“yes” or
function of the group membership of the perpetrators
“no”) and who the perpetrators had been as a manipu-
and the bogus pipeline manipulation in Study 2. Error
lation check (“the Red Army”, “Japanese troops”, “SS
bars represent standard errors of the mean.
officers”, or “American soldiers”).
Discussion
Studies 1 and 2 failed to replicate the basic effect of
an increase in antisemitism in response to the ongoing

===== PAGE 10/22 =====
10
IMHOFF & MESSER
suffering of Jewish victims, which had been reported in Method
the original study (Imhoff & Banse, 2009). In light of
Participants. Seventy-eight psychology students
this repeated failure to replicate the interaction of bo-
from the University of Cologne, Germany, were re-
gus pipeline and ongoing suffering, we decided to
cruited via mailing lists, flyers, social networks, or by
switch gears and focus on establishing the basic effect.
being personally approached on the university campus
The bogus pipeline manipulation appeared to us as the
to take part in Study 3a. Based on a priori set criteria
most plausible candidate for this failure. Clearly, partic-
(see below), we excluded 17 participants before run-
ipants needed a lot of trust in the researchers to believe
ning the analyses because they did not remember cor-
that the researchers could indeed detect untruthful re-
rectly that the target person was Jewish [vs. Christian]
sponding. In contrast to the time when bogus pipelines
or that he was volunteering in an organization that sup-
were originally proposed in the early 1970s (e.g., Sigall
ports Holocaust survivors [vs. an organization working
& Page, 1971), current students are very likely aware of
to protect forests] or both. The remaining sample of N
the fact that a simple “lie detector” is a gadget from fic-
= 61 (47 women and 14 men) ranged from 20 to 49
tional literature, not a real thing. Based on the working
years in age (M = 24.67, SD = 5.82). Participants re-
hypothesis that lie detection machines have been too
ceived course credit for their participation.
thoroughly debunked in public discourse to affect par-
Roughly 120 students from different fields of study
ticipants’ responding, we turned to another popular ap-
participated in exchange for 4 EUR in Study 3b (N =
proach to circumvent social desirable responding: more
121) and Study 3c (N = 120), respectively. The effec-
subtle measures.
tive sample size after exclusions based on the same cri-
teria as in Study 3a was N = 94 (50 women and 44
Study 3a – 3c men; age 18 to 38 years, M = 22.71, SD = 3.42) in
Study 3b, and N = 89 (59 women, 29 men, one partic-
In Studies 3a to 3c, we investigated whether the very ipant did not indicate; age 18 to 40 years, M = 23.22,
basic effect shown in the original study (Imhoff & SD = 4.23) in Study 3c.
Banse, 2009) – Germans show increased antisemitism Independent Variables. The session started with an
when confronted with the Holocaust – is detectable. As impression formation task that contained the manipula-
we were not confident in the effectiveness of the bogus tion of both independent variables. Participants read a
pipeline manipulation given the results of Studies 1 and short text about a person containing irrelevant infor-
2, we employed an alternative approach in addressing mation about that person’s job, residence, and leisure
the problem of measuring antisemitic attitudes, which time, and, critically, cues to the person’s religious affili-
are socially very undesirable to express. Instead of a bo- ation and a sentence mentioning the Holocaust or a con-
gus pipeline setup, we adopted a reverse-correlation trol issue. Participants were told that the person was ac-
paradigm as a subtle, indirect measure of prejudice. If tive in his synagogue [vs. church] and volunteered with
confronting Germans with the crimes their ancestors an organization that helps Holocaust survivors because
committed against Jews results in them becoming more his grandfather had been murdered in the Auschwitz
antisemitic, we expected Germans to remember the face concentration camp [vs. an organization working to
of a Jewish person as more negative when the Holo- protect forests]. In Studies 3b and 3c, we introduced
caust is mentioned at the initial confrontation with this minor changes in the manipulations. Specifically, we
person. To test this hypothesis, we asked participants to reasoned that volunteer work in any religious group
form a first impression of a person that was either Jew- might be seen as a cue to morality or other positive
ish or Christian. In addition, we manipulated whether traits. In Studies 3b and 3c, religious affiliation was thus
the text about this person contained information about made salient without implying volunteer work: The sen-
the Holocaust or not. Participants then completed a re- tence containing the manipulation of group member-
verse-correlation image-classification task based on the ship was changed so that the target person was not ac-
memory they had of the target person’s face, which al- tive in a synagogue or church but had been asked
lowed us to visualize the remembered facial appearance whether he wanted to become active in his father’s syn-
of that person. We replicated this study twice (Studies agogue [vs. church]. Participants in the Holocaust con-
3b and 3c) with minor changes regarding the materials, dition read that the target person was involved in an
as explained below. organization demanding reparation payments for Holo-
caust survivors (whereas he was working for another
charity not related to the Holocaust in the other condi-

===== PAGE 11/22 =====
IN SEARCH OF EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE FOR SECONDARY ANTISEMITISM : A FILE DRAWER REPORT 11
tion). Contrary to Study 3a, the text contained no infor- the target face. We used a two-images, forced-choice
mation about any victims among his family members to variant of the reverse-correlation paradigm (e.g.,
eliminate potential effect of direct sympathy. In each of Dotsch et al., 2008; Imhoff et al., 2011), in which each
the three versions of Study 3, the text about the target participant completed 400 trials of selecting one of two
person was accompanied by a picture showing the face presented faces. In each of these trials, they selected the
of a young man. In Studies 3a and 3b, the face image face that they thought looked more like the target per-
was the neutral male face of the Averaged Karolinska son they had seen before (i.e., during the impression
Directed Emotional Faces database (Lundqvist & Litton, formation task). The stimuli used in the picture classifi-
1998), whereas we used a morph of sixteen emotionally cation task were all based on the face they had seen on
neutral faces in frontal view taken from the Radboud the page about the target person. To generate the stim-
Faces Database (Langner et al., 2010) in Study 3c. Both uli, this base image had been converted to grayscale and
images have been used in previous reverse-correlation superimposed with random noise resulting in random
research (e.g., Dotsch et al, 2008, and Imhoff et al., variations of the facial appearance between the stimuli
2013, respectively). (for noise generation, see Dotsch & Todorov, 2011).
Central Dependent Variable: Reverse-Correlation Every trial employed a different noise pattern display-
Image-Classification Task. We relied on reverse correla- ing the original pattern on the left and the negative of
tions to assess whether participants’ memory of a per- that pattern on the right side of the screen. Participants
son’s face is biased by information on that person’s selected pictures by pressing a left or right button on
group membership and mention of the Holocaust. Re- the keyboard.
verse correlation is a data-driven approach that enables By averaging all noise patterns participants had se-
researchers to visualize an idealized decision criterion. lected separately for each experimental condition and
By tracking which kind of subtle (and random) altera- superimposing these classification patterns on the base
tions in the appearance of face correlates with a classi- image, we obtained a classification image for every con-
fication decision (e.g., which of two faces look more fe- dition (see Figure 4). Trials with a response time lower
male; Mangini & Biederman, 2004), one can estimate than 200ms were excluded before constructing the clas-
what a face that fulfills all criteria in an ideal way looks sification images (<5% of the trials). The resulting clas-
like (classification image). Beyond very basic decisions sification images visualized how participants in each of
(e.g., male vs. female), and more relevant to this study, the four experimental groups remembered the target
reverse-correlation techniques can be used to construct face on average. In addition to the classification images
images that reflect the expected or remembered facial aggregated on a group level, we also analyzed classifi-
appearance of a target person without making any a pri- cation images of individual participants in Studies 3b
ori assumptions about relevant features. and 3c in order to explore the possibility that derogation
Previous studies applied this approach to investigate of victims could occur on inter-individually different di-
biased expected facial appearance of out-group mem- mensions and hence be reflected in different facial fea-
bers (Dotsch, Wigboldus, Langner, & van Knippenberg, tures.
2008; Dotsch, Wigboldus, & van Knippenberg, 2013;
Imhoff & Dotsch, 2013; Imhoff, Dotsch, Bianchi, Banse, Holocaust Metioned Control
& Wigboldus, 2011) and previously encountered indi-
viduals (Karremans, Dotsch, & Corneille, 2011). For in-
stance, Karremans et al. (2011) found that people in-
volved in a romantic relationship held a less attractive
memory of an attractive alternative’s face than unin-
volved individuals. When asked to select a face that best
represents a typical member of a certain social group
(e.g., manager, nursery teacher), stereotypical beliefs
about these groups’ warmth as well as competence are
encoded in the face and can be decoded from the clas-
sification image by independent perceivers (Imhoff,
Woelki, Hanke, & Dotsch, 2013).
Image Creation. Subsequently, participants worked
through the reverse-correlation task, which allowed us
to obtain visualizations of the participants’ memories of
tegraT
hsiweJ

===== PAGE 12/22 =====
12
IMHOFF & MESSER
tegraT
naitsirhC
(4 items, e.g. “competent”, Cronbach’s α = .69; Fiske et
al., 2002) characterized the target person on a five-
point scale (1 = not at all to 5 = very much). In Studies
3b and 3c, we excluded the question asking participants
to describe the target person and replaced the warmth
and competence items with ten items assessing likabil-
ity of the target person (e.g., “How likable do you find
David S.?”), which also included five reverse-coded
Figure 4. Classification Image as a function of infor- items representing common negative stereotypes about
mation about the Holocaust (Holocaust is mentioned vs. Jews (e.g., “How stingy do you find David S.?”). These
control) and group membership of the target person ten items were combined into a single explicit likability
(Jewish vs. Christian) in Study 3a. scale, Cronbach’s α = .84 in Study 3b and .88 in Study
3c. Next, participants answered ten (in Studies 3b and
Image Rating. In the second phase of Study 3, the 3c, six) questions about the target person of which three
classification images created by every experimental served as a manipulation check and gave demographic
group in the first phase were rated on warmth information. Finally, they completed an antisemitism
(Cronbach’s α between .84 and .92) and competence questionnaire (only in Study 3a) consisting of 14 items
(Cronbach’s α between .72 and .90) by 56 independent taken from the scale used in Study 1 (Imhoff, 2010;
participants recruited via Amazon MechanicalTurk Cronbach’s α = .86).
(MTurk; 30 women and 26 men, age 18 to 75 years, M In Studies 3b and 3c, we included a word stem com-
= 38.57, SD = 14.59; Study 3b: N = 43, 20 women and pletion task to explore whether representations of the
23 men, age 20 to 66 years, M = 37.93, SD = 13.04; Holocaust were successfully activated in the Holocaust
Study 3c: N = 64, 40 women, and 23 men, one person condition. This task was administered after the warmth
did not indicate, age 18 to 71 years, M = 35.56, SD = and competence ratings and asked participants to com-
12.68). Five other participants were excluded because plete 30 word stems of which ten could be completed to
they indicated that they had answered randomly or pur- form a word related to the Holocaust (e.g., “Endl_____”
posely false, or that they would exclude their data if could be completed to “Endlösung” [final solution]).
they were the researcher (six exclusions in Study 3b and Answers on the ten critical items were coded as Holo-
four in Study 3c). The warmth and competence items caust-related or not by a single rater and aggregated to
were the same as in the first phase of the study. Re- a sum score. Furthermore, the Positive and Negative Af-
sponses were made using a five-point scale ranging fect Schedule (PANAS; Watson, Clark, & Tellegen,
from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree). Every 1988) was added in between the impression formation
rater in this second phase of the study rated each of the task and the reverse-correlation image-classification
four group-wise classification images. Accordingly, rat- task in Studies 3b and 3c for exploratory purposes.
ings were analyzed using within-subjects tests. The Materials and Procedure. Participants were seated
warmth ratings of the classification images constituted at a computer in individual cubicles and were randomly
the main dependent variable. The individual classifica- assigned to one of four experimental conditions follow-
tion images from the first phases of Studies 3b and 3c ing a 2 (group membership of the target person: Jewish
were rated by independent participants by indicating vs. Christian) × 2 (Holocaust is mentioned vs. control
“how likable” they found each of the persons. Partici- information) design. Secondary antisemitism, we rea-
pants were paid 25 cents in Study 3a and 50 cents in soned, would be exhibited in a face that independent
Studies 3b and 3c. others would perceive as less warm if the person was
Additional measures. After completing the reverse- introduced as Jewish and the Holocaust was mentioned.
correlation task, participants were probed for suspicion
Results
using a funneled debriefing procedure (cf. Chartrand &
Bargh, 1996) and were then asked to indicate their first
Based on the idea of secondary antisemitism, we ex-
impression of the target person by a) describing the per-
pected the classification images created by participants
son in their own words and b) rating the person’s
who were both presented with a Jewish target person
warmth and competence. For the warmth and compe-
and reminded of the Holocaust to be rated as less warm
tence ratings, participants indicated to what extent each
or likable than those from the other conditions. Warmth
of 20 adjectives representing warmth (5 items, e.g.
ratings of the group-wise classification images were
“good-natured”, Cronbach’s α = .82) and competence

===== PAGE 13/22 =====
IN SEARCH OF EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE FOR SECONDARY ANTISEMITISM : A FILE DRAWER REPORT 13
subjected to a 2 (group membership of the target per- speculation as to whether the chosen measure is indeed
son: Jewish vs. Christian) × 2 (Holocaust is mentioned immune to social desirability concerns. Although it is
vs. control information) repeated measures ANOVA. not explicitly an evaluation task, participants are of
Contrary to the hypothesis, in Studies 3a and 3b results course free to take all the time they need to select im-
did not show a significant interaction effect, F(1, 55) = ages according to whatever impression they want to
0.03, p = .872, η 2 = .00, and F(1, 42) = 0.02, p = convey of themselves (e.g., as particularly unpreju-
p
.897, η 2 = .00, respectively. In Study 3c, a significant diced). It may thus be that the measure taps into partic-
p
interaction effect emerged, F(1, 63) = 10.06, p = .002, ipants’ very explicit and elaborate evaluation as much
η 2 = .14. However, the pattern of means was in con- as typical prejudice scales do. The unexpected effect
p
trast to expectations, as the classification image from (somewhat reminiscent of the pattern in the no bogus
the Jewish condition was rated as warmer when partic- pipeline condition in the original paper) is compatible
ipants were reminded of the Holocaust (vs. control in- with this interpretation, but the lack of any effect in the
formation). following studies does not corroborate this speculation.
For the analysis of individual classification images, At present, there is no consistent effect (in any direc-
likability ratings were averaged across raters yielding a tion) of making the atrocities of the Holocaust salient.
mean likability rating for every individual classification As perhaps a side effect rather than the focus of the
image. The likability scores were then submitted to a 2 current interest, we also were not able to produce con-
(group membership of the target person: Jewish vs. sistent effects on what we perceived as a simple manip-
Christian) × 2 (Holocaust is mentioned vs. control in- ulation check: a word stem completion task. The logic
formation) between subjects ANOVA. Neither for Study was that making the history of the Holocaust salient
3b nor for Study 3c the ANOVAs revealed any differ- should increase participants’ tendency to complete am-
ences between experimental conditions, test of interac- biguous word stems in a semantically consistent way.
tion effects, F(1,90) = 0.03, p = .871, η 2 = .00 and Such tasks are highly popular instruments in the field of
p
F(1,85) = 0.16, p = .693, η 2 = .00, respectively. social cognition to tap into the semantic accessibility of
p
In addition to the primary analyses looking at the certain constructs (or concept activation). While our
classification images reported above, we explored the failure to find any effect in such measures may raise
explicit ratings of the target person’s warmth (Study 3a) doubts about their validity, it should be noted that the
and likability (Studies 3b and 3c). Between-subjects employed task was constructed ad hoc without proper
ANOVAs did not yield an interaction effect in any of the pilot testing of base rates of word completion tenden-
studies, F(1, 57) = 0.02, p = .879, η 2 = .00 in Study cies. In our own lab, we have gathered experiences with
p
3a, F(1, 90) = 2.97, p = .088, η 2 = .03 in Study 3b, such tasks in other domains (i.e., to what extent pic-
p
and F(1, 85) = 0.38, p = .537, η 2 = .00 in Study 3c. tures of or real pregnant women make baby-related
p
To explore whether representations of the Holocaust word completions more likely) with more success (Mar-
were activated to a higher degree in the conditions men- henke & Imhoff, 2018). We would thus caution against
tioning the Holocaust than in the control conditions, we throwing the baby out with the bath water based on the
compared the number of Holocaust-related answers in failure presented here. At the same time, we caution
the word stem completion task. In contrast to our ex- that it is bad practice how naïvely we and other col-
pectations, the sum of Holocaust-related answers was leagues construct such measures ad hoc and interpreted
not significantly higher in the Holocaust conditions (M them as valid as long as they produced the desired ef-
= 2.22, SD = 1.74 in Study 3b and M = 1.58, SD = fects, but discard them as unreliable and invalid if they
1.18 in Study 3c) than in the control conditions (M = do not.
1.66, SD = 1.58 and M = 1.43, SD = 1.17), t(92) = Another reason for the failure to replicate the effect
1.63, p = .108, Hedges’s g = 0.33, 95% CI [-0.08, 0.74] could be the population we sampled from in Studies 1-
s
and t(87) = 0.59, p = .559, Hedges’s g = 0.12, 95% CI 3. Most were student samples from the University of Co-
s
[-0.29, 0.54], respectively. logne, more specifically the School of Humanities with
a specialization in special needs education. Students
Discussion from this school have a reputation to be particularly lib-
eral (and their average self-reported political orienta-
Studies 3a to 3c failed to provide any evidence for
tion was left of the scale midpoint in both Studies 1 and
the notion that making the Holocaust salient increases
2), whereas students in the original study were psychol-
participants’ need to derogate the victim group. If any-
ogy students who do not necessarily have the same rep-
thing, the effect was in the opposite direction in one
utation. To increase our chances of finding support for
study, but not reliably in the other studies. This invites

===== PAGE 14/22 =====
14
IMHOFF & MESSER
the mechanism of secondary antisemitism, we thus keep these participants in the sample. The results re-
changed the research setting to a less restricted sample ported below do not change when these participants are
that might not have egalitarian norms to the same ex- excluded. Participants received no compensation.
tent. We thus conducted two studies in the city center In Study 4b, participants scored higher on national
of Cologne with pedestrians from the general popula- glorification (M = 2.32, SD = 1.22) than our student
tion as participants. sample in Study 1 (M = 1.72, SD = 0.88), t(276) =
4.02, p < .001, Hedges’s g = 0.52, 95% CI [0.26, 0.79]
s
using the same three items. Although, a mean of 2.32 is
Studies 4a and 4b
still relatively low on a seven-point scale, our goal to
acquire a less liberal sample was achieved.
To include more politically diverse participants, we
Materials and Procedure. The study was conducted
recruited individuals walking in front of the main sta-
in summer 2014 during the 2014 Israel-Gaza conflict.
tion in Cologne, Germany, to fill in a “short survey on
Participants were approached by the experimenter and
opinions on violent conflicts”. Instead of open antise-
asked to participate in a “short survey on opinions on
mitic expressions, we used agreement to criticism of Is-
wars and violent conflicts” (in Study 4b, “on the Israeli-
rael as a dependent variable. We assumed that criticism
Palestinian conflict”). They were then handed a two-
of Israel would be perceived as less taboo and thus be
page paper-and-pencil questionnaire and were ran-
reported openly in a questionnaire so that we would not
domly assigned to one of two experimental conditions
need a bogus pipeline setup. This approach was built on
in which they were either reminded of the Holocaust or
the notion that not only are anti-Israeli sentiment and
not. The manipulation of being reminded of the Holo-
antisemitism highly correlated in Europe (Kaplan &
caust vs. a control condition was embedded in the in-
Small, 2006), but certain forms of criticism of Israeli
structions of the questionnaire. In Study 4a, participants
politics are construed as a substitute communication.
in the Holocaust condition read that “70 years have
Demonizing Israel is socially more accepted than de-
passed since the monstrous German crime, the Holo-
monizing Jews (Steinberg, 2004), but – in the context
caust. Within 4 years, the Germans systematically killed
of secondary antisemitism – serves the same purpose:
6 million Jews in extermination camps like Auschwitz.”
By portraying the (Jewish) state of Israel as ruthless
In the control condition, that first part of the instruc-
perpetrator of human right violations, the (German)
tions read, “History of humanity is a sequence of wars”
crimes against Jews become less salient (i.e., victim-per-
making no reference to the Holocaust. Participants then
petrator reversal; Imhoff, 2010). In line with the hy-
indicated their agreement to 13 statements criticizing
pothesis of secondary antisemitism, we expected partic-
Israel (Cronbach’s α = .77), which had been taken from
ipants to show higher agreement (relative to a control
the existing literature (e.g., “Israel is a state that stops
condition) to statements criticizing Israel after being re-
at nothing”; Kempf, 2014). To make the cover story (a
minded of the Holocaust. This effect might be greater
survey on wars and violent conflicts) more credible, the
for individuals high in national glorification.
questionnaire also included ten items on two other
wars, five on the war in Ukraine and five on the war in
Method
Syria, which were not analyzed.
Participants. One hundred passers-by approached In Study 4b, we included a more detailed description
in front of the main station of Cologne, Germany, par- of the Holocaust in the Holocaust condition emphasiz-
ticipated in Study 4a (57 women and 43 men). Partici- ing that a) most Germans from all parts of German so-
pants ranged from 17 to 76 years in age (M = 33.87, ciety participated in the genocide or willfully ignored
SD = 14.59). For Study 4b we recruited 196 passers-by the crimes and that b) Jews are still suffering today as
(119 women, 73 men, four did not indicate their gen- a result of the Holocaust. Besides the text, the Holocaust
der) ranging from 14 to 63 in age (M = 27.55, SD = condition included a picture showing corpses of prison-
12.03). Another four participants were excluded before ers of the Buchenwald concentration camp. The infor-
running the analyses because of missing responses on mation about the Holocaust was introduced by referring
more than 50% of the items of the main dependent var- to the public discussion in Germany about the role of
iable. In both studies, we included an attention check the Nazi past for the contemporary relations to Israel.
by asking participants in the last sentence of the instruc- The control condition in Study 4b was a baseline meas-
tion to write an X on the page margin. As a very high ure that simply asked participants to report their opin-
proportion of participants failed this attention check ion on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. The main depend-
(45% in Study 4a and 27% in Study 4b), we decided to ent variable, criticism of Israel, was assessed using an

===== PAGE 15/22 =====
IN SEARCH OF EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE FOR SECONDARY ANTISEMITISM : A FILE DRAWER REPORT 15
18-item scale (as compared to 13 items in Study 4a; fronted with statements criticizing Israel in a question-
Cronbach’s α = .84). This scale comprised the same 13 naire, Germans retrieve learned answers, leaving little
items that had been used in Study 4a and five more room for situational influences. However, emotional re-
items that were newly created on the basis of actual actions and behavior towards individual persons might
comments on the 2014 Israel-Gaza conflict from the me- be elicited more spontaneously and thus be more re-
dia (e.g., “The war that Israel initiated against Gaza is sponsive to situational influences. Therefore we turned
completely unjustifiable. It is a crime, whether from the away from antisemitism and investigated a more subtle
air or on the ground.”) reaction in the area of intergroup-emotions and inter-
To test whether Holocaust reminders increase criti- group-behavior: Does reminding Germans of the Holo-
cism of Israel especially among Germans who glorify caust result in decreased empathy and support towards
their national group, we included three of the items by Israeli victims of rocket attacks? Again, we also aimed
Roccas et al. (2008) on national glorification in Study at testing whether this presumably defensive reaction is
4b (Cronbach’s α = .62). In Study 4b, we also included dependent on the level of national glorification.
five items from the antisemitism scale (Imhoff, 2010),
four items on group-based shame, three items on na- Method
tional attachment, and, for exploratory purposes, an
Participants. Ninety-eight students (53 women and
open-ended question on participants’ understanding of
45 men) of different fields of study from the University
German identity.
of Cologne, Germany, participated in exchange for a bar
of chocolate and the opportunity to win 50 EUR in a
Results
raffle. Participants ranged from 17 to 56 years in age (M
Neither Study 4a nor Study 4b provided evidence for = 22.97, SD = 5.68). Another two participants dropped
an increase in criticism of Israel as a reaction to being out during the experiment and were deleted from the
reminded of the Holocaust, t(98) = -0.29, p = .776, data set.
Hedges’s g = -0.06, 95% CI [-0.45, 0.33] and t(194) = Materials and Procedure. Participants were seated
s
0.14, p = .890, Hedges’s g = 0.02, 95% CI [-0.26, at computers in individual cubicles and were randomly
s
0.30], respectively. Participants who read about the assigned to one of two experimental conditions (Holo-
Holocaust did not criticize Israel more (Study 4a: M = caust reminder vs. control). After reading the instruc-
3.02, SD = 0.72; Study 4b: M = 3.78, SD = 0.85) than tions in which they were informed that the study was
those in the control condition (Study 4a: M = 3.06, SD about German perceptions of Israel, participants started
= 0.91; Study 4b: M = 3.76, SD = 0.88). This result by reporting their age, gender, educational status, citi-
also held for participants high in national glorification zenship, and whether their family had a history of mi-
as revealed by a hierarchical multiple regression analy- gration. Next, they were either reminded of the Holo-
sis. In a first step, the effect-coded group variable (Hol- caust or not. In the Holocaust reminder condition, par-
ocaust = 1; control = -1), attachment to Germany, and ticipants read the same text that already had been used
glorification of Germany were entered as predictors of in Study 4b. The control condition was a baseline con-
criticism of Israel, followed by three product terms rep- dition in which participants were simply told that “we
resenting all possible two-way interactions between the are interested in your perception of different aspects of
predictor variables in a second step, and the three-way Israel.” Subsequently, participants were presented with
interaction in a third step. The interaction between ex- a short (47s) television news video about the Gaza-
perimental condition and glorification of Germany did based rocket attacks on a village in Israel. After presen-
not significantly predict criticism of Israel in the full tation of the video, empathy towards the Israeli victims
model, β = .05, t(187) = 0.60, p = .550. was assessed using six adjectives from the empathy lit-
erature (e.g., “compassionate”; Cronbach’s α = .73;
Batson, Fultz, & Schoenrade, 1987). Using a seven-
Study 5
point scale (1 = not at all to 7 = extremely), partici-
pants indicated for each of the items to what extent they
In Study 4, we tried to assess antisemitism in a less
had felt the given emotion while watching the video
blatant form, harsh criticism of Israel. In Study 5, we
about the situation of the Israeli victims. The empathy
accounted for the possibility that Germans might be
items were presented among ten filler items – eight dis-
equally sensitized to criticism of Israel as to open anti-
tress adjectives (e.g., “worried”) and two guilt adjec-
semitic statements. It might be the case that when con-
tives (e.g., “guilty”) for exploratory purposes.

===== PAGE 16/22 =====
16
IMHOFF & MESSER
In order to increase credibility of the cover story that scores did not significantly differ between participants
the study was about German perceptions of different as- who were reminded of the Holocaust (M = 4.03, SD =
pects of Israel, participants were presented with an- 1.07) and those in the control group (M = 3.72, SD =
other short video, which was a report about young Is- 0.94), t(96) = -1.53, p = .129, Hedges’s g = -0.31, 95%
s
raelis protesting against housing shortage and high rent CI[-0.70, 0.09]. Likewise, results revealed no significant
prices, and indicated their agreement to six statements group difference in the amounts participants pledged to
about the social protests (e.g., “I can easily identify with donate in support of the Israeli victims (Holocaust re-
the requests of the protesters.”). Subsequently, partici- minder: M = 18.48, SD = 13.41; control: M = 21.52,
pants answered the eight-item national attachment SD = 15.26), t(46) = 0.74, p = .466, Hedges’s g = -
s
(Cronbach’s α = .86) and the eight-item national glori- 0.21, 95% CI[-0.78, 0.36]. To test whether level of na-
fication scale (Cronbach’s α = .79). Finally, they were tional glorification moderated the hypothesized effect
presented with a screen saying that the study was over of Holocaust reminders on empathy, we conducted a hi-
and that they could participate in a raffle offering the erarchical multiple regression analysis with the effect-
opportunity to win 50 EUR. Participation in the raffle coded group variable (Holocaust = 1; control = -1), at-
included a measure of financial support of the Israeli tachment to Germany, glorification of Germany, and all
victims as a second dependent variable (in addition to possible two-way and three-way interaction terms as
empathy). Participants were invited to pledge to donate predictors. In contrast to our hypothesis, the product
a portion of their choice of these 50 EUR (between 0 term representing the interaction between glorification
and 50 EUR) to an organization supporting the Israeli of Germany and experimental condition did not signifi-
victims in case of them winning the raffle. The text in- cantly predict empathy in the full regression model, β
cluded a description of the charity organization. = -.20, t(90) = -1.29, p = .200.
Results
Empathy scores and donation pledge amounts were
subjected to independent samples t-tests. Empathy
Table 1
Means, t-tests, and effect sizes for simple effects that would indicate secondary antisemitism across all studies.
Study Hedges’s g
N M (SD) M (SD) t df p SE
Measure [95% CI] g
Study 1 Ongoing No ongoing Ongoing conse- No ongoing
Change in explicit conse- consequences quences consequences 0.44 42 .666 0.13 0.30
antisemitism quences 22 0.11 (0.90) -0.00 (0.78) [-0.45, 0.71]
22
Study 2 Bogus Pipe- Control Bogus Pipeline Control
Change in explicit line 23 -0.47 (0.58) -0.41 (0.87) -0.27 42 .791 -0.08 0.30
antisemitism 21 [-0.66, 0.50]
Study 3a Jewish/Holo- Jewish/con-
Warmth ratings of 56 caust trol 2.89 55 .006 0.54 0.20
Classification Im- 3.02 (0.84) 3.51 (0.96) [0.15, 0.93]
ages
Study 3b Jewish/Holo- Jewish/con-
Warmth ratings of 43 caust trol 1.11 42 .272 0.17 0.16
Classification Im- 3.00 (0.89) 3.16 (0.86) [-0.14, 0.48]
ages
Study 3c Jewish/Holo- Jewish/con-
Warmth ratings of 64 caust trol -4.49 63 < -0.60 0.15
Classification Im- 3.10 (0.84) 2.61 (0.78) .001 [-0.88, -
ages 0.31]
Study 4a Holocaust Control Holocaust Control
Criticism of Israel 50 50 3.02 (0.72) 3.06 (0.91) -0.29 98 .776 -0.06 0.20
[-0.45, 0.33]

===== PAGE 17/22 =====
IN SEARCH OF EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE FOR SECONDARY ANTISEMITISM : A FILE DRAWER REPORT 17
Study 4b Holocaust Control Holocaust Control
Criticism of Israel 100 96 3.78 (0.85) 3.76 (0.88) 0.14 194 .890 0.02 0.14
[-0.26, 0.30]
Study 5 Holocaust Control Holocaust Control
Empathy towards 50 48 3.72 (0.94) 4.03 (1.07) -1.53 96 .129 -0.31 0.20
Israeli victims of [-0.70, 0.09]
rocket attacks
Note: The effect size measure used in Studies 1, 2, 4a, 4b, and 5 is Hedges’s gs. In Studies 3a through 3c, we used Hedges’s gav for the differ-
ence of two correlated measurements as recommended by Lakens (2013).
Discussion
General Discussion
Study 5 did not provide evidence for the notion that
being reminded of the Holocaust makes Germans (who Across a research program spanning two years and
score high on national glorification) less empathic with eight studies, we did not provide evidence for the no-
Israeli victims of Palestinian rocket attacks. We thus, tion that reminders of the Holocaust evoke negative re-
again, failed to observe data patterns in line with sec- sponses towards Jews among German participants.
ondary antisemitism. Although the study did not have None of the studies had particularly strong statistical
particularly high statistical power according to current power and none were
standards, the effect on empathy was – if anything – in
the unexpected direction (Hedges’s g of 0.31).
Meta-analysis across studies
Before discussing the findings, we want to integrate
them to give an overall feeling for the obtained evidence
or lack thereof. To do so, we calculated simple effects
for each study that would indicate secondary antisemi-
tism (Table 1). Although we predicted interactions for
the first three studies, we decided to select simple com-
parisons instead of effect sizes of interaction terms, be-
cause simple comparisons are more informative regard-
Figure 5. Forest plot of all studies reported in the man-
ing the direction of effects. For Studies 1 and 3 (that
uscript. Simple effects are coded so that positive effects
have a 2x2 design), we focused on the comparison be-
speak to the hypothesis of secondary antisemitism.
tween conditions with reminders of either ongoing suf-
fering or the Holocaust and conditions with these on the
a direct replication in exact detail. Nevertheless, their
evaluation of Jewish targets. For Study 2, each condi-
consistency in not producing any result has shaken our
tion included an ongoing suffering manipulation and
confidence in the very basic effect. In light of this, the
thus we compared the degree of (baseline-corrected)
original goal to better understand the involved pro-
antisemitism in the bogus pipeline condition to that in
cesses has lost some of its relevance.
the control condition. We calculated Hedges’s g, respec-
s As a caveat, although all of the studies reported here
tively g (see Lakens, 2013), for each of the studies and
av were conducted after the current debate on how to
conducted a random-effects model using the R metafor
achieve more reproducible and reliable science had al-
package (Viechtbauer, 2010). The data show substan-
ready taken off in 2011, the spirit behind this research
tial heterogeneity, Q(7) = 27.14, p = < .001, I2 =
program is still rooted in the “old way” of doing re-
72.26%, and meta-analytically again no evidence for
search. What we did (without success) was hunt down
any secondary antisemitism (Figure 5). Given the large
an effect, desperately seeking a way to “make it signifi-
heterogeneity, an average effect size of almost exactly
cant”. What we did not do is systematically plan for
zero may be taken as an indication that – despite under-
compelling evidence – in either direction. In hindsight,
powered studies – it was not just too small of samples
many steps and detours we made may seem premature
that prevented us from replicating the effect.
and a single extremely high-powered study might have

===== PAGE 18/22 =====
18
IMHOFF & MESSER
been more advisable. That was not the typical proce- ity, we would argue that the several other steps we un-
dure for conducting social psychological science in our dertook to reduce social desirability should then have
book. Instead, if the effect was not there, the researcher produced at least a suggestive pattern in line with the
had the wrong method to show it and therefore needed hypothesis.
to change that method. Independent of how we might Another counter point to that argument might rest
have obtained more compelling evidence in either di- on the observation that psychologists tend to overesti-
rection, all our studies consistently converged in not mate the power of social desirability, as most people are
producing results in line with a very influential theory quite confident in the validity of their beliefs and do not
of post-Holocaust antisemitism. adapt them according to what they think they ought to
What can we now make of this pattern? Does it think and feel instead. In that case bogus pipelines
mean that the original study (Imhoff & Banse, 2009) would fail to produce effects not because they are not
was a false positive? Although virtually everything in working, but because there is no hidden “real” belief to
that original study fell exactly in its place, luck might be revealed: People already speak frankly without such
have played a trick on us and convinced us of something an apparatus. This would, however, mean that ongoing
that was never there to begin with (despite a plethora victim suffering did not increase our participants’ prej-
of qualitative writings and discourse analyses along the udice. If it had, it should have produced a main effect
same lines). In light of the present research, we would independent of the bogus pipeline manipulation (not an
argue that this is very well possible. Assuming that the interaction by the – in this logic – obsolete bogus pipe-
original study was indeed a false positive might mean line), which we never observed. The lack of effect in
that either the very idea of secondary antisemitism is subsequent studies while maintaining the speculation
wrong or – as a more modest interpretation – that psy- that the original effect was a true positive is addressed
chologists’ illusions of omnipotence to translate a socie- by a second potential explanation.
tal discourse and its dynamics into a pretty, 30-minute The second explanation is a little more difficult to
experiment are ill-advised. Maybe scholarly interpreta- argue with and in fact a reoccurring argument in the
tions of the effect of continuous Holocaust reminders replication debate. Heraclitus’ dictum that you cannot
are indeed to the point but it is naïve to emulate this in step into the same river twice, as it is not the same river
a cute little study. and you are not the same person, served as an encapsu-
While we can only emphasize again that we are lation of the notion that the objectively same thing is
more than open to this possibility, we would – for the not the same as time has passed. Meanings change and
sake of the argument – like to entertain alternative ex- persons change and potentially the effect we sought is
planations. Under the (admittedly speculative) assump- subject to Zeitgeist effects to a much greater extent than
tion that the original study was a true positive, how we anticipated. In fact, many effects, particularly in so-
could we explain the absence of any effect in that direc- cial psychology, may be more prone to changing times
tion in all studies reported here? and norms than most of us are typically willing to con-
One of the most parsimonious (and potentially cede. The year 2007 not only was the year in which our
cheap) explanations could rest on the assertion that – original study took place, but also the year in which the
for whatever reasons – the bogus pipeline procedure last public negotiation between the Jewish Claims Con-
just never worked as nicely as it did in 2007. As the ference Against Germany with the German federal gov-
original study attested, however, this is crucial to find ernment came to an agreement. This was a publicly fol-
the diverging effects of Holocaust reminders. The dilu- lowed event and for many Germans Martin Walser’s
tion of psychological research and knowledge about the (1998) infamous speech, in which he conceded that “I
(missing) validity of “lie detectors” might have made it am almost glad when I think I can discover that more
increasingly difficult to convince people of the operat- often not the remembrance, the not-allowed-to-forget is
ing principle of the bogus pipeline. In fact, lie detectors the motive, but the exploitation of our shame for cur-
are debunked on a regular base not only in undergrad- rent goals” still resonated. Very possibly, much like
uate psychology classes but also popular media outlets. studies on prejudices against African Americans from
If that was true, the psychological processes of second- the 1970s would not necessarily replicate in the 1980s
ary antisemitism indeed happened within our partici- and much less today, maybe also here the discursive
pants as they did in 2007, but our setup was not potent context changed and thus made the seemingly highly
enough to make participants admit antisemitism. Alt- similar experimental situation a psychologically very
hough we have no direct evidence against this plausibil- different one.

===== PAGE 19/22 =====
IN SEARCH OF EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE FOR SECONDARY ANTISEMITISM : A FILE DRAWER REPORT 19
This is a specific case of Gergen’s (1973) more gen- Open Science Practices
eral argument that psychology is primarily a historical
inquiry as it “deals with facts that are largely nonrepeat-
able and which fluctuate markedly over time” (p. 310).
If indeed empirical studies are then mere manifestations
of a historically situated effect that neither does nor
should be expected to be diachronically robust, what is
This article earned the Open Data and the Open Ma-
the use of doing such studies? First, (obviously always
terials badge for making the data and materials availa-
under the premise that the original finding was no false
ble. It has been verified that the analysis reproduced the
positive) it illustrates this historically situated principle.
results presented in the article. The entire editorial pro-
It might be of interest (admittedly primarily for histori-
cess, including the open reviews, are published in the
cal reasons) that in the early 21st century a markedly
online supplement.
negative reaction towards Jewish suffering was observ-
able among German students. Second, and potentially
more interesting, the original study might illustrate a
general principle and a methodological approach to it
References
rather than establish a human constant. The principle
may be that the emphasis on victim suffering can back-
fire if respondents are liberated from social desirability Adorno, T. W. (1975). Schuld und Abwehr. In T. W.
concerns. The method might thus provide a potential Adorno, Gesammelte Schriften, Band 9
blueprint of how to tackle such research questions. Soziologische Schriften II.2 (pp. 121-326).
Is this enough for a field of science that so desper- Frankfurt: Suhrkamp.
ately seeks to be as hard a science as the physical sci- Banse, R., & Gawronski, B. (2003). Die Skala
ences in which “stable and broad generalizations can be Motivation zu vorurteilsfreiem Verhalten:
established with a high degree of confidence” (Gergen, Psychometrische Eigenschaften und Validität.
1971, p. 309) and thus allow explanations that can be Diagnostica, 49, 4-13.
empirically tested? Does such an understanding of sci- Batson, C. D., Fultz, J., & Schoenrade, P. A. (1987).
ence have a place in the replication era? One positive Distress and empathy: Two qualitatively distinct
aspect of the new way of doing psychology is that vicarious emotions with different motivational
(hopefully), unlike in the present case, original studies consequences. Journal of Personality, 55, 19-39.
will have been pre-registered and (internally) repli- Bergmann, W. (2006). “Nicht immer als Tätervolk
cated before publication. The likelihood that these re- dastehen” - Zum Phänomen des Schuldabwehr-
sults were true positives is much higher than in the cur- Antisemitismus in Deutschland In D. Ansorge
rent case of a single underpowered study. Failure to rep- (Ed.), Antisemitismus in Europa und in der
licate in a different time, location, and/or context might arabischen Welt (pp. 81-106). Paderborn-
thus inform our theorizing about the situatedness of the Frankfurt: Bonifatius Verlag.
effect at hand. Thus, pre-registration will not only in- Branscombe, N. R., Ellemers, N., Spears, R., & Doosje,
crease the trust in published findings, but also allow an B. (1999). The context and content of social
informative hint whether it is advised or futile to seek identity threat. In N. Ellemers, R. Spears, & B.
hidden moderators. Doosje (Eds.), Social identity: Context,
In summary, we repeatedly failed to conceptually commitment, content (pp. 35-58). Oxford,
replicate one of our findings across a relatively large England: Blackwell Science.
number of studies, with different methodological ap- Branscombe, N. R., Schmitt, M. T., & Schiffhauer, K.
proaches. Thus, the claim that confrontation with the (2007). Racial attitudes in response to thoughts
Holocaust evokes a backlash of antisemitism among of White privilege. European Journal of Social
Germans is not empirically well supported. Either the Psychology, 37, 203-215.
initial finding was a false positive or this process needs Buruma, I. (2003, August). How to talk about Israel.
to be specifically situated in a given time and context. New York Times, Section 6, p. 28.
Castano, E., & Giner-Sorolla, R. (2006). Not quite
human: Infrahumanization in response to
collective responsibility for intergroup killing.

===== PAGE 20/22 =====
20
IMHOFF & MESSER
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 90, Gergen, K. J. (1973). Social psychology as history.
804-818. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 26,
Chartrand, T. L., & Bargh, J. A. (1996). Automatic 309-320.
activation of impression formation and Godfrey, B. W., & Lowe, C. A. (1975). Devaluation of
memorization goals: Nonconscious goal priming innocent victims: An attribution analysis within
reproduces effects of explicit task instructions. the just world paradigm. Journal of Personality
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 71, and Social Psychology, 31, 944-951.
464-478. Golec de Zavala, A., Cichocka, A., Eidelson, R., &
Cohen, T. R., Wolf, S. T., Panter, A. T., & Insko, C. A. Jayawickreme, N. (2009). Collective narcissism
(2011). Introducing the GASP scale: a new and its social consequences. Journal of Personality
measure of guilt and shame proneness. Journal of and Social Psychology, 97, 1074-1096.
Personality and Social Psychology, 100, 947-966. Heider, F. (1958). The psychology of interpersonal
Correia, I., & Vala, J. (2003). When will a victim be relations. New York: Wiley.
secondarily victimized? The effect of observer’s Heitmeyer, W. (2005). Deutsche Zustände (Folge 3)
belief in a just world, victim’s innocence and [German circumstances (Vol. 3)]. Frankfurt:
persistence of suffering. Social Justice Research, Suhrkamp.
16, 379-400. Imhoff, R., & Banse, R. (2009). Ongoing victim
Dalbert, C. (1999). The world is more just for me than suffering increases prejudice: The case of
generally: About the personal belief in a just secondary anti-semitism. Psychological Science, 20,
world scale's validity. Social Justice Research, 12, 1443–1447.
79-98. Imhoff, R., & Bruder, M. (2014). Speaking (un-)truth
Dotsch, R. & Todorov, A. (2012). Reverse Correlating to power: Conspiracy mentality as a generalised
Social Face Perception. Social Psychological and political attitude. European Journal of Personality,
Personality Science, 3, 562-571. 28, 25–43.
Dotsch, R., Wigboldus, D. H. J., & van Knippenberg, A. Imhoff, R., & Dotsch, R. (2013). Do we look like me or
(2013). Behavioral information biases the like us? Visual projection as self- or ingroup-
expected facial appearance of members of novel projection. Social Cognition, 31, 806-816.
groups. European Journal of Social Psychology, 43, Imhoff, R. (2010). Zwei Formen des modernen
116-125. Antisemitismus? Eine Skala zur Messung
Dotsch, R., Wigboldus, D. H., Langner, O., & van primären und sekundären Antisemitismus.
Knippenberg, A. (2008). Ethnic out-group faces Conflict & communication online, 9.
are biased in the prejudiced mind. Psychological Imhoff, R., Bilewicz, M., & Erb, H. (2012). Collective
Science, 19, 978-980. regret versus collective guilt: Different emotional
Egloff, B. & Krohne, H. W. (1998). Die Messung von reactions to historical atrocities. European Journal
Vigilanz und kognitiver Vermeidung: of Social Psychology, 42, 729–742.
Untersuchungen mit dem Angstbewältigungs- Imhoff, R., Dotsch, R., Bianchi, M., Banse, R., &
Inventar (ABI). Diagnostica, 44, 189-200. Wigboldus, D. H. J. (2011). Facing Europe:
Fiske, S. T., Cuddy, A. J. C., Glick, P., & Xu, J. (2002). Visualizing spontaneous in-group projection.
A model of (often mixed) stereotype content: Psychological Science, 22, 1583-1590.
competence and warmth respectively follow from Imhoff, R., Woelki, J., Hanke, S., & Dotsch, R. (2013).
perceived status and competition. Journal of Warmth and competence in your face! Visual
Personality and Social Psychology, 82, 878-902. encoding of stereotype content. Frontiers in
Friedman, J. S., & Austin, W. (1978). Observers’ Psychology, 4, 386.
reactions to an innocent victim: Effect of Jost, J. T., & Hunyady, O. (2002). The psychology of
characterological information and degree of system justification and the palliative function of
suffering. Personality and Social Psychology ideology. European Review of Social Psychology,
Bulletin, 4, 569-574. 13, 111-153.
Funke, F. (2005). The dimensionality of right-wing Jost, J.T., Banaji, M.R., & Nosek, B.A. (2004). A
authoritarianism: Lessons from the dilemma decade of system justification theory:
between theory and measurement. Political Accumulated evidence of conscious and
Psychology, 26, 195-218. unconscious bolstering of the status quo. Political
Psychology, 25, 881–919.

===== PAGE 21/22 =====
IN SEARCH OF EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE FOR SECONDARY ANTISEMITISM : A FILE DRAWER REPORT 21
Kaplan, E. H., & Small, C. A. (2006). Anti-Israel version of the Big Five Inventory in English and
sentiment predicts anti-Semitism in Europe. German. Journal of Research in Personality, 41,
Journal of Conflict Resolution, 50, 548-561. 203-212.
Karremans, J. C., Dotsch, R.,& Corneille, O.(2011). Roccas, S., Klar, Y., & Liviatan, I. (2006). The paradox
Romantic relationship status biases memory of of group-based guilt: modes of national
faces of attractive opposite-sex others: Evidence identification, conflict vehemence, and reactions
from a reverse-correlation paradigm. Cognition, to the in-group's moral violations. Journal of
121, 422-426. Personality and Social Psychology, 91, 698-711.
Kempf, W. (2014). Anti-Semitism and criticism of Rüsch, N., Corrigan, P. W., Bohus, M., Jacob, G. A.,
Israel: Methodology and results of the ASCI Brueck, R., & Lieb, K. (2007). Measuring shame
survey. conflict & communication online, 14. and guilt by self-report questionnaires: A
Lakens, D. (2013). Calculating and reporting effect validation study. Psychiatry Research, 150, 313-
sizes to facilitate cumulative science: a practical 325.
primer for t-tests and ANOVAs. Frontiers in Schönbach, P. (1961). Reaktionen auf die
psychology, 4, 863 antisemitische Welle im Winter 1959/1960
Langner, O., Dotsch, R., Bijlstra, G., Wigboldus, D. H. [Reactions to the anti-Semitic wave in the winter
J., Hawk, S., & van Knippenberg, A.(2010). 1959/1960]. Frankfurt: Europäische
Presentation and validation of the Radboud Faces Verlagsanstalt.
Database. Cognition and Emotion, 24, 1377–1388. Selznick, G. J., & Steinberg, S. (1969). The tenacity of
Lerner, M. J., & Simmons, C. H. (1966). Observer's prejudice: Anti-Semitism in contemporary America.
reaction to the" innocent victim": Compassion or Oxford, England: Harper & Row.
rejection? Journal of Personality and Social Sigall, H., & Page, R. (1971). Current stereotypes: A
Psychology, 4, 203-210. little fading, a little faking. Journal of Personality
Lerner, M. J. (1980). Belief in the just world. New York: and Social Psychology, 18, 247-255.
Plenum Press. Simons, C. W., & Piliavin, J. A. (1972). Effect of
Lundqvist, D., Flykt, A., & Öhman, A. (1998). The deception on reactions to a victim. Journal of
Karolinska directed emotional faces (KDEF). CD Personality and Social Psychology, 21, 56-60.
ROM from Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Steinberg, G. (2004). Abusing the legacy of the
Psychology section, Karolinska Institutet, (1998). Holocaust: The role of NGOs in exploiting human
Mangini, M. & Biederman, I. (2004). Making the rights to demonize Israel. Jewish Political Studies
ineffable explicit: Estimating the information Review, 16, 59-72.
employed for face classifications. Cognitive Vala, J, Pereira, C. P., Eugênio, M., Lima, O., & Leyens,
Science, 28, 209–226. J. (2012). Intergroup Time Bias and Racialized
Marhenke, T., & Imhoff, R. (2018). Increased Social Relations. Personality and Social Psychology
accessibility of semantic concepts after (more or Bulletin, 38, 491-504.
less) subtle activation of related concepts: Support von Collani, G. (2002). Das Konstrukt der Sozialen
for the basic tenet of priming research. Dominanzorientierung als generalisierte
Unpublished manuscript. Einstellung: eine Replikation [The construct of
Miller, D. T. (1977). Altruism and threat to a belief in social dominance orientation as a generalized
a just world. Journal of Experimental Social attitude: A replication]. Zeitschrift für Politische
Psychology, 13, 113-124. Psychologie, 10, 263-282.
Payne, B. K., Cheng, C. M., Govorun, O., & Stewart, B. Walser, M. (1998). Erfahrungen beim Verfassen einer
D. (2005). An inkblot for attitudes: affect Sonntagsrede [Experiences while composing an
misattribution as implicit measurement. Journal oration]. In: Börsenverein des Deutschen
of Personality and Social Psychology, 89, 277-293. Buchhandels (Hg.): Friedenspreis des Deutschen
Quirin, M., Kazén, M., & Kuhl, J. (2009). When Buchhandels 1998 - Ansprachen aus Anlaß der
nonsense sounds happy or helpless: The Implicit Verleihung [Peace prize of the German booktrade
Positive and Negative Affect Test (IPANAT). 1998 – Speeches from the award ceremony].
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 97, Frankfurt/Main.
500-516. Watson, D., Clark, L. A., & Tellegen, A. (1988).
Rammstedt, B., & John, O. P. (2007). Measuring Development and validation of brief measures of
personality in one minute or less: A 10-item short positive and negative affect. The PANAS scales.

===== PAGE 22/22 =====
22
IMHOFF & MESSER
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 54,
1063-1070.
Weil, F. D. (1985). The variable effects of education
on liberal attitudes: A comparative historical
analysis of anti-Semitism using public opinion
survey data. American Sociological Review, 50,
458-474.