Articles
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-019-0762-8
Drivers are blamed more than their automated
cars when both make mistakes
Edmond Awad 1,2,9, Sydney Levine 1,3,4,9, Max Kleiman-Weiner 3,4, Sohan Dsouza1,
Joshua B. Tenenbaum3*, Azim Shariff5*, Jean-François Bonnefon 1,6* and Iyad Rahwan 1,7,8*
When an automated car harms someone, who is blamed by those who hear about it? Here we asked human participants to con-
sider hypothetical cases in which a pedestrian was killed by a car operated under shared control of a primary and a secondary
driver and to indicate how blame should be allocated. We find that when only one driver makes an error, that driver is blamed
more regardless of whether that driver is a machine or a human. However, when both drivers make errors in cases of human–
machine shared-control vehicles, the blame attributed to the machine is reduced. This finding portends a public under-reaction
to the malfunctioning artificial intelligence components of automated cars and therefore has a direct policy implication: allow-
ing the de facto standards for shared-control vehicles to be established in courts by the jury system could fail to properly regu-
late the safety of those vehicles; instead, a top-down scheme (through federal laws) may be called for.
E
very year, about 1.25 million people die worldwide in car an important one.) Accordingly, the uncertainty about the extent
crashes1. Laws concerning principles of negligence cur- of corporate liability for automated vehicle crashes may be slowing
rently adjudicate how responsibility and blame are assigned down automated vehicle adoption2 while people continue to die in
to the individuals who injure others in these harmful crashes. The car crashes each year. Clarifying how and when responsibility will
impending transition to fully automated cars promises a radical be attributed to manufacturers in automated car crashes will be a
shift in how blame and responsibility will be attributed in the cases first step in reducing this uncertainty and speeding the adoption of
where crashes do occur, but most agree that little or no blame will be automated, and eventually fully automated, vehicles.
attributed to the occupants in the car who will, by then, be entirely The second direct implication of this work will be to forecast how
removed from the decision-making loop2. However, before this a tort-based regulatory scheme (which is decided on the basis on
era of fully automated cars arrives, we are entering a delicate era of jury decisions) is likely to turn out. Put another way, understanding
shared control between humans and machines. how the public is likely to react to crashes that involve both a human
This new moment signals a departure from our current sys- and a machine driver will give us a hint as to what standards will be
tem—where individuals have full control over their vehicles and established if we let jury decisions shape them. If our work uncovers
thereby bear full responsibility for crashes (absent mitigating cir- systematic biases that are likely to impact juries and would impede
cumstances)—to a new system where blame and responsibility may the adoption of automated cars, then it may make sense for federal
be shared between a human and a machine driver. The spontane- regulations be put in place, which would pre-empt the tort system
ous reactions of people to crashes that occur when a human and from being the avenue for establishing standards for these cars.
machine share control of a vehicle have at least two direct industry- Already, automated vehicle crashes are in the public eye. In May
shaping implications. First, at present, little is known about how the 2016, the first deadly crash of a Tesla Autopilot car occurred and the
public is likely to respond to crashes that involve both human and occupant of the car was killed. In a news release, Tesla explained:
machine drivers. This uncertainty has concrete implications: manu- “Neither Autopilot nor the driver noticed the white side of the trac-
facturers price products to reflect the liability they expect to incur tor-trailer against a brightly lit sky, so the brake was not applied”3.
from the sale of those products. If manufacturers cannot assess the In March 2018, the first automated car crash that killed a pedestrian
scope of the liability they will incur from automated vehicles, that occurred. A pedestrian that was crossing the street went unnoticed
uncertainty will translate to substantially inflated prices of auto- by both the car and the back-up driver (Uber). A few seconds before
mated vehicles2. Moreover, the rate of the adoption of automated the crash, the car finally identified that it should be braking but
vehicles will be proportional to the cost to consumers in adopting failed to do so. The driver also braked too late to avoid the collision.
the new technology2. (The rate of the adoption of this technology In the fatal Tesla and Uber crashes, both the machine driver
is contingent on many other factors, including consumers’ under- and the human driver should have taken action and neither did.
standing of the relative risks and benefits of using the cars. We do The mistakes of both the machine and the human led to the crash.
not mean to state that uncertainty about the scope of liability for The National Highway Safety Traffic Administration carried out an
manufacturers is the only factor impacting adoption, just that it is investigation of the Tesla incident and did not find Tesla at fault
1Media Lab, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA. 2Department of Economics, University of Exeter Business School, Exeter,
UK. 3Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA. 4Department of Psychology, Harvard
University, Cambridge, MA, USA. 5Department of Psychology, University of British Columbia Vancouver, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. 6Toulouse
School of Economics (TSM-Research), Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, University of Toulouse Capitole, Toulouse, France. 7Centre for
Humans & Machines, Max-Planck Institute for Human Development, Berlin, Germany. 8Institute for Data, Systems and Society, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA. 9These authors contributed equally: Edmond Awad and Sydney Levine. *e-mail: jbt@mit.edu; shariffa@uci.edu;
jean-francois.bonnefon@tse-fr.eu; irahwan@mit.edu
NATuRE HuMAN BEHAvIOuR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTure HumaN BeHaviour
in the crash4. Likewise, Uber has been exonerated from criminal Driver(s) Real-world Bad Missed
charges after an investigation by a county prosecutor5. Notably, 1 2 implementation intervention intervention
press attention surrounding the Tesla incident was markedly skewed
towards blaming the human driver for the crash, with rumours H – Regular
quickly circulating that the driver had been watching a Harry Potter
movie6, though following further investigation it was discovered H H –
that there was no evidence grounding this claim7. Likewise, the fate
of the Uber back-up driver remains unknown5, with press attention H M Guardian
focusing on the distracted nature of the driver8.
The set of anecdotes around these two crashes begins to suggest
M H Autopilot
a troubling pattern, namely that humans might be blamed more
than their machine partners in certain kinds of automated vehicle
M M –
crashes. Was this pattern a fluke of the circumstances of the crash
and the press environment? Or does it reflect something psycho-
Fully
logically deeper that may colour our responses to human–machine M – automated
joint action and, in particular, when a human–machine pair jointly
controls a vehicle?
What we are currently witnessing is a gradual and multi-pronged Human decision Omission Best outcome
increase toward full automation, going through several steps of
shared control between user and vehicle, which may take decades Machine decision Commission Worst outcome
due to technical and regulatory issues as well as the attitudes of
consumers towards adoption9,10 (see Fig. 1). Some vehicles can take Fig. 1 | Actions or action sequences for the different car types considered.
control over the actions of a human driver (for example, Toyota’s Outline arrows indicate an action by a human (H) and solid arrows
Guardian) to perform emergency manoeuvres. Other vehicles may indicate an action by a machine (M). The top and bottom rows represent
do most of the driving, while requiring the user to constantly moni- sole-driver cars, while all others represent dual-driver cars. A red arrow
tor the situation and be ready to take control (for example, Tesla’s indicates a decision—whether action or inaction—that had the avoidable
Autopilot). Unless clear or explicitly mentioned, we use ‘human’ and death of a pedestrian as the outcome; a blue arrow indicates a decision
‘user’ interchangeably to refer to the person inside the car (being a that does not result in any deaths. For example, the H + M type (real-world
driver or a passenger), and we use ‘industry’ and ‘machine’ inter- implementation is the Guardian system) has a human main driver (1) and
changeably to refer to both company and car combined. a machine standby driver (2). A bad intervention then involves the human
Our central question is this: when an automated car crashes and staying on course (a non-lethal action, indicated by the outline of the
harms someone, how is blame and causal responsibility attributed straight, blue arrow) and the machine overriding that action, causing the
to the human and machine drivers by people who hear about the death of the pedestrian (solid, angled red arrow). A missed intervention
crash? In this article, we use vignettes in which a pedestrian was hit involves the human staying on course to kill the pedestrian (outline, straight
and killed by a car being operated under shared control of a primary red arrow) without intervention from the machine (solid, straight red arrow).
and a secondary driver, and ask our participants to evaluate the crash
on metrics of blame and causal responsibility. The cases we use are
hypothetical (insofar as respondents know that they did not actually
take place), but are not unrealistic as they were designed to contain In missed intervention cases, the primary driver has made an
the relevant elements of events that could actually occur. We consider incorrect decision to keep the car on course (rather than swerving),
a wide range of control regimes (see Fig. 1), but the two main cases of which would cause the car to hit and kill a pedestrian. The second-
interest are the instances of shared control where a human is the pri- ary driver then neglects to swerve out of the way of the pedestrian.
mary driver and the machine a secondary driver (human–machine) In these cases, the predictions for how participants will distribute
and where the machine is the primary driver and the human the sec- blame and causal responsibility are less clear because both drivers
ondary driver (machine–human). We consider a simplified space of make a mistake. As in the bad intervention cases, agent type (human
scenarios in which (1) the main driver makes the correct choice and or machine) may have an effect on blame and causal responsibility
the secondary driver incorrectly intervenes (bad intervention) and ratings. But, unlike with bad intervention cases, missed interven-
(2) the main driver makes an error and the secondary driver fails to tion cases introduce the possibility that driver role (primary or sec-
intervene (missed intervention). Both scenarios end in a crash. For ondary) may also impact judgements. It is possible that participants
comparison, we also include analogous scenarios involving a single may shift responsibility and blame either toward the agent who con-
human driver (a regular car) or a single machine driver (a fully auto- tributed the most to the outcome (primary driver) or to the agent
mated car) as well as two hypothetical two-driver cars (driven by two who had the last opportunity to act (secondary driver12–15). Under
humans or two machines). We ask participants to make evaluations some regimes—such as Toyota’s Guardian—the user does most of
of the human user and one representative of the machine, either the the driving but the decision to override (and thus to act last) per-
car itself or the company that designed the car. tains to the machine. Under others—such as Tesla’s Autopilot—the
In bad intervention cases (see Case description for details), machine does most of the driving but the decision to override per-
the primary driver (be it human or machine) has made a correct tains to the user.
decision to keep the car on course, which will avoid a pedestrian.
Following this, the secondary driver makes the decision to swerve Results
the car into the pedestrian. In these sorts of cases, we expect that All studies used hypothetical vignettes that describe a crash (see
the secondary driver (the only driver that makes a mistake) will Case description for details on car regimes and intervention types,
be blamed more than the first driver. What is less clear is whether and see Supplementary methods 1 for vignettes of Studies 1–5).
people will assign blame and causal responsibility differently if this
secondary driver is a human driver or a machine. Recent research Study 1. Study 1 compared four kinds of car with different regimes of
suggests that humans may be blamed more than robots for making control. Each car had a primary driver whose job it was to drive the
the same error in the same situations11. car, and a secondary driver whose job it was to monitor the actions of
NATuRE HuMAN BEHAvIOuR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTure HumaN BeHaviour Articles
Table 1 | Regression analysis of data collected in Studies 1–5 in the cases of bad intervention and missed intervention
Blame and causal responsibility
Bad intervention Missed intervention
Study 1 Study 2 Study 3 Study 1 Study 2 Study 3 Study 4 Study 5
Human 2.141 3.358 −1.508 16.942 17.493 3.567 10.745 2.594
(1.061) (1.574) (0.811) (1.148) (1.514) (0.852) (2.189) (0.860)
P = 0.044 P = 0.033 P = 0.063 P = 0.000 P = 0.000 P = 0.000 P = 0.000 P = 0.003
Mistake 64.293 57.559 11.917
(1.061) (1.574) (0.881)
P = 0.000 P = 0.000 P = 0.000
Last driver −1.822 −6.759 1.715 −0.073 1.355
(0.915) (1.514) (0.852) (2.189) (0.860)
P = 0.047 P = 0.000 P = 0.045 P = 0.974 P = 0.116
Constant 18.653 21.352 27.406 60.504 57.354 36.102 61.032 65.923
(0.916) (1.370) (1.171) (1.531) (1.878) (1.252) (1.911) (0.811)
P = 0.000 P = 0.000 P = 0.000 P = 0.000 P = 0.000 P = 0.000 P = 0.000 P = 0.000
Participant random Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
effects?
Question random Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes N/A N/A
effects?
n 786 382 389 786 382 389 375 2,000
Observations 3,144 1,528 3,112 3,144 1,528 3,112 750 4,000
Data from Studies 2 and 3 are limited to shared-control regimes in the table. ‘Human’ refers to the type of agent in question (that is, human as compared to the baseline, machine), ‘Mistake’ refers
to whether the decision was a mistake (that is, the decision would have resulted in losing a life or losing more lives in Study 3) and ‘Last driver’ refers to the driver role (that is, the driver assumes the
secondary role). All models include participant random effects and question (blame or causal responsibility) random effects, where applicable. Data were assumed to meet the requirements of the model.
N/A, not applicable.
the first driver and intervene when the first driver made an error. The The human–machine difference appears to be driven by a reduc-
car architectures of central interest were human primary–machine tion in the blame attributed to machines when there is a human in
secondary (human–machine) and machine primary–human sec- the loop. This is evident when comparing both the human–machine
ondary (machine–human). We also included human–human and and machine–human instances of shared control to the machine–
machine–machine architectures for comparison. This allowed us to machine scenario. Note that the behaviours in these scenarios are
see how blame was distributed in a dual-driver architecture when identical, but the extent to which a machine is blamed depends
there was no difference in driver type (human or machine) in each on whether it is sharing control with a human or operating both
of the driving roles (primary or secondary). the primary and secondary driver roles. When the machine is the
primary driver, it is held significantly less blameworthy when its
Bad interventions. In bad intervention cases, two predictors were secondary driver is a human (m = 57.2) compared to when the
1
entered into a regression with blame and causal responsibility ratings secondary driver is also the machine (m = 68), t(760.6) = −5.0,
2
as the outcome variable: (1) whether or not the driver made an error P < 0.0001, m − m = 10.8, 95% CI for m − m = 6.6–15 (all tests
2 1 2 1
and (2) driver type (human or machine). The main finding is that are two-tailed.) Similarly, when the machine is the secondary driver,
whether or not the driver made an error was a significant predictor it is held significantly less blameworthy when its primary driver is
of ratings (see Table 1, bad intervention, Study 1). In other words, a human (m = 53.4) compared to when the primary driver is also
1
unnecessary intervention by a driver leading to the death of a pedes- the machine (m = 68), t(722.77) = −6.6, P < 0.0001, m − m = 14.6,
2 2 1
trian was blamed more than a driver that operated on the correct 95% CI for m − m = 10.2–19.
2 1
course—regardless of whether the driver was a human or machine.
It is worth noting here that we did not detect a reliable effect of driver Study 2. Study 2 compared the human–machine and machine–
type (human versus machine), once correcting for multiple compar- human shared control cars to two different baseline cars: a stan-
isons (see Table 1, human, bad intervention, Study 1). We do not dard car exclusively driven by a human and a fully automated car
discuss this factor further in the bad intervention cases. exclusively driven by a machine. This allowed us to both replicate
the main results of Study 1 (the responses to machine–human and
Missed interventions. In missed intervention cases, blame and human–machine crashes) and determine how blame was assigned
responsibility judgements cannot depend on whether a driver differently to dual-driver cars as compared to sole-driver cars. The
made an error because both drivers make errors in these cases. industry representative was varied (car and company), but this
The main finding for these cases is that driver type—whether the exploratory variable was analysed neither in this study nor in sub-
driver is a human or machine—has a significant impact on ratings. sequent studies.
Specifically, in these shared-control scenarios where both human
and machine have made errors, the machine driver is consistently Bad interventions. We replicated the main results of Study 1: namely,
blamed less than the human driver (Table 1, missed intervention, in bad intervention cases for the shared-control cars (machine–
Study 1) and Fig. 2). human and human–machine), whether or not the driver made an
NATuRE HuMAN BEHAvIOuR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTure HumaN BeHaviour
error was a significant predictor of ratings (Table 1, bad interven- blaming the machine in the shared control cases to blaming it in the
tion, Study 2 and Fig. 2). fully automated car (driven by a sole machine driver). In each case,
blaming the machine in the shared control case is significantly lower
Missed interventions. We again replicated the main finding of than blaming the machine in the fully automated car: fully automated
Study 1. Driver type—whether the driver is a human or machine— (m = 75.6) versus machine–human (m = 59.5), t(754.63) = −7.4,
1 2
has a significant impact on ratings. Specifically, in shared-control P < 0.0001, m − m = 16.1, 95% CI for m − m = 11.8–20.3;
1 2 1 2
scenarios (machine–human and human–machine), where both versus human–machine (m = 48.5), t(745.06) = 11.7, P < 0.0001, m
3 1
human and machine have made errors, the machine driver is con- − m = 27.1, 95% CI for m − m = 22.5–31.6.
3 1 3
sistently blamed less than the human driver (Table 1, missed inter-
vention, Study 2 and Fig. 2). Study 3. In Study 3, we used the same car regimes as in Study 2 but
As we noted in Study 1, the human–machine difference is driven the cases were dilemma scenarios in which the drivers had to choose
by a reduction in the blame attributed to machines when there is between crashing into a single pedestrian or crashing into five
a human in the loop. This is verified in Study 2 by comparison of pedestrians. This study was conducted as a comparison to Studies
sesac
lacitirC
sesac
lacitirC
a
Bad intervention Missed intervention
S2-M
S1-MM
S1-MH
S1-HM
S2-MH
S2-HM
S1-HH
S2-H
100 < first driver 0 last driver > 100 100 < first driver 0 last driver > 100
Blame and responsibility
b
tnemtaerT
Agent
Industry
User
Bad intervention Missed intervention
S2-M
S1-MM
S1-MH
S1-HM
S2-MH
S2-HM
S1-HH
S2-H
100 < first driver 0 last driver > 100 100 < first driver 0 last driver >
Blame and responsibility
tnemtaerT Agent
Industry
User
100
Fig. 2 | Blame ratings for user and industry in six car types. a,b, Bar plot (a) and dot plot (b). Data from Study 1 (S1: n = 786, observations = 3,144) and
Study 2 (S2: n = 382, observations = 1,528). Ratings of blame and causal responsibility are aggregated (collectively referred to as blame, henceforth).
Ratings of car and company are aggregated (collectively referred to as industry, henceforth). The y axis represents the six car types considered in S1 and
S2. Two car types, HM (human–machine) and MH (machine–human), were considered in both studies. The y-axis labels include the study and the car
type. For example, S1-HM represents the human–machine regime ratings collected in Study 1. In the six car types, the x-axis labelling of first driver refers
to the main driver, while the last driver refers to the secondary driver in dual-driver cars and the sole driver in sole-driver cars. For bad intervention, only
one agent has erred (the last driver). This agent (whether user or industry) is blamed more than the other agent (first driver, see Table 1). For missed
intervention, in dual-driver cars (rows 2–7), both agents have erred. When human and machine are sharing control (within the dotted rectangle), blame
ratings of Industry drop significantly regardless of the role of the machine (main or secondary). In Study 1, blame to Industry in S1-MH (m 1 = 57.2) is
significantly less than in S1-MM (m 2 = 68), (t(760.6) = −5.05, P < 0.0001, m 2 − m 1 = 10.8, 95% confidence interval (CI) for m 2 − m 1 = 6.6–15).
Blame to Industry in S1-HM (m 1 = 53.4) is significantly less than in S1-MM (m 2 = 68), (t(722.77) = −6.6042, P < 0.0001, m 2 − m 1 = 14.6, 95% CI for
m 2 − m 1 = 10.2–19). In Study 2, blame to Industry in S2-M (m 1 = 75.6) is significantly more than in S2-MH (m 2 = 59.5), (t(754.63) = −7.3885,
P < 0.0001, m 1 − m 2 = 16.1, 95% CI for m 1 − m 2 = 11.8–20.3) and is significantly more than in S2-HM (m 3 = 48.51), (t(745.06) = 11.676, P < 0.0001,
m 1 − m 3 = 27.1, 95% CI for m 1 − m 3 = 22.5–31.6).
NATuRE HuMAN BEHAvIOuR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTure HumaN BeHaviour Articles
Education Employment Gender
Postgraduate Student
Homemaker
4 years Female
Permanently disabled
2 years Retired
Some college Unemployed
Temporarily laid off
High school graduate Male
Part-time
No high school Full-time
Generation Have kids < 18 Marital status
Silent Domestic/civil partnership
No Never married
Gen Z
Widowed
Gen Y
Divorced
Gen X
Yes Separated
Boomers Married
Political Ethnicity Religiosity
Mixed
Not sure Not at all important
Native American
Independent Not too important
Asian
Hispanic
Republican Somewhat important
Black
Democrat Very important
White
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0 0.2 0.4 0.6
Proportion within sample (n = 2,000)
Fig. 3 | Representation of demographic attributes in Study 5. Study 5 was run via YouGov, a service that administers and runs surveys on nationally
representative samples. The sample includes 2,000 participants with diverse demographic attributes. Participants who did not disclose their demographic
information are not shown. Generation labels Silent, Boomers, Gen X, Gen Y, and Gen Z refer to individuals born before 1946, during 1946–1964, during
1965–1976, during 1977–1995, and after 1995, respectively.
1 and 2, which involve clear errors, and the studies conducted in to participants looked like realistic newspaper articles (see
previous research on self-driving cars (such as in refs. 11,16–18), which Supplementary methods 1, Studies 4–5).
involve the difficult choice of deciding which of two groups of peo- The main finding of Studies 1–3 was replicated: the machine
ple to hit. All the main effects in Study 2 were replicated in Study 3. driver is consistently blamed less than the human driver in these
shared-control scenarios where both human and machine have
Bad interventions. Here, we replicated the main results of Studies 1 made errors (Table 1, missed interventions, Study 4).
and 2, in bad intervention cases for the shared-control cars, whether
or not the driver made an error was a significant predictor of ratings Study 5. Study 5 was a replication of Study 4, run via YouGov with
(Table 1, bad intervention, Study 3). a nationally representative sample of the US population (see Fig. 3
for details).
Missed interventions. Replicating the main results of Studies 1 and The main finding was again replicated: the machine driver is
2, driver type has a significant impact on ratings. Specifically, in consistently blamed less than the human driver (Table 1, missed
shared-control scenarios where both human and machine have interventions, Study 5). This result (that is, human is blamed more
made errors, the machine driver is consistently blamed less than the than machine) holds directionally in 82% of demographic sub-
human driver (Table 1, missed interventions, Study 3). groups of participants (see Fig. 4).
Study 4. In Study 4 we replicated the central findings but using Discussion
more ecologically valid stimuli. We used only the human–machine Our central finding is that in cases where a human and a machine
and machine–human shared control cars in the missed interven- share control of the car in hypothetical scenarios, less blame is
tions scenario; these are the cases where we observed systematic attributed to the machine when both drivers make errors. The first
decrease in blaming the machine in Studies 1–3. For this study, we deadly crashes of automated vehicles (mentioned above) were sim-
continued to use hypothetical scenarios but the stimuli shown ilar in structure to our missed intervention cases. In those cases,
NATuRE HuMAN BEHAvIOuR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTure HumaN BeHaviour
Effect of demographic attributes
Male
Female
White
Black
Hispanic
Blame user more
Asian
No high school
Blame industry more
High school graduate
Some college
2 years
4 years
Postgrad
Married
Divorced
Widowed
Never married
Domestic/civil partnership
Have kids < 18
Do not have kids < 18
Full-time
Part-time
Unemployed
Retired
Permanently disabled
Homemaker
Student
Democrat
Republican
Independent
Not sure
Religiosity is very important
Religiosity is somewhat important
Religiosity is not too important
Religiosity is not at all important
Boomers
Gen X
Gen Y
Gen Z
Silent
−10 −5 0 5 10 15
Differential blame to user versus industry
Fig. 4 | Ratings of demographic subgroups in Study 5. Data collected in Study 5 from nationally representative sample (n = 2,000, observations = 4,000).
Each row represents the mean of differential blame attributed to user (that is, human) versus industry (that is, car or company). Positive values (blue)
indicate more blame attributed to user while negative values (red) represent more blame attributed to industry. Error bars are 95% CI. Only subgroups
with at least 50 participants are shown; 33 of 40 subgroups (82%) attribute more blame to user. Few subgroups blame industry more, and those that do
typically have smaller samples.
both the machine primary driver and human secondary driver the crash—one that focused attention on the driver being exceed-
should have taken action to avoid a collision, and neither driver ingly negligent—is likely to generalize to other dual-error missed
did. Our results suggests that the public response that occurred to intervention-style cases, shifting blame away from the machine
NATuRE HuMAN BEHAvIOuR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTure HumaN BeHaviour Articles
and towards the human. Moreover, the convergence of our results attention generated in response to such a case focused on the role of
with this real-world public reaction seems to suggest that while the algorithm rather than the judge22, indicating that the possibility
we employed stylized, simplified vignettes in our research, our of incentive shaping in the legal domain is not so far-fetched.
findings show external validity. Moreover, this pattern of results Given these possible societal-level implications of our findings,
was replicated in a nationally representative sample of the US it is important to acknowledge the potential limitations of interpret-
population (and across different subgroups; see Fig. 4), which ing our data this broadly. First, the participants in all of our experi-
employed naturalistic presentation of scenarios (see Supplementary ments know that they are reading about hypothetical scenarios. It is
methods 1, Studies 4–5). possible that this reduces the psychological realism of the study23,24,
Our central finding (diminished blame apportioned to the causing participants’ responses to be characteristically different to
machine in dual-error cases) leads us to believe that, while there what they would be after reading about an actual event. The litera-
may be many psychological barriers to self-driving car adoption19, ture provides a mixed view of how well responses to hypothetical
public over-reaction to dual-error cases is not likely to be one of scenarios map onto those made in real-life situations25–28. However,
them. In fact, we should perhaps be concerned about public under- the research that does show considerable differences25,26 finds that
reaction. Because the public are less likely to see the machine as these differences are mostly seen in the way participants them-
being at fault in dual-error cases like the Tesla and Uber crashes, selves would act in moral situations and not necessarily about the
the sort of public pressure that drives regulation might be lack- moral judgments they render about third parties. In our paper, we
ing. For instance, if we were to allow the standards for automated study participants’ judgements (blame and causal responsibility)
vehicles to be set through jury-based court-room decisions, we about third parties in hypothetical scenarios; these may align more
expect that juries will be biased to absolve the car manufacturer directly with judgements of actual scenarios.
of blame in dual-error cases, thereby failing to put sufficient pres- Second, although we may see a reasonably tight mapping
sure on manufacturers to improve car designs. Despite the fact that between the opinions expressed in this study’s scenarios and those
there are some avenues available to courts to mitigate psychological that would be expressed in real-life situations, it is important to note
biases that may arise among juries (such as carefully worded jury that, in the latter case, judgements will not be occurring in isolation.
instructions or expert witnesses), psychological biases continue to Instead, they will occur within a richer context than the carefully
play an important role in court-based decisions20. In fact, we have controlled scenarios used in our studies. People may hear reports
been in a similar situation before. Before the 1960s, car manufac- of accidents with more emotion-arousing details, which are known
turers enjoyed a large amount of liberty from liability when a car’s to skew people’s judgements29,30. Moreover, the public’s reaction
occupant was harmed in a crash (because blame in car crashes was to hearing about semi-autonomous vehicle crashes will be shaped
attributed to the driver’s error or negligence). Top-down regulation by many factors beyond their immediate psychological response
was necessary to introduce the concept of ‘crash worthiness’ into (which is the object of our study), including opinion pieces they
the legal system—that is, that cars should be designed in such a way read, the views of community leaders and so on. These factors will
as to minimize injury to occupants when a crash occurs. Only fol- collectively shape the public’s overall reaction to crashes.
lowing these laws were car manufacturers forced to improve their Studies 1, 2, 4 and 5 looked at blame and causal responsibility
designs21. Here, too, top-down regulation of automated car safety attribution in cases where one or both drivers made errors. Study 3
might be needed to correct a public under-reaction to crashes in looked at dilemma scenarios where the drivers faced the choice of
shared-control cases. What, exactly, the safety standard should be is running over either one or five pedestrians. While there is, in some
still an open question, however. sense, an ‘optimal’ outcome in these cases (corresponding to sav-
If our data identify a source of possible public over-reaction, it ing more lives), it is not obvious that it would (for example) count
is for cars with a human primary driver and a machine secondary as an error to refuse to swerve away from five pedestrians into a
driver in bad intervention-style cases. These are the only cases we pedestrian that was previously unthreatened. In fact, the German
identified where the car receives more blame than the human. It Ethics Commission on Automated and Connected Driving report31
seems possible that these sorts of cars may generate widespread indicates that programming cars to trade off lives in this way would
public concern once we see instances of bad intervention-style be prohibited. The report states: “It is also prohibited to offset vic-
crashes in human–machine car regimes. This could potentially tims against one another. (…) Those parties involved in the gen-
slow the transition to fully automated vehicles if this reaction is not eration of mobility risks must not sacrifice non-involved parties”.
anticipated and managed appropriately in public discourse and legal Even though participants in previous studies prefer to sacrifice one
regulation. Moreover, manufacturers that are working to release person who was previously not involved than five (for example,
cars with a machine secondary driver should plan appropriately for refs. 16,17), the German Ethics Commission’s decision underscores
the probable legal fall-out for these unique cases where that driver the fact that trading off lives in dilemma situations can be particu-
receives more blame than a human. larly fraught. For this reason, and for continuity with previous work
Our data portend the sort of reaction we can expect to auto- on the ethics of self-driving cars11,16,17 and in moral psychology more
mated car crashes at the societal level (for example, through public generally32,33, we chose to investigate dilemma situations. Our find-
reaction and pressure to regulate). Once we begin to see societal- ings about the effect of driver type in these cases underscore the fact
level responses to automated cars, that reaction may shape incen- that findings about how blame and responsibility are attributed after
tives for individual actors. For example, people may want to opt a crash may still hold in less-clear dilemma scenarios.
into systems that are designed such that, in the event of a crash, the Some of our results fall in line with previous work on the psy-
majority public response will be to blame the machine. Worse yet, chology of causal inference. In bad intervention cases, the primary
people may train themselves to drive in a way that, if they crash, the driver (be it human or machine) makes a correct decision to keep
blame is likely to fall to the machine (for instance, by not attempting the car on a course that will avoid a pedestrian. Following this, the
to correct a mistake that is made by a machine override). This sort secondary driver makes the decision to swerve the car into the
of incentive shaping may already be happening in the legal domain. pedestrian. Our data show that the secondary driver (the one that
Judges who make decisions about whether to release a person from makes a mistake) is considered more causally responsible than the
custody between arrest and trial frequently rely on actuarial risk first. It is well established that judgements of causal responsibility
assessment tables to help make their decision. Some suspect that are impacted by violations of statistical and moral norms34–37, and
judges may be overly reliant on these tables as a way of diminish- a mistake seems to count as such a violation. That is, if something
ing their responsibility if a released person commits a crime. Recent unusual or counter-normative happens, that event is more likely to
NATuRE HuMAN BEHAvIOuR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTure HumaN BeHaviour
be seen as a cause of some effect than another event that is typical Sole-driver car. This car has only one driver that does all the driving. Two versions
or norm-conforming. are used.
Moreover, the central finding that humans are blamed more than
Human-only. This is a sole-driver car, in which a human is the driver. Also referred
machines, even when both make errors, accords with research on to as a regular car.
the psychology of causal attribution. Findings in that field suggest
that voluntary causes (causes created by agents) are better causal Machine-only. This is a sole-driver car, in which a machine is the driver. Also
explanations than physical causes38. While it is clear that what a referred to as a fully automated car.
human does is fundamentally different to what a machine does in
Dual-driver car. This car has a primary driver whose job it is to drive the car, and
each of the scenarios, it remains an open question whether an arti- a secondary driver whose job it is to monitor the actions of the first driver and
ficial intelligence that is operating a car is perceived as a physical intervene when the first driver makes an error (also referred to as shared-control
cause, an agent, something in between or something else entirely39,40. car). Four versions are used.
Future work should investigate the mental properties attributed to
Human–machine. This is a dual-driver car in which a human is the primary driver
an artificial intelligence that controls a car both in conjunction with
and a machine is the secondary driver (also referred to as Guardian).
a human and alone. Understanding the sort of mind we perceive as
dwelling inside an artificial intelligence may help us understand and Machine–human. This is a dual-driver car in which a machine is the primary
predict how blame and causal responsibility will be attributed to it41. driver and a human is the secondary driver (also referred to as Autopilot).
Another open question concerns the implications of attribut-
Human–human. This is a dual-driver car in which a human is the primary driver
ing blame to a machine at all. There are various ways that humans
and another human is the secondary driver.
express moral condemnation. For example, we may call an action
morally wrong, say that a moral agent has a bad character or judge Machine–machine. This is a dual-driver car in which a machine is the primary
that an agent is blameworthy. Judgements of blame typically track driver and another machine is the secondary driver.
judgements of willingness to punish the perpetrator42,43. Are the
Intervention types. We use two types of intervention: bad intervention and missed
participants in our study expressing that some punishment is due to
intervention. The description of each is dependent on whether the car is a sole- or
the machine driver of the car, whatever that may mean? Alternately, a dual-driver car.
is it possible that participants’ expressions of blame indicate that
some entity is deserving of punishment that represents the machine Bad intervention (dual-driver). The primary driver kept the car on its track. The
secondary driver intervened and steered the car off its track (killing a pedestrian)
(the company, or a human representative of the company, such as
rather than keeping the car on track and killing no one.
the chief executive officer). The similar blame judgements given to
the car and the car’s representatives (company) perhaps support this Missed intervention (dual-driver). The primary driver kept the car on its track.
possibility. Finally, it is possible that participants ascribe only non- The secondary driver kept the car on its track (killing a pedestrian) rather than
moral blame to the machine, in the sense of it being responsible but swerving into the adjacent lane and killing no one.
not in a moral sense. We may say that a forest fire is to blame for
Bad intervention (sole-driver). The sole driver steered the car off its track (killing a
displacing residents from their homes, without implying that pun- pedestrian) rather than keeping the car on track and killing no one.
ishment is due to anyone at all.
Following these studies, the reason that participants blame Missed intervention (sole-driver). The sole driver kept the car on its track (killing a
machine drivers less than human drivers in missed intervention pedestrian) rather than swerving into the adjacent lane and killing no one.
cases also remains an open question. The findings may be linked
Dilemma versions (Study 3). The two outcomes of killing one pedestrian versus
to the uncertainty with which we perceive the agential status of killing no one are replaced with the two outcomes of killing five pedestrians versus
machines. Once machines are a more common element in our killing one pedestrian. For example, in missed intervention (dual-driver): (…)
moral world and we interact with them as moral actors, will this The secondary driver kept the car on its track (killing five pedestrians) rather than
swerving into the adjacent lane and killing one pedestrian.
effect change? Or will this finding be a lasting hallmark of the cogni-
tive psychology of human–machine interaction?
Study 1. Participants. The data were collected in September 2017 from
A final open question concerns whether the effects we report 809 participants (US residents) recruited from the Mechanical Turk platform (each
here will generalize to other cases of human–machine interaction. was compensated US$0.5). Of those, 23 participants were excluded (as explained
Already we see fruitful human–machine partnerships emerging above) leaving us with 786 participants. Participants were aged 18–83 years
(median, 33 years), 50% were females, 39% had an annual income of US$50,000 or
with judges, doctors, military personnel, factory workers, artists
more and 55% had a bachelor degree or higher.
and financial analysts, to name but a few. We conjecture that we may
see the patterns we report here in domains other than automated Stimuli and procedures. Participants were uniformly randomly allocated to one of
vehicles, though each domain will have its own complications and four conditions. Conditions varied the car type (human–human, human–machine,
quirks as machines begin to become more subtly integrated in our machine–human and machine–machine) in a four-level between-subjects design. In
each condition, participants first read a description of the car and were then asked
personal and professional lives.
to attribute competence to each of the two drivers on a 100-point scale anchored
at ‘not competent’ and ‘very competent’ (see Supplementary Fig. 1 for results on
Methods competence). Participants then read two scenarios (presented in a random order),
This study was approved by the Institute Review Board at Massachusetts Institute one bad intervention case and one missed intervention case. After each scenario,
of Technology. The authors complied with all relevant ethical considerations, participants were asked to indicate (on a 100-point scale) to what extent they thought
including obtaining informed consent from all participants. each driver was blameworthy (from ‘not blameworthy’ to ‘very blameworthy’), and
In all studies, participants were allocated uniformly randomly into conditions. to what degree each of these two agents caused the death of the pedestrian (from
Data collection and analysis were performed blind to the conditions of the ‘very little’ to ‘very much’). Questions were presented in a randomized order. (See
experiments. The sample size was chosen in each study to ensure the inclusion at least Supplementary methods 1, Study 1 for text of the vignettes and see Supplementary
100 participants for each condition. Numbers of participants were chosen in advance methods 2 for questions). At the end of the surveys, participants provided basic
of running the study, and all data were collected before analysis. See details below. demographic information (for example, age, gender, income, education).
In Studies 1–3 we excluded any participant who did not (1) complete all
measures within the survey, (2) transcribe (near-perfectly) a 169-character Study 2. Participants. The data were collected in May 2017 from 804 participants
paragraph from an image (used as an attention check) and (3) have a unique (US residents) recruited from the Mechanical Turk platform (each was
MTurk ID per study (all records with a recurring MTurk ID were excluded). compensated US$0.3). Of those, 25 participants were excluded (as explained
above), leaving us with 779 participants. Participants were aged 18–77 years
Case description. Summary descriptions of all car types and cases. For full (median, 32 years), 48% were females, 39% had an annual income of US$50,000 or
vignettes, see Supplementary methods 1. more and 54% had a bachelor degree or higher.
NATuRE HuMAN BEHAvIOuR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTure HumaN BeHaviour Articles
Stimuli and procedures. Participants were uniformly randomly allocated to References
one of eight conditions. Conditions varied the car type (human-only, human– 1. Road traffic injuries. World Health Organization Fact Sheet (WHO, 2017).
machine, machine–human and machine only) and the industry representative 2. Geistfeld, M. A. A roadmap for autonomous vehicles: state tort liability,
(car and company), in a 4 × 2 between-subjects multifactorial design. In each automobile insurance, and federal safety regulation. Calif. L. Rev. 105,
condition, participants read two scenarios (presented in a random order), one 1611 (2017).
bad intervention case and one missed intervention case. After each scenario, 3. Tesla. A Tragic Loss https://www.tesla.com/blog/tragic-loss (Tesla, 2016).
participants were asked to attribute causal responsibility, blameworthiness 4. Automatic Vehicle Control Systems—Investigation of Tesla Accident (National
and competence (see Supplementary Fig. 1 for results on competence) to two Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 2016).
agents: the human in the car and a representative of the car (the car itself or the 5. Griswold, A. Uber found not criminally liable in last year’s self-driving car
manufacturing company of the car, depending on the condition). All other features death. Quartz (5 March 2019).
of Study 2 were the same as those in Study 1. 6. Lowy, J. & Krishner, T. Tesla driver killed while using autopilot was watching
Harry Potter, witness says. Associated Press News https://apnews.com/
Study 3. Participants. The data were collected in November 2016 from ee71bd075fb948308727b4bbff7b3ad8 (30 June 2016).
1,008 participants (US residents only) recruited from the Mechanical Turk 7. Chong, Z. & Krok, A. Tesla not at fault in fatal crash, driver was not watching
platform (each was compensated US$0.6). Of those, 35 participants were excluded a movie. CNET https://www.cnet.com/roadshow/news/tesla-found-not-guilty-
(as explained above), leaving us with 973 participants. Participants were aged of-fatal-crash-says-us-report/ (19 June 2017).
18–84 years (median, 33 years), 51% were females, 37% had an annual income of 8. Randazzo, R. Who was really at fault in fatal uber crash? here’s the whole
US$50,000 or more and 53% had a bachelor degree or higher. story. AZ Central https://www.azcentral.com/story/news/local/
tempe/2019/03/17/one-year-after-self-driving-uber-rafaela-vasquez-behind-
Stimuli and procedures. There were two groups of participants in Study 3: those wheel-crash-death-elaine-herzberg-tempe/1296676002/ (17 March 2019).
who saw dual-driver cases and those who saw sole-driver. For those who saw 9. Munster, G. Here’s when having a self-driving car will be a normal thing.
dual-driver cases, participants were randomly assigned to one of six conditions Fortune https://fortune.com/2017/09/13/gm-cruise-self-driving-driverless-
in a 2 × 3 design, varying the car type (human–machine or machine–human) autonomous-cars/ (13 September 2017).
and the industry representative (car, company and programmer). Data for the 10. Kessler, S. A timeline of when self-driving cars will be on the road, according
programmer were later dropped from the analysis. For those who saw sole-driver to the people making them. Quartz https://
cases, participants were randomly assigned to one of four conditions in a 2 × 2 qz.com/943899/a-timeline-of-when-self-driving-cars-will-be-on-the-road-
design, varying the car type (human-only or machine-only) and the industry according-to-the-people-making-them/ (29 March 2017).
representative (car or company). In each condition (for both dual- and single-car 11. Li, J., Zhao, X., Cho, M.-J., Ju, W. & Malle, B. F. From Trolley to Autonomous
groups), participants read two scenarios (presented in a random order), one bad Vehicle: Perceptions of Responsibility and Moral Norms in Traffic Accidents
intervention case and one missed intervention case. These scenarios were the with Self-driving Cars SAE Technical Paper 2016-01-0164 https://doi.
dilemma versions of those presented in Studies 1 and 2 (see description above). org/10.4271/2016-01-0164 (SAE, 2016).
After each scenario, participants were asked to attribute causal responsibility and 12. Chockler, H. & Halpern, J. Y. Responsibility and blame: a structural-model
blameworthiness to two agents: the human in the car and a representative of the approach. J. Artif. Intell. Res. 22, 93–115 (2004).
car (the car itself, the company or the programmer, depending on the condition). 13. Gerstenberg, T. & Lagnado, D. A. When contributions make a difference:
All other features of Study 3 were identical to those of Study 2. explaining order effects in responsibility attribution. Psychon. Bull. Rev. 19,
729–736 (2012).
Study 4. Participants. The data were collected in January 2019 from 14. Sloman, S. A. & Lagnado, D. Causality in thought. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 66,
375 participants (US residents only) recruited from the Mechanical Turk platform 223–247 (2015).
(each was compensated US$0.3). No demographic data were collected for 15. Zultan, R., Gerstenberg, T. & Lagnado, D. A. Finding fault: causality and
this study. Given that it was done on the same platform as Studies 1–3 (that is, counterfactuals in group attributions. Cognition 125, 429–440 (2012).
Mechanical Turk), its demographic proportions are expected to be similar. 16. Bonnefon, J.-F., Shariff, A. & Rahwan, I. The social dilemma of autonomous
vehicles. Science 352, 1573–1576 (2016).
Stimuli and procedures. The key elements of this study and Study 5 are (1) the 17. Awad, E. et al. The moral machine experiment. Nature 563, 59 (2018).
restriction to missed intervention cases and (2) the visual and textual content of 18. Malle, B., Scheutz, M., Arnold, T., Voiklis, J. & Cusimano, C. Sacrifice one for
the vignettes have the look and feel of a news piece (see Supplementary methods 1, the good of many? People apply different. In Proc. 10th ACM/IEEE
Studies 4–5). International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction 117–124 (2015).
Participants were uniformly randomly allocated to one of four conditions. 19. Shariff, A., Bonnefon, J.-F. & Rahwan, I. Psychological roadblocks to the
Conditions varied the car type (human–machine and machine–human) and adoption of self-driving vehicles. Nat. Hum. Behav. 1, 694 (2017).
the industry representative (car and company), in a 2 × 2 between-subjects 20. Bornstein, B. H. & Greene, E. Jury decision making: implications for and
multifactorial design. In each condition, participants read one scenario—one from psychology. Curr. Dir. Psychol. Sci. 20, 63–67 (2011).
missed intervention case. The textual content of these scenarios was close to that 21. Nader, R. Unsafe at Any Speed. The Designed-in Dangers of the American
presented in Studies 1–3, with slight changes to make it read like a news piece. Automobile (Grossman, 1965).
After each scenario, participants were asked to attribute blameworthiness to two 22. Westervelt, E. Did a bail reform algorithm contribute to this
agents: the human in the car and a representative of the car (the car itself or the San Francisco man’s murder? National Public Radio https://www.npr.
company, depending on the condition). org/2017/08/18/543976003/did-a-bail-reform-algorithm-contribute-to-this-
san-francisco-man-s-murder (18 August 2017).
Study 5. Participants. The data were collected in March 2019 from 23. Bauman, C. W., McGraw, A. P., Bartels, D. M. & Warren, C. Revisiting
2,189 participants (US residents) recruited via YouGov, a service that administered external validity: concerns about trolley problems and other sacrificial
the study and collected the data from a representative sample of participants. The dilemmas in moral psychology. Soc. Personal Psychol. Compass 8,
participants were then matched down to a sample of 2,000 participants based on 536–554 (2014).
demographics. See Fig. 3 for details on demographic proportions of participants in 24. Aronson, E, Wilson, T. D. & Brewer, M. B. in The Handbook of Social
this study. Psychology Vol. 1 (eds Gilbert, D. T., Fiske, S. T., & Lindzey, G.) 99–142
(McGraw-Hill, 1998).
Stimuli and procedures. This study is identical in set-up in Study 4. 25. FeldmanHall, O. et al. Differential neural circuitry and self-interest in real vs
hypothetical moral decisions. Soc. Cogn. Affect. Neurosci. 7, 743–751 (2012).
Reporting Summary. Further information on research design is available in the 26. Bostyn, D. H., Sevenhant, S. & Roets, A. Of mice, men, and trolleys:
Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article. hypothetical judgment versus real-life behavior in trolley-style moral
dilemmas. Psychol. Sci. 29, 1084–1093 (2018).
Data availability 27. Dickinson, D. L. & Masclet, D. Using ethical dilemmas to predict antisocial
Raw data and source data for Figs. 2–4, Table 1 and Supplementary Fig. 1 are choices with real payoff consequences: an experimental study. J. Econ. Behav.
available at https://bit.ly/2kzLymH. Organ. 166, 195–215 (2018).
28. Plunkett, D. & Greene, J. Overlooked evidence and a misunderstanding of
Code availability what trolley dilemmas do best: a comment on Bostyn, Sevenhant, & Roets
(2018). Psychol. Sci. 30, 1389–1391 (2019).
Code used to produce figures and tables in this article is available at https://bit.
29. Greene, J. & Haidt, J. How (and where) does moral judgment work? Trends
ly/2kzLymH.
Cogn. Sci. 6, 517–523 (2002).
30. Horberg, E. J., Oveis, C. & Keltner, D. Emotions as moral amplifiers: an
Received: 23 March 2018; Accepted: 24 September 2019; appraisal tendency approach to the influences of distinct emotions upon
Published: xx xx xxxx moral judgment. Emot. Rev. 3, 237–244 (2011).
NATuRE HuMAN BEHAvIOuR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTure HumaN BeHaviour
31. Luetge, C. The German ethics code for automated and connected driving. Acknowledgements
Philos. Technol. 30, 547–558 (2017). I.R., E.A., S.L. and S.D. acknowledge support from the Ethics and Governance of
32. Mikhail, J. Elements of Moral Cognition: Rawls’ Linguistic Analogy and the Artificial Intelligence Fund. J.-F.B. acknowledges support from the ANR-Labex Institute
Cognitive Science of Moral and Legal Judgment (Cambridge Univ. Press, 2011). for Advanced Study in Toulouse, the ANR-3IA Artificial and Natural Intelligence
33. Greene, J. Moral Tribes: Emotion, Reason, and the Gap between Us and Them Toulouse Institute and grant no. ANR-17-EURE-0010 from Investissements d’Avenir. The
(Penguin, 2014). funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish or
34. Alicke, M. D. Culpable control and the psychology of blame. Psychol. Bull. preparation of the manuscript.
126, 556 (2000).
35. Gerstenberg, T., Goodman, N. D., Lagnado, D. A. & Tenenbaum, J. B. How, Author contributions
whether, why: causal judgments as counterfactual contrasts.
in Proc. 37th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society E.A., S.L., M.K.-W., S.D., J.B.T., A.S., J.-F.B. and I.R. contributed to the conception and
782–787 (2015). design of the research. E.A., S.L., M.K.-W. and S.D. conducted studies. E.A. and J.-F.B.
36. Hitchcock, C. & Knobe, J. Cause and norm. J. Philos. 106, analysed data. S.L., E.A., M.K.-W., J.-F.B. and I.R. wrote the manuscript. All authors
587–612 (2009). reviewed and revised the manuscript.
37. Kominsky, J. F., Phillips, J., Gerstenberg, T., Lagnado, D. & Knobe, J. Causal
Competing interests
superseding. Cognition 137, 196–209 (2015).
38. Hart, H. L. A. & Honoré, T. Causation in the Law (Oxford Univ. The authors declare no competing interests.
Press, 1985).
39. Gray, H. M., Gray, K. & Wegner, D. M. Dimensions of mind perception. Additional information
Science 315, 619–619 (2007).
Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/
40. Weisman, K., Dweck, C. S. & Markman, E. M. Rethinking people’s
s41562-019-0762-8.
conceptions of mental life. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 114,
11374–11379 (2017). Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to J.B.T., A.S., J.-F.B.
41. Gray, K., Young, L. & Waytz, A. Mind perception is the essence of morality. or I.R.
Psychol. Inq. 23, 101–124 (2012). Peer review information Primary Handling Editor: Mary Elizabeth Sutherland
42. Cushman, F. Crime and punishment: distinguishing the roles of
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
causal and intentional analyses in moral judgment. Cognition 108,
353–380 (2008). Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
43. Cushman, F. Deconstructing intent to reconstruct morality. Curr. Opin. published maps and institutional affiliations.
Psychol. 6, 97–103 (2015). © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2019
NATuRE HuMAN BEHAvIOuR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
1
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Corresponding author(s): Edmond Awad
Last updated by author(s): Sep 9, 2019
Reporting Summary
Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency
in reporting. For further information on Nature Research policies, see Authors & Referees and the Editorial Policy Checklist.
Statistics
For all statistical analyses, confirm that the following items are present in the figure legend, table legend, main text, or Methods section.
n/a Confirmed
The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
A statement on whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided
Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.
A description of all covariates tested
A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
A full description of the statistical parameters including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient)
AND variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)
For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted
Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.
For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated
Our web collection on statistics for biologists contains articles on many of the points above.
Software and code
Policy information about availability of computer code
Data collection For studies 1-4, data was collected through Qualtrics, and participants were recruited from Amazon Mechanical Turk. For study 5, data
was collected and administered by YouGov, a service that recruits nationally representative samples.
Data analysis Data was analyzed using R (RStudio 3.4.1)
For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors/reviewers.
We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Research guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.
Data
Policy information about availability of data
All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable:
- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets
- A list of figures that have associated raw data
- A description of any restrictions on data availability
Raw data and Source data for Fig 2, 3 and 4; Table 1; and Supplementary Fig 1 are available in: https://bit.ly/2kzLymH
Field-specific reporting
Please select the one below that is the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.
Life sciences Behavioural & social sciences Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences
2
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/documents/nr-reporting-summary-flat.pdf
Behavioural & social sciences study design
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
Study description The submitted manuscript present results from five studies. Are all quantitative studies.
Research sample For Studies 1-4, participants are recruited through Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT), an online platform. This platform allows for the
collection of high-quality data from a considerably large sample with minimal cost and effort. This platform is widely used to collect data
in psychology and social surveys. As for demographics: Study 1 has 786 participants. Participants are aged between 18-83 (median: 33),
50% are females, 39% has annual income of $50K or more, and 55% has a bachelor degree or higher. Study 2 has 779 participants.
Participants are aged between 18-77 (median: 32), 48% are females, 39% has annual income of $50K or more, and 54% has a bachelor
degree or higher. Study 3 has 931 participants. Participants are aged between 18-84 (median: 33), 51% are females, 37% has annual
income of $50K or more, and 53% has a bachelor degree or higher. Study 4 has 375 participants. No demographic data was collected for
this study. Given that it was done on the same platform as studies 1-3 (i.e. Mechanical Turk), its demographic proportions are expected
to be similar.
For Study 5, participants are recruited by YouGov, a service that runs and administers experiments using nationally representative
samples. Study 5 has 2000 participants. Participants are aged between 19-89 (median: 49), 53% are females, 48% are currently employed
(full or part time), and 30% has a bachelor degree or higher. The demographic proportion for this study is available in Supplemental
Figure 4.
Sampling strategy For studies 1-4, like other studies usually run on AMT, the survey was advertised on the platform and was available on a first come, first
served basis. As a rule of thumb, the sample size was chosen in each study as to ensure having 100 participants for each condition. In one
study, 200 participants were considered for each condition. For study 5, the sample size was 500 participants for each of the four
conditions.
Data collection Studies 1-4 were programmed on Qualtrics survey software and participants (USA residents only) were recruited from the online
platform AMT. Allocation to conditions was handled by the software. Participants who did one study were not allowed to enter any of
the following studies. Study 5 was run and administered by YouGov (https://yougov.co.uk/solutions/research).
Timing Study 1: September 2017, Study 2: May 2017, Study 3: November 2016, Study 4: January 2019, Study 5: March 2019
Data exclusions For studies 1-3, we excluded any subjects who did not (i) transcribe (near-perfectly) a 169-character paragraph from an image (used to
exclude non-serious Turkers), and (ii) have unique TurkID per study (all records with a recurring MTurk ID were excluded). Study 1
excluded data of 23 participants, Study 2 excluded data of 25 participants, and Study 3 excluded data of 35 participants.
For study 5, YouGov interviewed 2189 respondents who were then matched down to a sample of 2000 to produce the final dataset. The
respondents were matched to a sampling frame on gender, age, race, and education. The frame was constructed by stratified sampling
from the full 2016 American Community Survey (ACS) 1-year sample with selection within strata by weighted sampling with
replacements (using the person weights on the public use file). The matched cases were weighted to the sampling frame using propensity
scores. The matched cases and the frame were combined and a logistic regression was estimated for inclusion in the frame. The
propensity score function included age, gender, race/ethnicity, years of education, and region. The propensity scores were grouped into
deciles of the estimated propensity score in the frame and post-stratified according to these deciles.
Non-participation 380 participants (328 before and 52 after condition allocation) dropped out from Study 1; 347 participants (276 before and 71 after
condition allocation) dropped out from Study 2; 327 participants (220 before and 107 after condition allocation) dropped out from Study
3; and 68 participants (37 before and 31 after condition allocation) dropped out from Study 4. Dropouts are participants who dropped
after seeing the very first page of the survey, but before finishing the last question in the survey. All data of dropouts were excluded from
studies.
Randomization In all studies, participants were allocated uniformly randomly into conditions.
Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods
We require information from authors about some types of materials, experimental systems and methods used in many studies. Here, indicate whether each material,
system or method listed is relevant to your study. If you are not sure if a list item applies to your research, read the appropriate section before selecting a response.
Materials & experimental systems Methods
n/a Involved in the study n/a Involved in the study
Antibodies ChIP-seq
Eukaryotic cell lines Flow cytometry
Palaeontology MRI-based neuroimaging
Animals and other organisms
Human research participants
Clinical data
3
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Human research participants
Policy information about studies involving human research participants
Population characteristics See above
Recruitment For studies 1-4, participants were recruited from Amazon Mechanical Turk. The recruited sample is not nationally representative,
but given that this platform is widely used to collect data in psychology and social surveys, the sample is comparable to many
currently available studies.
For study 5, recruitment was done by YouGov, a service that recruits nationally representative samples.
Ethics oversight This study was approved by the Institute Review Board (IRB) at Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). The authors
complied with all relevant ethical considerations.
Note that full information on the approval of the study protocol must also be provided in the manuscript.