Articles
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-019-0551-4
Regulation of evidence accumulation by
pupil-linked arousal processes
Waitsang Keung 1,3*, Todd A. Hagen1,3 and Robert C. Wilson1,2
Effective decision-making requires integrating evidence over time. For simple perceptual decisions, previous work suggests
that humans and animals can integrate evidence over time, but not optimally. This suboptimality could arise from sources
including neuronal noise, weighting evidence unequally over time (that is, the ‘integration kernel’), previous trial effects and
an overall bias. Here, using an auditory evidence accumulation task in humans, we report that people exhibit all four subopti-
malities, some of which covary across the population. Pupillometry shows that only noise and the integration kernel are related
to the change in pupil response. Moreover, these two different suboptimalities were related to different aspects of the pupil
signal, with the individual differences in pupil response associated with individual differences in the integration kernel, while
trial-by-trial fluctuations in pupil response were associated with trial-by-trial fluctuations in noise. These results suggest that
different suboptimalities relate to distinct pupil-linked processes, possibly related to tonic and phasic norepinephrine activity.
The ability to integrate evidence over time is a crucial compo- and animals can have quite suboptimal kernels. For example, in the
nent of perceptual decision-making. This is true whether we random dot motion task, monkeys exhibit a ‘primacy’ kernel, put-
are integrating visual information from saccade to saccade as ting more weight on the early parts of the stimulus relative to the
we scan a scene, or integrating auditory information from word to later parts of the stimulus4. Conversely, in a slightly different inte-
word as we listen to someone talk. In recent years, much work has gration task, humans exhibit the opposite ‘recency’ kernel, weigh-
been devoted to understanding how humans and animals perform ing later information more than early information18,19. Finally, in
evidence integration over short time scales (on the order of one some experiments, this second source of suboptimality appears to
second) in simple perceptual tasks1–4. In a classic paradigm from be absent, with a ‘flat’ integration kernel being found in both rats
this literature, known as the random dot motion task, participants and highly trained humans1.
are presented with a movie of randomly moving dots that have a The third source of suboptimality reflects the tendency to let
weak tendency to drift in a particular direction (for example, left previous decisions and outcomes interfere with the present choice.
or right) and they must decide which way the dots are drifting5. Thus, when making multiple perceptual decisions, the current
The optimal strategy in this task is to count (that is, integrate) the decision is influenced by the choice we just made; for example, by
number of dots moving to the left and right over the time course repeating an action when it is rewarded and choosing something
of the stimulus and choose the side that had the most dots moving else when it is not (a reinforcement learning effect8,15,16,20), or sim-
in that direction. Amazingly, this optimal strategy can account for ply repeating a choice regardless of the outcome associated with
many of the qualitative properties of human and animal behaviour, it (a choice kernel effect8,20,21). Such sequential dependence can be
and neural correlates of integrated evidence can be found in several advantageous when there are temporal correlations between trials,
areas of the brain2,3,6,7. as is the case in many reinforcement learning tasks15,16, but is subop-
Despite the ability of the optimal model to qualitatively account timal in most perceptual decision-making tasks when each trial is
for a number of experimental findings, the quantitative performance independent of the past8,20,22,23.
of even highly trained humans and animals is suboptimal1,8. This Finally, the fourth suboptimality is an overall side bias where
suboptimality is thought to arise from at least four different sources: both humans and animals develop a preference for one option (for
(1) neuronal noise; (2) unequal weighting of evidence over time; example, left) even though that leads to more errors overall20.
(3) order effects from previous trials; and (4) overall side biases. Evidence from a number of studies suggests that pupil-linked
The first source of suboptimality is neuronal noise. While the arousal processes, putatively driven by the locus coeruleus norepi-
exact cause of neuronal noise is subject to debate8–11, it is thought nephrine system24–28, are well placed to modulate all four of these
that variability in neural firing impacts perceptual decision-mak- different sources of suboptimality. With regard to noise, increased
ing in one of two ways. First, noisy sensory information reduces pupil response has been associated with a number of different
the quality of the evidence going into the accumulator in the first cognitive processes, such as effort, arousal, mood, attention and
place1,12–14. Second, noisy action selection causes mistakes to be memory, all of which might influence noise26,29. In the specific case
made even after the integration process is complete15–17. of perceptual decisions, previous work suggests a role for pupil-
The second source of suboptimality comes from the unequal linked arousal systems to modulate the overall neuronal noise
weighting of evidence over time, which we call here the ‘integra- (that is, the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of sensory cues) in the
tion kernel’. In particular, while the optimal kernel in most percep- evidence accumulation process30,31. With regard to kernel and side
tual decision-making tasks is flat (that is, all information is weighed bias, pupil response has been associated with a change in the ‘gain’
equally over time), a number of studies have shown that humans of other neural systems, which in turn is thought to modulate
1Department of Psychology, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA. 2Cognitive Science Program, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA. 3These authors
contributed equally: Waitsang Keung, Todd A. Hagen. *e-mail: wkeung@email.arizona.edu
NATuRe HumAN BeHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTurE HuMaN BEHaviour
a Response Feedback 5 s The main reason for using a Bernoulli process was to simplify the
subsequent logistic regression analysis for quantifying the differ-
Correct
Fixation 1 s Stimulus 1 s < 1 ent sources of suboptimality, without imposing too many a priori
assumptions. To indicate this difference, we refer to our task as the
Bernoulli clicks task.
+ +
Incorrect Psychometric and chronometric functions. A total of 108 partici-
L 0
pants each performed between 666 and 938 trials (mean: 760.7) of
R
the Bernoulli clicks task. Basic behaviour was consistent with behav-
iours in similar pulsed-accumulation tasks1,4. Choice exhibited a
b c Number
1.0 0.8 of trials sigmoidal dependence on the net difference in evidence strength
150 (that is, the difference in the number of clicks between the right and
0.6 50 left, Δclick) (Fig. 1b). A simple logistic regression of the form:
50
0.5 0.4 10 logit[P attrialt]=β +β Δclick (1) left 0 Δclick
0.2
revealed a significant effect of Δclick (two-tailed, one-sample
0 t 107 = 29.19; P < 0.001; Cohen’s d = 2.81; 95% confidence interval
(CI) = 0.33 to 0.37). Reaction times were also modulated by net evi-
dence strength (Fig. 1c), and linear regression of the form:
RTattrialt in seconds=β +β ∣Δclick∣ (2) 0 Δclick
found a significant effect of the absolute value of Δclick on reac-
tion time (two-tailed one-sample t = −16.29; P < 0.001; Cohen’s
107
d = −1.57; 95% CI = −0.02 to −0.01). These results indicated that
participants were faster and more accurate when the difference in
the number of clicks was large (easy trials), and less accurate and
slower when that difference was small (difficult trials).
Humans exhibited all four suboptimalities in the Bernoulli
clicks task. We used a logistic regression model to characterize
the strength of internal and external cognitive biases on decision- the four different types of suboptimalities in human decision-
making26,28,32–35. In addition, recent empirical and theoretical work making in our task. This model quantified the impact of each
has also suggested that norepinephrine—a putative driver of pupil click, the reinforcement learning and choice kernel effects from
dilation—modulates the urgency of decision-making in a sequen- the five previous trials and the side bias on participants’ choices.
tial sampling task such that the higher the norepinephrine level, In particular, we assumed that the probability of choosing left on
the more urgently a decision is made36–38. Taken together, these trial t was given by:
studies point to the possibility of pupil-linked norepinephrine
systems to modulate the integration kernel and side bias by chang- 20 5 5
ing the strength of pre-existing biases during the integration pro- logit[P leftattrialt]=∑β iclickc i+∑β jRLa t−jr t−j+∑β jCKa t−j+ βside
cess. Finally, with regard to sequential effects, pupil changes have (cid:31)i(cid:29)=(cid:29)1(cid:29)(cid:30)(cid:29)(cid:29)(cid:29)(cid:29)(cid:28) (cid:31)j(cid:29)=(cid:29)1(cid:29)(cid:29)(cid:29)(cid:30)(cid:29)(cid:29)(cid:29)(cid:29)(cid:29)(cid:28) (cid:31)j(cid:29)=(cid:29)1(cid:29)(cid:29)(cid:30)(cid:29)(cid:29)(cid:29)(cid:29)(cid:28) ⏟Side (3)
Intergration Reinforcement Choice bias
been related to how humans integrate relevant information from kernel learning kernel
previous trials to infer uncertainty and expectation21,39,40, suggest-
ing a role for pupil-linked arousal systems in modulating sequen- where c is the ith click (+1 for a left click and −1 for a right click),
i
tial effects. a is the choice made on the t − jth trial (+1 for a left choice and −1
t−j
In this work, we investigated all four sources of suboptimal per- for a right choice) and r is the ‘reward’ on the t − jth trial (+1 for
t−j
ceptual decision-making and their relationship with pupil-linked correct and −1 for incorrect). Therefore, a r indicates the correct
t−j t−j
arousal processes in a single task. By quantifying all four sources side on the t − jth trial (+1 when left is correct and −1 when right
of suboptimality in the same task, we were able to assess the rela- is correct). The relative effect of each of these terms on the decision
tionships between the suboptimalities and determine the extent to is determined by the regression weights: βclick (the effect of each
i
which pupil-linked arousal processes were related to each. click), βRL (the reinforcement learning effect; that is, the effect of
i
the previous correct side), βCK (the choice kernel effect; that is, the
i
Results effect of the previous choice) and βside (an overall side bias).
To study the effects of pupil response on evidence accumulation, Each of the four suboptimalities could be quantified using dif-
we designed an auditory discrimination task based on the Poisson ferent parameters from this model (Fig. 2a–d). First, the SNR—
clicks task1 (see Methods). In this task, participants listened to two corresponding to suboptimality arising from neuronal noise—was
trains of clicks in the left and right ears, and were instructed to indi- quantified as the average weight given to all clicks (1 ∑20 βclick). The
20 i=1 i
cate which side they thought had more clicks (Fig. 1a). Clicks in higher the average click weight, the higher the SNR or, equivalently,
our task were generated according to a Bernoulli process, such that the lower the relative level of the noise. This average was signifi-
there was always a click every 50 ms that was either on the left, with cantly different from zero (two-tailed, one-sample t = 27.65; false
107
probability P , or the right. This process meant that the total num- discovery rate (FDR)-corrected for multiple comparisons P < 0.001;
left
ber of clicks was always fixed at 20 clicks and the clicks occurred Cohen’s d = 2.66; 95% CI = 0.37 to 0.43) (Fig. 2a), indicating that
at a fixed frequency of 20 Hz. This generative process for the clicks participants based their decision on (at least some of) the clicks and
represented a slight departure from ref. 1, in which clicks were that each click increased the log odds of ultimately choosing that
generated by a Poisson process with a refractory period of 20 ms. direction by about 0.4.
P
tfel
esoohc
)s(
emit
noitcaeR
>
0
–10 0 10 0 5 10
Δclick abs(Δclick)
Fig. 1 | Basic behaviour of 108 participants. a, Participants listened to a
train of 20 clicks coming in either the left (L, black bars) or right ear
(R, grey bars) for 1 s and decided which side had more clicks. b, The choice
probability (probability of choosing left) showed a sigmoidal relationship
with difficulty (the difference in the number of clicks between left and
right). c, Reaction times were higher on more difficult trials. The sizes
of the grey dots are scaled by the number of trials. All error bars (black
bars) indicate s.e.m. across participants. The dotted lines are fits with the
sigmoidal function (b) and linear function (c).
NATuRe HumAN BeHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTurE HuMaN BEHaviour Articles
The second suboptimality (that is, deviations from a flat integra- more on history (reinforcement learning and choice kernel) tend
tion kernel) was quantified as the deviation of the click weights from to rely less on evidence from the current trial. This result could
the average (that is, βclick −1 ∑20 βclick (Fig. 2b). Here, we found also be interpreted as participants who were worse at making
i 20 j=1 j
that participants did not weigh all of the clicks equally (repeated- decisions based on evidence from the current trial tending to rely
measures analysis of variance (ANOVA), F = 28.21; P < 0.001; more on previous history. Interestingly, we also found a similar
19, 2,033
effect size measure partial η2 = 0.21). This was not consistent with small but significant relationship between sequential effects and
previous reports of a similar task in which all clicks received equal SNR at the within-participant level (Supplementary Note 1 and
weighting on average1. Supplementary Fig. 1).
Sequential effects—the third suboptimality—were captured by In addition, we also saw a negative correlation between rein-
the effects from previous trials. Specifically, the terms βRL and βCK forcement learning and choice kernel across participants (Pearson’s
j j
quantified the reinforcement learning effect (the effect of the past r = −0.46; P < 0.001) (Fig. 3c), which indicated that participants
correct side) and choice kernel effect (the effect of the past choice) who relied more on past feedback also relied more on past choice
for the past five trials on the current choice. In line with earlier (stronger alternating effect).
work20, we found that previous trials had both significant reinforce-
ment learning and choice kernel effects on participants’ choices Individual differences in pupil change correlate with individ-
(Fig. 2c). Notably, the positive reinforcement learning regression ual differences in integration kernel. To examine the interaction
weight demonstrated a positive reinforcement learning effect, in between individual differences in pupil response and integration
that participants tended to choose whichever side that was shown to behaviour, we first computed the pupil diameter change during
be correct on the previous trial (two-tailed, one-sample t = 14.40; the presentation of click stimuli. We time-locked the pupillary
107
FDR-corrected for multiple comparisons P < 0.001; Cohen’s d = 1.39; response to the onset of the clicks stimulus, and averaged the
95% CI = 0.32 to 0.43). The negative choice kernel regression weight pupil diameter for each participant. We then took the difference
indicated an alternating choice kernel: participants tended to choose between the peak and the trough of the pupil diameter within
the opposite of what they had chosen on the previous trial (two- the click stimuli, which we called the ‘pupil change’ for each par-
tailed, one-sample t = −10.45; FDR-corrected for multiple com- ticipant (Fig. 4a). As shown by a median split in Fig. 4b, there
107
parisons P < 0.001; Cohen’s d = −1.01; 95% CI = −0.33 to −0.23). were considerable individual differences in the pupil change, with
Finally, the side bias was quantified by the intercept term βside in some participants showing almost no change while others showed
the model (Fig. 2d). This term quantified the extent to which a par- a much larger change during the stimulus. The difference in the
ticipant chose the left side on all trials regardless of which side was magnitude of pupil change between two median-split groups is
the correct side. Here, we saw a significant right bias indicated by significant (two-tailed, two-sample t = 9.54; P < 0.001; Cohen’s
106
a significantly negative regression weight (two-tailed, one-sample d = 1.30; 95% CI = 0.18 to 0.27).
t = −4.12; FDR-corrected for multiple comparisons P < 0.001; To examine the relationship between pupil change and the over-
107
Cohen’s d = −0.40; 95% CI = −0.19 to −0.07). all SNR and integration kernel, we used a two-way mixed ANOVA
to compare the effects of pupil change (coded as a continuous
Sequential effects and SNR covary across participants. We then variable) and time on participants’ regression weights (βclick from
i
inspected how these suboptimalities correlated with each other equation (3)). If pupil change had an effect on the overall SNR,
across participants. We used a three-way mixed ANOVA to inspect we should see a main effect of pupil change on regression weight.
the effect of previous trials on both SNR and kernel shape. The Conversely, if pupil change had an effect on the integration kernel, we
three factors we investigated were reinforcement learning regression should see a significant interaction effect between pupil change and
weights, choice kernel regression weights and time. The ANOVA was time on regression weight. Only the interaction effect was significant
set up to investigate the effect of these three factors on the regression (interaction: F = 2.225; P = 0.0018; partial η2 = 0.02; main effect:
19, 2,014
weights of clicks. In this ANOVA, the main effects of either reinforce- F = 2.761; P = 0.10). Moreover, these results were robust to a num-
1, 106
ment learning or choice kernel on kernel weights told us whether ber of different assumptions in the analysis, such as the size and loca-
reinforcement learning or choice kernel correlated with the overall tion of the window size for computing pupil change (Supplementary
SNR. The interaction effect between either reinforcement learning Note 2 and Supplementary Figs. 2–3) and whether we performed the
or choice kernel and time on kernel weights told us whether rein- analysis on the raw regression weights or on the top two principal
forcement learning or choice kernel correlated with the kernel shape. components (Supplementary Fig. 4). Taken together, these findings
We found that both reinforcement learning and choice ker- suggest that individual differences in pupil change affected the shape
nel had significant main effects on SNR (reinforcement learning: of the integration kernel but not the overall SNR (illustrated using a
F = 50.66; P < 0.001; choice kernel: F = 56.82; P < 0.001), median split in the left two panels of Fig. 4c).
1, 2,080 1, 2,080
but not kernel shape (reinforcement learning × time: F = 0.80; To understand which click weights were driving this interaction
19, 2,080
P = 0.71; choice kernel × time: F = 0.19; P = 0.99). Specifically, effect, we performed a correlation analysis between individual dif-
19, 2,080
reinforcement learning is negatively correlated with SNR (Pearson’s ferences in the regression weights for each click and individual dif-
r = −0.28; P = 0.003) (Fig. 3a), while choice kernel is positively cor- ferences in the pupil change. These post-hoc tests suggested that the
related with SNR (Pearson’s r = 0.22; P = 0.03) (Fig. 3b). main change occurred in the second and third clicks, whose weights
Importantly, since the reinforcement learning effect was positive were increased in participants with high pupil change. Specifically,
(Fig. 2c; that is, participants tended to choose, on the current trial, pupil change was significantly correlated with second (Pearson’s
whichever side was correct in the previous trial), a negative correlation r = 0.29; FDR-corrected for multiple comparisons P = 0.02) and
indicated that participants who relied more on feedback from the third (Pearson’s r = 0.30; FDR-corrected for multiple comparisons
previous trial tended to rely less on information on the current trial. P = 0.02) kernel weights (Supplementary Fig. 5).
Conversely, since the choice kernel effect was negative (that is, partici- To examine the relationship between pupil change and sequen-
pants tended to alternate their choices of sides between trials; Fig. 2c), tial effects and side bias, we looked at the correlation between pupil
a positive correlation indicated that the more participants alternated change and regression weights for the previous trials (reinforce-
their choices (that is, relied on past choice history), again the less ment learning and choice kernel) and side bias. We found no sig-
they relied on evidence from the current trial. nificant relationship between pupil change and either sequential
Together, these results suggest a ‘subtractive’ effect between effects (reinforcement learning: Pearson’s r = −0.06; FDR-corrected
choice history and SNR on the current trial: participants who rely for multiple comparisons P = 0.92; choice kernel: Pearson’s r = 0.04;
NATuRe HumAN BeHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTurE HuMaN BEHaviour
0.4
0.2
0
–0.2
SNR
FDR-corrected for multiple comparisons P = 0.94) or side bias We then tested whether there was an interaction between pupil
(Pearson’s r = −0.01; FDR-corrected for multiple comparisons change and integration kernel shape with a slightly modified ver-
P = 0.94) (illustrated using a median split in the right two panels sion of equation (4):
in Fig. 4c).
Combined, these results suggest that individual differences in
pupil change were associated with individual differences in only
logit[P attrialt]
one of the four suboptimalities (that is, the kernel of integration), left
20
such that participants with larger pupil change had more uneven =∑βclickc +βRLa r +βCKa +βside
integration kernels. i i 1 t−1t−1 1 t−1
i=1
20
Trial-by-trial variability in pupil change correlates with trial-by-trial +∑βclick×ΦtcΦ + βRL×Φta r Φ (5)
variability in SNR. To quantify how trial-by-trial pupil change relates i i t (cid:31)(cid:29)1(cid:29)(cid:29)(cid:29)(cid:29)(cid:29)(cid:30)t−(cid:29)1(cid:29)(cid:29)t−(cid:29)1(cid:29)(cid:29)(cid:28)t
to the four suboptimalities in evidence accumulation, we modified the
(cid:31)i(cid:29)=(cid:29)1(cid:29)(cid:29)(cid:29)(cid:29)(cid:30)(cid:29)(cid:29)(cid:29)(cid:29)(cid:29)(cid:29)(cid:28)
Reinforcementlearning×pupil
Kernel×pupil
regression model (equation (3)) to include interaction terms between
clicks, previous trials and trial-by-trial fluctuations in the pupil: + (cid:31)β (cid:29)1(cid:29)C (cid:29)K (cid:29)× (cid:29)Φ (cid:30)ta (cid:29)t(cid:29)−(cid:29)1(cid:29)Φ (cid:29)(cid:28)t + (cid:31)β(cid:29)s (cid:29)id (cid:29)e (cid:30)× (cid:29)Φ (cid:29)tΦ(cid:29)(cid:28)t
Choicekernel×pupil Sidebias×pupil
logit[P attrialt]
left
20
where Φ is the pupil change measure at trial t. The first four terms
=∑β iclickc i+β 1RLa t−1r t−1+β 1CKa t−1+βside +(cid:31)β(cid:29)Δ (cid:29)c (cid:29)li (cid:29)c (cid:29)k (cid:30)×Φ (cid:29)t (cid:29)Δ(cid:29)c (cid:29)Φ(cid:29)(cid:28)t
(4)
in this
mt
odel are the same as in equation (3). The last four terms are
i=1 SNR×pupil the respective interaction terms of clicks (integration kernel), previ-
+ (cid:31)β (cid:29)1R (cid:29)L (cid:29)× (cid:29)Φ (cid:29)t (cid:29)a (cid:30)t−(cid:29)1(cid:29)r (cid:29)t−(cid:29)1(cid:29)Φ
(cid:29)(cid:28)t
+ (cid:31)β (cid:29)1(cid:29)C (cid:29)K (cid:29)× (cid:29)Φ (cid:30)ta (cid:29)t(cid:29)−(cid:29)1(cid:29)Φ
(cid:29)(cid:28)t
+ (cid:31)β(cid:29)s (cid:29)id (cid:29)e (cid:30)× (cid:29)Φ (cid:29)tΦ(cid:29)(cid:28)t o keu rs
n
c eo l)r r ae nc dt s si id de
e
( bre iain
s
f wor ic them pe un pt
i
ll e ca hr an nin geg .) ,
W
pr ite hv i ro eu ps
e
c ah teo di -c me e(c ah suo ric ee
s
Reinforcementlearning×pupil Choicekernel×pupil Sidebias×pupil ANOVA, we did not find a significant effect of time on βclick×Φt
i
(F = 0.72; P = 0.81), suggesting that pupil change did not
19, 2,033
where Δc is the number of clicks on the left minus the number modulate the integration kernel on a trial-by-trial level. We did
of clicks on the right, corresponding to the mean click regression not find a significant interaction effect between pupil change
weight in Fig. 2a, indicating the average SNR. It is also worth not- and reinforcement learning (two-tailed, one-sample t = 1.78;
107
ing that, here, the interaction between side bias and pupil change is FDR-corrected P = 0.14), choice kernel (two-tailed, one-sample
equivalent to a main effect of pupil change, since the regressor of the t = −0.78; FDR-corrected P = 0.62) or side bias (two-tailed, one-
107
interaction between side bias and pupil change is the same as the sample t = −1.63; two-tailed, FDR-corrected P = 0.19) either. We
107
regressor of pupil change alone. also performed variance impact factor analysis to assuage concerns
We found that trial-by-trial pupil change interacted signifi- of collinearity in our regression analyses (Supplementary Note 3
cantly with Δclick (that is, the interaction term between SNR and and Supplementary Figs. 7–11). These results combined suggest
pupil change was significantly different from zero; two-tailed, one- that pupil change on a trial-by-trial level specifically modulated the
sample t = −3.46; FDR-corrected P < 0.001; Cohen’s d = −0.33; overall SNR, and not integration kernel or sequential effects.
107
95% CI = −0.03 to −0.01), but not with side bias (two-tailed, one-
sample t = −0.80; FDR-corrected P = 0.46), reinforcement learn- Drift diffusion model bound corresponds to individual pupil
107
ing (two-tailed, one-sample t = 0.65; FDR-corrected P = 0.64) or change. To further examine the potential computations underlying
107
choice kernel (two-tailed, one-sample t = −0.59; FDR-corrected the relationship between the accumulation process and pupil change,
107
P = 0.57) (Fig. 5). We showed that the result is robust after repeat- we fit a canonical model for this type of perceptual decision-making
ing the same analysis with trial-by-trial pupil changes residualized task—the drift-diffusion model (DDM)—to participants’ choice data.
from previous-trial pupil change, ensuring that the result we This model proposes that evidence is integrated over time and a deci-
saw was not driven by pupil signal bled over from previous trials sion is made when the evidence passes a bound. In an interrogation
(Supplementary Fig. 6). task paradigm (such as ours in which participants can only respond
thgiew
noissergeR
a b c d
*** *** Reinforcement learning *** *
Choice kernel
** **
***
1 5 10 15 20 –5 –4 –3 –2 –1 Side bias
Click number Previous trial number
Fig. 2 | Regression model. a, The mean of the click weights is significantly above zero (***P < 0.001; absolute Cohen’s d > 1). b, Deviation of click weights
from the mean has a significantly uneven shape (***P < 0.001). c, Effect of previous trials: reinforcement learning (the correct side in the previous trial)
positively predicts choice, indicating a reinforcement learning effect, whereas choice kernel (the choice made in the previous trial) negatively predicts
choice, indicating an alternating choice kernel (***P < 0.001; absolute Cohen’s d > 1; **P < 0.001; absolute Cohen’s d > 0.5). d, Side bias is significantly
negative (*P < 0.001; absolute Cohen’s d < 0.5). All error bars (black bars) indicate s.e.m. across participants. All statistical details are reported in the
section ‘Humans exhibited all four suboptimalities in the Bernoulli clicks task’.
NATuRe HumAN BeHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTurE HuMaN BEHaviour Articles
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0 0.5 1.0
Reinforcement learning regression
weights
after the train of clicks ends), the DDM with no bound provides an Second, they include a ‘memory parameter’, λ, to describe the
optimal solution to the task. Brunton and colleagues extended this extent to which the model is ‘forgetful’ or ‘impulsive’. In particular,
standard DDM to include several different suboptimalities1. a forgetful accumulator (λ < 0) forgets previous evidence and exhib-
First, their model includes three types of noise that describe vari- its the recency effect, while an impulsive accumulator (λ > 0) over-
ability in the initial state of the accumulator, σ, the integration of weights early evidence and exhibits a primacy effect. When there is
i
evidence over time, σ, and the encoding of sensory stimuli, σ. no memory noise (λ = 0), the integration kernel is flat.
a s
thgiew
noisserger
RNS
0.5
0
–0.5
–1.0
–1.5
–1.0 –0.5 0 –0.5 0 0.5 1.0 1.5
Choice kernel regression Reinforcement learning regression
weight weight
thgiew
noisserger
lenrek
eciohC
a b c
Fig. 3 | interaction between suboptimalities across participants. a, Reinforcement learning is significantly negatively correlated with SNR (Pearson’s
r = −0.28; P = 0.003; n = 108). b, Choice kernel is significantly positively correlated with SNR (Pearson’s r = 0.22; P = 0.03; n = 108). c, Reinforcement
learning is significantly negatively correlated with choice kernel (Pearson r = −0.46; P < 0.001; n = 108).
Clicks start Clicks end Clicks start Clicks end
0.2
0
–0.2
–1 0 1 2
Time (s) Time (s)
)derocs-z(
retemaid
lipuP
High pupil change
Low pupil change
Pupil change
–1 0 1 2
0.4
0.2
0
–0.2
SNR
thgiew
noissergeR
a b
c
High pupil change (reinforcement learning) High pupil change (choice kernel)
Low pupil change (reinforcement learning) Low pupil change (choice kernel)
NS ** NS NS
1 5 10 15 20 –5 –4 –3 –2 –1 Side bias
Click position Previous trial position
Fig. 4 | interaction between pupil change and integration behaviour across participants. a, Pupil diameter time-locked to the onset of clicks, averaged
within participants across trials and then across participants. b, Averaged pupil response across participants, split into two groups (n = 54 in each
group), showing high (blue) versus low (red) change in pupil response. All shaded areas in a and b indicate s.e.m. across participants. c, Regression
weights averaged across participants, split into high versus low pupil change groups for visualization. All statistical details are reported in the section
‘Individual differences in pupil change correlate with individual differences in integration kernel’. Left: the mean regression weight showed no change
across groups. Middle-left: pupil response had a significant interaction effect with time on regression weight (**P = 0.002). Middle-right: there was
no difference in the effect of previous trials across groups. Right: side bias showed no change across groups. All error bars indicate s.e.m. across
participants. NS, not significant.
NATuRe HumAN BeHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTurE HuMaN BEHaviour
0.05 NS ** NS NS their relationship with pupil diameter at the across-participant and
within-participant levels. We showed that all four types of subopti-
mality were at play in our perceptual decision-making task. These
included variance that could not be explained by another source
(that is, ‘noise’, a predominantly ‘bump’ integration kernel, sequen-
tial effects in the form of a positive reinforcement learning effect
(choosing the previous correct answer) and an alternation choice
kernel effect (choosing the opposite of the previous choice), and an
0
overall side bias (Fig. 2)). In addition, across the population, partici-
pants with stronger sequential effects (reinforcement learning and
choice kernel) tended to rely less on evidence from the current trial
(smaller SNR), and participants with one kind of sequential effect
(reinforcement learning) also tended to have the other kind (choice
kernel) (Fig. 3). At the physiological level, two of the four subop-
timalities were associated with pupil dilation, at the trial-by-trial
–0.05 and individual difference levels, respectively. At the individual dif-
Pupil
∆click ×
Prp eu vp iil
ous
correct ×
p Pru epil
vious
choice ×
pupil f
c
w
C
pe
h
uoir
ta
pe nhnn
iv
lgc
el
cee
a
r
h,
sr
l
aw
g
ee nlev
i
yr
gte
,h
el a,
p
,
t
ao
w
u
t
n
m
hp
itl
i
ey
ho
l
t
rt arceh
i
h
a
se
u
a
ml
-n
ni bn
ae
g
y
lt
v
e
le
-
ee
tg
rn
rdr
i
Sua
ap
Nt
r
lri io
lo
n
Ren
f
g
v
i
b
l
ek
e
else
,
it
o
nr oimfn
gn
ie
lun
ayl
slt
w
ue
n
sog
s
oa
r
cs
ia
p
s
i
aa
t eri
ts
eo
ews
s
dno
e
a
c
n
s
wbi ta
ae
iat
tsi
te
hn
sid
oo
g
l
n
c
a
w
a
i
r
as
gi
(
tst
eF
eoh
rdic
g
pp
i w.a
uu
t
i4
pp
e
t)
h
ii
d
ll
.
change on that trial (Fig. 5). Our work adds to growing literature
on the suboptimalities in evidence accumulation and perceptual
decision-making and their relationship with pupil dilation. Below,
we discuss the implications of our behavioural and pupillometric
findings.
At the behavioural level, our findings are consistent with a num-
Third, the bound, B, describes the threshold of evidence at which ber of previous results showing the presence of noise in the integra-
the model makes a decision. In the context of an interrogation para- tion process1,8, uneven weighting of information over time4,18,19, and
digm, evidence coming after the bound has been crossed is ignored. the presence of order effects20,21,23 and side biases1. In addition, by
Fourth, a sensory adaptation process controls the impact of suc- running our task in a large number of participants (something not
cessive clicks on the same size. This process is controlled by two traditionally done in the animal literature), we were able to expose
adaptation parameters: (1) the direction of adaptation, ϕ, which the relationships between the suboptimalities at the individual dif-
dictates whether the impact of a click on one side either increases ference level. Intriguingly, this analysis suggests an antagonistic rela-
(ϕ > 1) or decreases (ϕ < 1) with the number of clicks that were pre- tionship between the use of information from the past trial (that is,
viously on the same side; and (2) a time constant τ , which deter- reinforcement learning and choice kernel effects) and processing of
ϕ
mines how quickly the adapted impact recovers to 1. the current stimulus, as reflected in SNR. Such an effect may reflect
Finally, the bias describes an overall bias, and the lapse rate a kind of compensatory process in low performers. That is, people
describes the probability of a random response being made. who are less able to process the stimulus correctly (low SNR) may
Overall, the Brunton model has nine free parameters—three types rely more on sequential effects to (either explicitly or implicitly) try
of neuronal noise, memory noise, bound, two parameters controlling to compensate. While such a strategy is not adaptive for this task,
sensory adaptation, bias and lapse rate. We fit these parameters using this approach would pay off if there was autocorrelation in the task.
the maximum-likelihood procedure described previously1 and fol- In addition to the correlations between suboptimalities, one
lowing code from ref. 41. We generated choices for each participant unexpected behavioural finding is the shape of the uneven inte-
using the best-fitting parameters, and computed an integration ker- gration kernel—specifically, the ‘bump’ kernel, where clicks in the
nel for each participant using these model-generated choices. middle are weighed more than those at the beginning or the end.
As shown in Fig. 6, the model provides a good fit to the main This contrasts with previous work on perceptual decision-making
aspects of the data, including the integration kernel (Fig. 6a) and the by Brunton and colleagues1, who found the integration kernel of
psychometric curve (Fig. 6b). In addition, the parameter values we rats and well-trained humans to be flat, Yates and colleagues4, who
found from these fits were comparable to those found in Brunton showed a purely primacy-driven integration kernel in monkeys,
et al.1 for the human version of their task (Supplementary Fig. 12). and several studies showing that humans have a recency kernel18,19.
This provides a good replication of their findings in a larger cohort Given this difference in results, one obvious question is whether the
of participants. bump kernel is a genuine feature of the integration process or some
Looking in more detail at the parameters, we find that pupil artefact of either the analysis pipeline or the task.
change is marginally significantly negatively correlated with bound With respect to the analysis, one possibility is that the bump
(Pearson’s r = −0.28; FDR-corrected for multiple comparisons may result from a mixture of participants with primacy and recency
P = 0.05; Fig. 6c) and not significantly correlated with the other kernels, which average together to form the bump. To test this, we
eight parameters (that is, participants with high pupil change have categorized the integration kernel for each participant into one of
lower bound in the accumulator). This result suggests that pupil the following four shapes: bump, primacy, recency or flat (for the
change affects the integration kernel shape, potentially by changing categorization method, see Supplementary Note 4). All 108 of these
the height of the bound. are plotted in Supplementary Fig. 13. From here, it is easy to see
that a large number of participants (49%) exhibit the bump kernel.
Discussion This suggests that, at least on the level of individual participants,
In this paper, we investigated four sources of suboptimality in human the bump kernel is a feature of the integration process, and not
evidence integration—neuronal noise (as reflected in the SNR), just an artefact of averaging. Of course, the possibility remains that
uneven integration kernel, sequential effects and side bias—and this bump kernel is a result of mixing primacy and recency kernels
thgiew
noissergeR
Fig. 5 | Trial-by-trial interaction between pupil change and integration
behaviour. All error bars (black bars) indicate s.e.m. across participants.
**P < 0.001.
NATuRe HumAN BeHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTurE HuMaN BEHaviour Articles
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
1 5 10 15 20
Click position
within subject (for example, some trials have primacy kernels and In this paper, we have related it to SNR, with the interpretation that
some have recency kernels). More detailed modelling work will be changes in the pupil reflect changes in SNR, which cause poor per-
needed to tease these interpretations apart. formance. If one takes pupil change as an index of activity in the
With respect to the task, another possible cause for the bump ker- locus coeruleus, our interpretation is consistent with the adaptive
nel comes from the number of clicks in each stimulus being fixed. This gain theory of norepinephrine function, such that increased locus
fixed number of clicks in each stimulus means that an ideal observer, coeruleus activity causes more variability in behaviour via changes
who is aware that there are only 20 clicks in each stimulus, could in neural gain26,43.
safely stop integrating clicks if the excess number of clicks favouring An alternate interpretation, put forth by Urai and colleagues21,
one side exceeds the number of remaining clicks. That is, by fixing the is that pupil change reflects subjective uncertainty and that partici-
number of clicks, we may be implicitly favouring a bounded integra- pants are more uncertain on trials in which they perform poorly.
tion process (with a collapsing bound). Such bound crossing would In this interpretation, the direction of causality is reversed: it is poor
cause the later clicks to be down-weighted on average, as we see in performance that leads to changes in pupil response, via its effect
the later part of the bump profile. Of course, bound crossing would on uncertainty (which, incidentally, may also be related to the locus
not account for the initial rise in weights for the bump profile, which coeruleus44). Distinguishing between these accounts, which predict
would need some additional mechanism (perhaps a recency effect almost identical relationships between pupil change and behav-
combined with a bound) as an explanation. Incidentally, this account ioural variability, will be difficult with correlational experiments
would fit with the recency bias found in perceptual categorization in such as ours, and future work using pharmacological and other
previous studies18,19. An important direction for future research would causal interventions will be necessary to determine the direction of
be to test whether this account fully explains the bump profile, with the relationship between pupil change (putatively the locus coeru-
more detailed modelling in addition to more experiments in which leus) and noise.
the total number of clicks in each stimulus is not fixed. With regard to sequential effects, in contrast with our result
At the physiological level, our results add to rapidly growing showing no relationship between pupil change and reinforcement
literature on the relationship between pupil dilation and decision- learning and choice kernel, a number of studies have found rela-
making. In particular, this literature has reported associations tionships between pupil change and sequential effects. For exam-
between pupil dilation and a number of suboptimalities, including ple, Nassar and colleagues39 showed that both baseline pupil size
noise18,21, reinforcement learning effects39, choice kernel effects21 and pupil change modulate how information from previous trials
and pre-existing biases28,33. Our work builds on previous work by affects current choice39—a result that was recently replicated in a
examining the relationship between pupil dilation and all of these different version of the task40. Similarly, in a perceptual decision-
suboptimalities in a single task and a single cohort of participants. making task, Urai and colleagues21 showed that pupil dilation on the
Our work also extends previous work by looking at the relation- previous trial modulated the extent to which that trial influenced
ship between pupil dilation and the shape of the integration kernel. the current choice.
Below, we situate our results with respect to this previous literature, One possible cause of the difference between our results and this
considering each of the suboptimalities in turn. previous work is the overall magnitude of the sequential effects in
With regard to SNR, we found that increased pupil change is the respective tasks. Specifically, in our task, the sequential effects
associated with lower SNR on each trial. This finding is consistent were small, with the combined effect of reinforcement learning and
with much of the previous literature. For example, in the dot motion choice kernel equating to about 2 clicks, or 10% of the variance in the
paradigm, Murphy and colleagues31 showed that trial-by-trial vari- response. Conversely, in ref. 21, the previous trial effects accounted
ability in the evidence accumulation process was associated with for almost 100% of the variance when evidence on the current trial
increased pupil dilation. Likewise in other perceptual decision- was weak. Likewise, in refs. 39,40, successful performance of the
making tasks, several authors have observed an association with tasks required the use of sequential effects, so the sequential effects
increased pupil dilation and noise in behaviour18,21. Outside percep- observed were huge. This difference in the overall magnitude of
tual decision-making, Jepma and Nieuwenhuis42 observed the same the sequential effects could simply have made modulation of these
relationship between pupil change and decision noise in a reinforce- sequential effects by pupil change too small to observe in our task.
ment learning-based explore–exploit task. Another possible cause of the difference in results is the timing
Of course, while the finding that trial-to-trial pupil dilation is of the pupil signal that we focused on. Specifically, our task was
associated with trial-to-trial behavioural variability is robust across optimized to look at the pupil response during presentation of
studies, exactly what this finding means is open to interpretation. the click stimuli and not at pupil response at other points in the
thgiew
noissergeR
Human 1.0
DDM
0.5
0
–10 0 10
P
tfel
esoohc
Human 1.5
DDM
1.0
0.5
0
5 10 15 20
Δclicks Bound
)derocs-z(
egnahc
lipuP
a b c
Fig. 6 | Bounded DDm fits and pupil change. a,b, Bounded DDM can account for the integration kernel (a) and psychometric curve (b) in human
participants. The orange dashed line and orange circles, respectively, indicate the model-generated kernel and choice curve averaged across participants.
The blue line and blue circles, respectively, indicate the averaged kernel and choice curve from human participants. All shaded areas in a and error bars
in b indicate s.e.m. across participants. c, Fitted bounds from bounded DDM correlate negatively with pupil change across participants. Each blue dot
indicates a participant (Pearson’s r = −0.28; FDR-corrected for multiple comparisons P = 0.05; n = 108).
NATuRe HumAN BeHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTurE HuMaN BEHaviour
task, such as at baseline or following choice and feedback, which reinforces this account of pupil change reflecting a change in the
can have very different behavioural and computational corre- decision bound, and thus effecting a change in the shape of the
lates45. This difference in timing is especially important for the integration kernel. Clearly, more detailed experimental work will
Urai et al.21 results where the pupil signal modulating sequential be needed to further test this result.
effects was computed 250 ms before feedback, which was at least The interpretation that phasic locus coeruleus activity, as indexed
2,800 ms after stimulus onset. Such a time lag would be well into by trial-by-trial pupil change, modulates SNR is consistent with a
the inter-trial interval and possibly even the next trial in our task, number of pupil findings, as outlined above18,21,31. However, it is at
making the corresponding pupil signal difficult for us to com- odds with a number of findings from direct locus coeruleus record-
pute. Indeed, when we looked at the signal at these later times, ings in monkeys, where enhanced phasic locus coeruleus activity
there was no association between pupil change and sequential is associated with better task performance47. Understanding these
effects (Supplementary Note 5 and Supplementary Figs. 14–15). results in more detail, with experiments in animals and neuroimag-
Clearly, future experiments with additional delays will be neces- ing in humans, will be important if we are to fully understand that
sary to determine whether pupil change modulates sequential the locus coeruleus plays a part in these decisions.
effects in our task.
Finally, a number of other authors have related individual differ- methods
ences in pupil dilation to a number of other biases, including risk Participants. A total of 188 healthy participants (University of Arizona
aversion46, learning styles28 and the framing effect33. While these undergraduate students) took part in the experiment for course credit. Data from
biases are not directly related to integrating evidence over time, the 108 participants were used in the analysis. We excluded 19 participants due to poor
performance (accuracy lower than 60%), 6 due to missing behavioural data files,
more general point that individuals with large pupil change have
11 due to missing pupillometry data files, and another 44 due to poor eye-tracking
more bias across a range of tasks is consistent with our result that
data (see the section ‘Eye tracking’ below). All participants provided informed
individual differences in pupil change modulate the integration written consent before participating in the study. All procedures conformed to
kernel. In particular, we find that people with greater pupil change the human subject ethical regulations. All study procedures and consent were
show more deviation (that is, more bias) from the ideal, flat, integra- approved by the University of Arizona Institutional Review Board.
tion kernel. Taken together, these results suggest that (at least some)
Bernoulli clicks task. Participants made a series of auditory perceptual decisions.
deviations from optimality are modulated by pupil change, possibly
On each trial, they listened to a series of 20 auditory ‘clicks’ presented over the
via its association with the locus coeruleus. course of 1 s. Clicks could be either ‘left’ or ‘right’ clicks, presented in the left or
More generally, the difference between the between- and within- right ear. Participants decided which ear received the most clicks. In contrast
participant pupil response results is intriguing. On the one hand, with the Poisson clicks task1, in which the click timing was random, clicks in our
individual differences in pupil change correlate with kernel shape. task were presented every 50 ms with a fixed probability (P = 0.55) of occurring
in the ‘correct’ ear. The correct side was determined with a fixed 50% probability.
On the other hand, trial-by-trial fluctuations in pupil change cor-
Feedback appeared 500 ms after response, followed by a 1-s fixation delay before
relate with SNR. Why exactly would the individual differences and the next trial.
trial-by-trial correlates of the same signal be so different? Participants performed the task on a desktop computer, while wearing
One possibility, originally raised in ref. 28, is that these slightly headphones, and were positioned in chin rests to facilitate eye tracking and
pupillometry. They were instructed to fixate on a symbol displayed in the
different measures of pupil diameter—individual differences ver-
centre of the screen, where response and outcome feedback was also displayed
sus trial-by-trial fluctuation—may represent different neural mea-
during trials, and communicated their responses using a standard keyboard.
sures, with the average of pupil dilations representing baseline or Participants played until they gave 500 correct responses, or when 50 min of total
tonic locus coeruleus signals, and the trial-to-trial fluctuations experiment time was reached.
of pupil response reflecting transient, or phasic, locus coeruleus
firing. At the individual difference level, Eldar and colleagues28,33 Behavioural analyses. We modelled the choice with logistic regression using
equation (3). In particular, we assumed that the probability of choosing left on
have suggested that the mean pupil response within a participant
trial t is a sigmoidal function of the impact from each click, the impact from five
is a measure of tonic locus coeruleus activity. In contrast, at the previous trial correct sides, the impact from five previous trial choices, and an
trial-by-trial level, work in monkeys and in mice has suggested that overall side bias. In this model, by giving the ith click its own weight, we could
moment-to-moment pupil diameter changes track phasic locus account for the overall integration kernel.
coeruleus firing24,25. Applying these interpretations to the pres-
Eye tracking. A desk-mounted EyeTribe eye tracker was used to measure
ent findings suggests that tonic locus coeruleus activity changes
participants’ pupil diameter from both eyes at a rate of 30 samples per second
the kernel of integration while phasic locus coeruleus activity while they were performing the behavioural task with their head fixed on a chin
decreases the SNR. rest. Pupil diameter data were preprocessed to detect and remove blinks and other
The interpretation that tonic locus coeruleus activity modu- artefacts. Pupil diameter was z-scored across the entire experiment before analysis.
For each trial, pupil response was extracted time-locked to the start of the trial
lates the integration kernel between participants is consistent
(Fig. 4a). Change in pupil response was computed as the difference between the
with previous work showing that individual differences in pupil
peak diameter and the minimum diameter during the 1 s following trial onset.
change correlate with individual differences in susceptibility to Pupil response measurements in which more than one-third of the samples
a variety of cognitive and decision biases28,33. Importantly, theo- contained artefacts were considered invalid and excluded from the analysis. Only
retical work has shown with a biophysically based neural network participants with at least 200 valid trials were included in analysis (n = 108).
model that high tonic locus coeruleus activity acts to amplify
Across-participant pupil analysis. For each participant, we took the mean pupil
attractor dynamics, essentially causing the storage of impulsive
response across trials and computed the change in pupil diameter, as described
decisions38. This can serve as a partial explanation for why our above. We then compared this pupil change measurement with regression weights
results revealed a positive correlation between individual pupil from equation (3). Specifically, we performed a two-way mixed ANOVA in which
change (a proxy for tonic locus coeruleus activity) and early kernel pupil change is a between-subject variable, time is a within-subject variable and
regression weight is the dependent variable. We inspected the main effect of pupil
weight. Furthermore, empirical work has shown that pupil-linked
change, which informed whether the average regression weight changed with pupil
arousal (associated with locus coeruleus–norepinephrine activity change across participants. We also inspected the interaction effect between pupil
and neural gain) is related to time-varying changes in the decision change and time, which informed whether pupil change modulates the effect of
bound36. Specifically, a higher pupil response was found to reflect time on regression weights (that is, the integration kernel).
a stronger urgency signal (lower decision bound). While this rela-
Trial-by-trial within-participant pupil analysis. For each trial, we took the
tionship between pupil response and urgency was only found for
pupil response and computed the change in pupil diameter. We then modelled
the case in which participants faced a decision deadline, our result participants’ choices with the logistic model in equations (4) and (5) to parse out
that pupil change was correlated with the bound in DDM (Fig. 6) trial-by-trial effects of pupil response on integration. The first three terms in both
NATuRe HumAN BeHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTurE HuMaN BEHaviour Articles
equations were similar to equation (3). However, in addition, we assumed that 18. Cheadle, S. et al. Adaptive gain control during human perceptual choice.
choice was also a function of the interaction between trial-by-trial pupil change Neuron 81, 1429–1441 (2014).
and clicks, previous correct side and previous choice. 19. Wyart, V., Myers, N. E. & Summerfield, C. Neural mechanisms of human
perceptual choice under focused and divided attention. J. Neurosci. 35,
DDM with sticky bound analysis. We fitted the nine-parameter DDM with sticky 3485–3498 (2015).
bound originally described by Brunton et al.1,41 (see ‘Code availability’ statement). 20. Abrahamyan, A., Silva, L. L., Dakin, S. C., Carandini, M. & Gardner, J. L.
Since the unit for the noise is set up in the code to be variance per second instead Adaptable history biases in human perceptual decisions. Proc. Natl Acad.
of variance per click, the noise depends on the click rate. Therefore, we changed the Sci. USA 113, E3548–E3557 (2016).
total sampling rate in the code from the default 40 Hz (which is the sampling rate 21. Urai, A. E., Braun, A. & Donner, T. H. Pupil-linked arousal is driven
used in Brunton et al.’s rat version of the task) to 20 Hz (the sampling rate used in by decision uncertainty and alters serial choice bias. Nat. Commun. 8,
our task and in Brunton et al.’s human auditory version of the task). We fitted the 14637 (2017).
model on our human choice data using a maximum-likelihood approach. 22. Barraclough, D. J., Conroy, M. L. & Lee, D. Prefrontal cortex and decision
making in a mixed-strategy game. Nat. Neurosci. 7, 404–410 (2004).
Statistics. All data analyses and statistics were performed in MATLAB and R. 23. Akrami, A., Kopec, C. D., Diamond, M. E. & Brody, C. D. Posterior parietal
Repeated-measures ANOVA, two-way mixed ANOVA and the corresponding cortex represents sensory history and mediates its effects on behaviour.
post-hoc tests were done in R. All other analyses and statistical tests were done Nature 554, 368–372 (2018).
in MATLAB. 24. Joshi, S., Li, Y., Kalwani, R. M. & Gold, J. I. Relationships between pupil
diameter and neuronal activity in the locus coeruleus, colliculi, and cingulate
Reporting Summary. Further information on research design is available in the cortex. Neuron 89, 221–234 (2016).
Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article. 25. Reimer, J. et al. Pupil fluctuations track rapid changes in adrenergic and
cholinergic activity in cortex. Nat. Commun. 7, 13289 (2016).
Code availability 26. Aston-Jones, G. & Cohen, J. D. An integrative theory of locus coeruleus-
norepinephrine function: adaptive gain and optimal performance. Annu. Rev.
Experiment code was created with Psychtoolbox-3 and custom MATLAB code. All
Neurosci. 28, 403–450 (2005).
behavioural and pupil analyses were created with custom MATLAB and R code.
27. Rajkowski, J. Correlations between locus coeruleus (LC) neural activity,
All code can be found at https://github.com/janekeung129/clicks-pupil. Code for
pupil diameter and behavior in monkey support a role of LC in attention.
fitting the DDM with sticky bound1,41 is provided at http://github.com/misun6312/
Soc. Neurosci. abstr. 19, 974 (1993).
PBupsModel.jl.
28. Eldar, E., Cohen, J. D. & Niv, Y. The effects of neural gain on attention and
learning. Nat. Neurosci. 16, 1146–1153 (2013).
Data availability
29. Sara, S. J. The locus coeruleus and noradrenergic modulation of cognition.
The datasets generated and analysed during the current study are available from the Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 10, 211–223 (2009).
corresponding author upon reasonable request. 30. Cavanagh, J. F., Wiecki, T. V., Kochar, A. & Frank, M. J. Eye tracking
and pupillometry are indicators of dissociable latent decision processes.
Received: 21 May 2018; Accepted: 5 February 2019; J. Exp. Psychol. Gen. 143, 1476–1488 (2014).
Published: xx xx xxxx 31. Murphy, P. R., Vandekerckhove, J. & Nieuwenhuis, S. Pupil-linked arousal
determines variability in perceptual decision making. PLoS Comput. Biol. 10,
e1003854 (2014).
References
32. Mather, M., Clewett, D., Sakaki, M. & Harley, C. W. Norepinephrine ignites
1. Brunton, B. W., Botvinick, M. M. & Brody, C. D. Rats and humans local hotspots of neuronal excitation: how arousal amplifies selectivity in
can optimally accumulate evidence for decision-making. Science 340, perception and memory. Behav. Brain Sci. 39, e200 (2016).
95–98 (2013). 33. Eldar, E., Felso, V., Cohen, J. D. & Niv, Y. A pupillary index of susceptibility to
2. Erlich, J. C., Brunton, B. W., Duan, C. A., Hanks, T. D. & Brody, C. D. decision biases. Preprint at https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/247890v1
Distinct effects of prefrontal and parietal cortex inactivations on an (2018).
accumulation of evidence task in the rat. eLife 4, e05457 (2015). 34. De Gee, J. W., Knapen, T. & Donner, T. H. Decision-related pupil dilation
3. Katz, L. N., Yates, J. L., Pillow, J. W. & Huk, A. C. Dissociated functional reflects upcoming choice and individual bias. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 111,
significance of decision-related activity in the primate dorsal stream. Nature E618–E625 (2014).
535, 285–288 (2016). 35. De Gee, J. W. et al. Dynamic modulation of decision biases by brainstem
4. Yates, J. L., Park, I. M., Katz, L. N., Pillow, J. W. & Huk, A. C. Functional arousal systems. eLife 6, e23232 (2017).
dissection of signal and noise in MT and LIP during decision-making. 36. Murphy, P. R., Boonstra, E. & Nieuwenhuis, S. Global gain modulation
Nat. Neurosci. 20, 1285–1292 (2017). generates time-dependent urgency during perceptual choice in humans.
5. Newsome, W. T. & Pare, E. B. A selective impairment of motion perception Nat. Commun. 7, 13526 (2016).
following lesions of the middle temporal visual area (MT). J. Neurosci. 8, 37. Hauser, T. U., Moutoussis, M., Purg, N., Dayan, P. & Dolan, R. J. Noradrenaline
2201–2211 (1988). modulates decision urgency during sequential information gathering. Preprint
6. Hanks, T. D. et al. Distinct relationships of parietal and prefrontal cortices to at https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/252932v1 (2018).
evidence accumulation. Nature 520, 220–223 (2015). 38. Eckhoff, P., Wong-Lin, K. & Holmes, P. Optimality and robustness of a
7. Gold, J. I. & Shadlen, M. N. Neural computations that underlie decisions biophysical decision-making model under norepinephrine modulation.
J. Neurosci. 29, 4301–4311 (2009).
about sensory stimuli. Trends Cogn. Sci. 5, 10–16 (2001).
39. Nassar, M. R. et al. Rational regulation of learning dynamics by pupil-linked
8. Drugowitsch, J., Wyart, V., Devauchelle, A.-D. & Koechlin, E. Computational
arousal systems. Nat. Neurosci. 15, 1040–1046 (2012).
precision of mental inference as critical source of human choice
40. Krishnamurthy, K., Nassar, M. R., Sarode, S. & Gold, J. I. Arousal-related
suboptimality. Neuron 92, 1398–1411 (2016).
adjustments of perceptual biases optimize perception in dynamic
9. Faisal, A. A., Selen, L. P. & Wolpert, D. M. Noise in the nervous system.
environments. Nat. Hum. Behav. 1, 0107 (2017).
Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 9, 292–303 (2008).
41. Yartsev, M. M., Hanks, T. D., Yoon, A. M. & Brody, C. D. Causal contribution
10. Ma, W. J., Beck, J. M., Latham, P. E. & Pouget, A. Bayesian inference with
and dynamical encoding in the striatum during evidence accumulation. eLife
probabilistic population codes. Nat. Neurosci. 9, 1432–1438 (2006).
7, e34929 (2018).
11. Beck, J. M., Ma, W. J., Pitkow, X., Latham, P. E. & Pouget, A. Not noisy, just
42. Jepma, M. & Nieuwenhuis, S. Pupil diameter predicts changes in the
wrong: the role of suboptimal inference in behavioral variability. Neuron 74,
exploration–exploitation trade-off: evidence for the adaptive gain theory.
30–39 (2012). J. Cogn. Neurosci. 23, 1587–1596 (2011).
12. Smith, P. L. & Ratcliff, R. Psychology and neurobiology of simple decisions. 43. Servan-Schreiber, D., Printz, H. & Cohen, J. D. A network model of
Trends Neurosci. 27, 161–168 (2004). catecholamine effects: gain, signal-to-noise ratio, and behavior. Science 249,
13. Osborne, L. C, Lisberger, S. G. & Bialek, W. A sensory source for motor 892–895 (1990).
variation. Nature 437, 412–416 (2005). 44. Angela, J. Y. & Dayan, P. Uncertainty, neuromodulation, and attention.
14. Kaufman, M. T. & Churchland, A. K. Cognitive neuroscience: sensory noise Neuron 46, 681–692 (2005).
drives bad decisions. Nature 496, 172–173 (2013). 45. O’Reilly, J. X. et al. Dissociable effects of surprise and model update in
15. Sutton, R. S. & Barto, A. G. Introduction to Reinforcement Learning parietal and anterior cingulate cortex. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 110,
(MIT Press, Cambridge, 1998). E3660–E3669 (2013).
16. Daw, N. D., O’Doherty, J. P., Dayan, P., Seymour, B. & Dolan, R. J. 46. Yechiam, E. & Telpaz, A. To take risk is to face loss: a tonic pupillometry
Cortical substrates for exploratory decisions in humans. Nature 441, study. Front. Psychol. 2, 344 (2011).
876–879 (2006). 47. Aston-Jones, G., Rajkowski, J., Kubiak, P. & Alexinsky, T. Locus coeruleus
17. Griffiths, T. L. & Tenenbaum, J. B. Optimal predictions in everyday cognition. neurons in monkey are selectively activated by attended cues in a vigilance
Psychol. Sci. 17, 767–773 (2006). task. J. Neurosci. 14, 4467–4480 (1994).
NATuRe HumAN BeHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTurE HuMaN BEHaviour
Acknowledgements Competing interests
The authors received no specific funding for this work. We thank M. Alberhasky, The authors declare no competing interests.
C. Andrade, D. Carrera, K. Chung, M. de Leon, Z. Dzhalilova, A. Esprit, A. Foley,
E. Giron, B. Gonzalez, A. Haddad, L. Hall, M. Higgs, M. Jacobs, M.-H. Kang,
K. Kellohen, N. Kwatra, H. Kyllo, A. Lawwill, S. Low, C. Lynch, A. Ornelas, G. Patterson, Additional information
F. Santos, S. Savita, C. Sikora, V. Thornton, G. Vargas, C. West and C. Wong for help with Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/
running the experiments. The funders had no role in study design, data collection and s41562-019-0551-4.
analysis, decision to publish or preparation of the manuscript.
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Author contributions Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to W.K.
W.K. analysed the data. T.H. collected and preprocessed the data. T.A.H. and R.C.W. Publisher’s note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
designed the experiment. W.K. and R.C.W. wrote the manuscript. All three authors published maps and institutional affiliations.
contributed to interpretation of the results and critical discussion. © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2019
NATuRe HumAN BeHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
1
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
April
2018
Corresponding author(s): Waitsang Keung
Reporting Summary
Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency
in reporting. For further information on Nature Research policies, see Authors & Referees and the Editorial Policy Checklist.
Statistical parameters
When statistical analyses are reported, confirm that the following items are present in the relevant location (e.g. figure legend, table legend, main
text, or Methods section).
n/a Confirmed
The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
An indication of whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided
Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.
A description of all covariates tested
A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
A full description of the statistics including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient) AND
variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)
For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted
Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.
For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated
Clearly defined error bars
State explicitly what error bars represent (e.g. SD, SE, CI)
Our web collection on statistics for biologists may be useful.
Software and code
Policy information about availability of computer code
Data collection Experiment code was created with Psychtoolbox-3 and custom MATLAB code. Code is available from the corresponding author upon
request, and will be uploaded to https://github.com/janekeung129/clicks-pupil
Data analysis All analyses were created using custom MATLAB and R code. Code is available from the corresponding author upon request, and will be
uploaded to https://github.com/janekeung129/clicks-pupil . Code for fitting DDM with sticky bound
\cite{brunton2013rats,yartsev2018causal} is provided by http://github.com/misun6312/PBupsModel.jl
For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors/reviewers
upon request. We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Research guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.
2
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
April
2018
Data
Policy information about availability of data
All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable:
- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets
- A list of figures that have associated raw data
- A description of any restrictions on data availability
The data sets generated and analysed during the current study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.
Field-specific reporting
Please select the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.
Life sciences Behavioural & social sciences Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences
For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/authors/policies/ReportingSummary-flat.pdf
Life sciences study design
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
Sample size No sample size calculation was performed, but our sample size is similar to or much larger (n = 108) than those reported in relevant previous
publications.
Data exclusions We excluded participants due to poor performance (accuracy < 60%) and/or poor eye tracking data: pupil response measurements in which
more than one-third of the samples contained artifacts were considered invalid and excluded from the analysis. Only participants with at least
200 valid trials were included in analysis.
Replication N/A
Randomization No random allocation of participants was done.
Blinding All stimuli were generated from a random seed, no other blinding was done.
Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods
Materials & experimental systems Methods
n/a Involved in the study n/a Involved in the study
Unique biological materials ChIP-seq
Antibodies Flow cytometry
Eukaryotic cell lines MRI-based neuroimaging
Palaeontology
Animals and other organisms
Human research participants
Human research participants
Policy information about studies involving human research participants
Population characteristics All participants were enrolled as undergraduates in University of Arizona.
Recruitment All participants were recruited through self sign ups via Department of Psychology website in University of Arizona. We did not
select any participants for participation.