
===== PAGE 1/4 =====
Opendata:NotApplicable Editedby:RickardCarlsson
Meta-Psychology,2025,vol9,MP.2020.2458 Openmaterials:NotApplicable Reviewedby:Pickering,J.,Gallyer,A.,Werner,C.P.
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2020-2458 Openandreproducibleanalysis:NotApplicable Analysisreproducedby:NotApplicable
Articletype:Commentary Openreviewsandeditorialprocess:Yes AllsupplementaryfilescanbeaccessedatOSF:
PublishedundertheCC-BY4.0license Preregistration:No https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/YTJD4
Standalone Apps for Anxiety and Depression Show Promising
Early Efficacy: A Commentary on Meta-Analytic Results
Nicholas C. Jacobson, Ph.D1, William Chen1, and Raphael Huang1
1DartmouthCollege
The current commentary is focused on the methods and conclusions drawn in a re-
cent meta-analysis which evaluated the impact of standalone interventions in treat-
ing anxiety and depressive symptoms (Weisel et al., 2019). The current commentary
discussesthelargeimpactofmethodologicalchoicesmadetoexcludetransdiagnostic
treatments and group heterogeneous treatments on study conclusions. Additionally,
the current commentary evaluates these conclusions considering opposing from two
additional meta-analytic findings. The current review concludes that more research
is needed effects before drawing any definitive conclusions, but the current evidence
basesuggeststhatappsshowpromisingearlyefficacyintreatinganxietyanddepressive
symptoms.
Keywords: meta-analysis,apps,anxiety,depression
Given the high incidence of anxiety and depressive decrease in the confidence bounds surrounding the es-
disorders and the very few persons who receive treat- timates. This effect on confidence bounds was particu-
ment for these disorders (Wilhelm et al., 2019), re- larlylargeforanxietyforwhichtheconfidenceintervals
searchers have become increasingly interested in stan- rangedfrom-0.1to0.7. Moreover,forbothanxietyand
dalone treatments for anxiety and depression. As the depression,notonlydotheeffectsizeofconfidencein-
ubiquity of smartphones has grown across the globe, tervalsdecreasewhentransdiagnosticinterventionsare
both academia and industry alike are increasingly de- included,butalsotheestimatedeffectsizesincrease.
veloping and testing standalone smartphone apps tar-
geting anxiety and depressive symptoms. A recent TwoPublishedMeta-AnalyseswithMoreStudies
meta-analysis summarized and concluded that smart- andMoreTrialsSuggestStrongEfficacy.
phone apps targeting mental health contribute to sig-
Additionally,Weiseletal.’s(2019)conclusionsabout
nificant reductions in depressive symptoms (Hedges’ g
the limited evidence base were likely principally based
= 0.33) but no significant reductions in anxiety symp-
on the restrictive inclusion criteria (see Table 1). Two
toms (Weisel et al., 2019). The paper concludes that
prior meta-analyses have been published on treating
“Although some trials showed potential of apps target-
anxiety and depressive symptoms using smartphone-
ing mental health symptoms, smartphone apps as stan-
basedmethods(Firth,Torous,Nicholas,Carney,Pratap,
dalone psychological interventions cannot be recom-
et al., 2017; Firth, Torous, Nicholas, Carney, Rosen-
mended based on the current level of evidence”. The
baum, and Sarris, 2017). Weisel et al.(2019) based
current comment further evaluates the evidence base
their conclusions about depression on six studies, four
formakingthesesummaryclaims.
of which were included in another meta-analysis. The
prior meta-analysis (Firth, Torous, Nicholas, Carney,
StrengthandEfficacywhenIncluding
Pratap, et al., 2017) included a total of 3,414 partici-
TransdiagnosticTreatmentImpacts.
pantsandincludedanadditionalrandomizedcontrolled
Despite the substantial literature which has devel- trialtargetingprimarydepressionnotcontainedwithin
oped in the last decade surrounding the efficacy of theWeiseletal.(2019)study(Wattsetal.,2013). This
transdiagnostic digital interventions in treating anxiety studyfoundsignificantsymptomreductioninbothstan-
anddepressivedisorders(Wilhelmetal.,2019),theab- dalone mobile and computer intervention groups with
stractandconclusionsciteseveralpaperswhereanxiety non-significant means favoring the mobile group over
ordepressivesymptomsweretheonlytarget. Moreover, thecomputergroup(Wattsetal.,2013). Withinanxiety,
it results in a substantial decrease in the potential evi- a prior meta-analysis included more participants, and
dence base of the targeted N, as well as a substantial anadditionalstudytestingthestandaloneefficacyofan
===== PAGE 2/4 =====
2
app-basedintervention(Firth,Torous,Nicholas,Carney, tentional bias modification studies, including Enock et
Rosenbaum, and Sarris, 2017). This study found a sig- al. and Clarke et al., are so qualitatively different from
nificant reduction in trait anxiety after four weeks for therestofthestudiesthatthepooledcomparisonloses
the app-based experimental group but not for the con- potential meaning (Clarke et al., 2016; Enock et al.,
trol group (g = 0.156), as well as significant reduction 2014).
instateanxietyaftereachusageoftheapp-basedinter-
ventionwhichwassignificantlygreaterthanthecontrol AppropriateComparisonConditionforStandalone
group(averageg=0.755)(Villanietal.,2013). These Technology-BasedTreatmentsIsNoTreatmentAt
studiesillustratetheefficacyofapp-basedinterventions All.
in reducing depressive and anxiety symptoms. Addi-
The evidence base suggests that app-based inter-
tionally, both prior meta-analyses included risk of bias
ventions lead to significant and superior reductions
assessmentsperformedusingEgger’stestandtrim-and-
in anxiety and depressive symptoms in app interven-
fillanalyses,withnoevidenceofpublicationbiasfound
tions broadly. However, the authors conclude that
in either. Thus, the criteria leading to the exclusion of
“standalonesmartphoneappscannotberecommended”
thesestudiesfromtheWeiseletal.(2019)meta-analysis
(Weisel et al., 2019). These recommendations appear
should be more fully addressed, given their contribu-
to be outside the scope of the meta-analysis itself. The
tionstothecurrentbodyofevidenceandthepriormeta-
arguments appear to be driven by one or both of two
analyses.
sentiments: (1) the interventions may not have the ef-
Additionally, Weisel et al.(2019) state in the Limita-
fect sizes of traditional interventions or (2) the inter-
tions section of their Discussion that “Due to the small
ventions, when evaluated qualitatively, do not appear
amount of studies per disorder, the number of compar-
to reach the magnitude achieved in internet interven-
isons per disorder was limited, therefore not all study
tions. Based on the aforementioned literature demon-
effects could be pooled, subgroup analyses were re-
strating the efficacy of app interventions in reducing
stricted,follow-upassessmentswerenotexamined,nor
anxiety symptoms, both these premises are overreach-
was publication bias explored.” Given the importance
ing and do not appear to reflect the evidence base
of inclusion/exclusion criteria in these meta-analyses,
(Firth, Torous, Nicholas, Carney, Pratap, et al., 2017;
we believe that publication bias should be more fully
Firth, Torous, Nicholas, Carney, Rosenbaum, and Sar-
reported. WeacknowledgethatWeiseletal.(2019)per-
ris, 2017). Firstly, most persons do not receive any
formed risk of bias assessment using Egger’s test and
mental health treatment when they have an anxiety
trim-and-fill analyses, and we would respectfully sug-
or depressive disorder; from the National Comorbid-
gestthattheauthorsmorefullytheresultsoftheseanal-
ity Survey Replication conducted in the US, Wang et
ysesandexploretheresultsoftheirassessmentsoasto
al. (2005) found substantially lower treatment contact
conform to the standard established by the prior meta-
for anxiety (27.3% - 95.3%), impulse control (33.9%-
analyses.
51.8%), and substance disorders (52.7%-76.9%). Fur-
thermore, even when they do engage in health seek-
HighHeterogeneityamongStudies.
ing behavior, in-person treatment is often delayed for
Notably, Weisel et al.(2019) describe the importance weeks or months; Wang et al. (2005) found delays
ofdoingthecurrentmeta-analysisinpartbecauseprior in initial treatment contact of as long as 23 years for
meta-analyses included apps which targeted “atten- anxiety disorders in the US while Trusler et al. (2006)
tional control”. Unfortunately, the same weakness is found average wait times of as long as 20 weeks be-
found in the current review, given that attention bias tween first assessment to referral to first therapy in the
modification was present in two of the four compar- UK’sNHS.Consequently,theideathatstandalonetreat-
isonsconditionsincludedintheevaluatedanxietystud- mentappsforanxietyanddepressionshouldinherently
ies which informed the primary study conclusions. We match traditional in-person treatment is not the most
agreewithWeiseletal.’s(2019)ownconcernsaboutin- appropriate comparison. In contrast, apps offer imme-
cludingthesetypesofarticlesastheydiffersubstantially diatetreatmenttoafflictedindividualswhoareawaiting
from the other types of treatment, such as intervention an in-person appointment. The alternative, suggested
reminders based on adherence monitoring, offered in by those who criticize technology-based treatment, is
applications (Weisel et al., 2019). However, the deci- no treatment at all. In regard to the direct qualitative
sion to include this study while simultaneously exclud- comparisonsmadeinthediscussionbytheauthors,the
ing many other studies which evaluated the treatment claim that internet-based interventions appear to have
impactonanxietysymptomsleadstoveryimprecisepa- a stronger efficacy than apps based on the reported ef-
rameter estimates. Here we believe the inclusion of at- fect sizes is misguided because the only studies which
===== PAGE 3/4 =====
3
have directly compared the effects of app-based treat- AuthorContact
ments with internet-based treatments for anxiety and
Nicholas C. Jacobson, Ph.D., Assistant Professor in
depression have found either no significant differences
Biomedical Data Science and Psychiatry, Center for
betweenthetwoorsignificantdifferencesfavoringapps
TechnologyandBehavioralHealth,DartmouthCollege,
(Dagöö et al., 2014; Watts et al., 2013). There is even
46 Centerra Parkway, Suite 300, Office 333S Lebanon,
some evidence that adding an app to internet based
NH 03766 (Nicholas.C.Jacobson@dartmouth.edu),
treatmentmayaidinternet-basedtreatments(Boettcher
phone (603) 646-7037. https://orcid.org/0000-0002-
et al., 2018). Ivanova et al. (2016) found no large dif-
8832-4741
ferences between an unguided app-based internet in-
tervention compared to a therapist guided app-based
ConflictofInterestandFunding
internet intervention. Thus, contrary to the authors’
summaries, apps for anxiety and depressive disorders Theauthorshavenoconflictsofinteresttodeclare.
significantly reduce anxiety and depressive symptoms
with a medium effect size when compared to no treat- AuthorContributions
ment at all, and the current evidence suggests simi-
Eachauthorcontributedtothewritingandreviewof
lar or marginally superior performance of apps to in-
the manuscript. The author order is allocated in order
ternet based interventions. However, conclusions here
oftheircontributiontothemanuscript.
arequiteprematureasveryfewstudieshavebeencon-
ducted.
OpenSciencePractices
ConclusionsfromtheBodyofEvidenceAmassed ThisarticleisconceptualandisnoteligibleforOpen
AcrosstheThreeMeta-AnalysesasWellasOther Science badges. It has been verified that the analysis
StandaloneStudies. reproducedtheresultspresentedinthearticle. Theen-
tire editorial process, including the open reviews, are
Given that the meta-analysis only included one new
publishedintheonlinesupplement.
studywhilesimultaneouslyexcludingseveralstudiesin-
cluded in two other meta-analyses on this topic, it is
References
important to interpret the totality of the evidence. The
totality of the evidence clearly suggests that the typi- Boettcher, J., Magnusson, K., Marklund, A., Berglund,
cal standalone intervention which has been tested to E., Blomdahl, R., Braun, U., Delin, L., Lundén,
treat anxiety and depressive symptoms in randomized C.,Sjöblom,K.,Sommer,D.,vonWeber,K.,An-
controlled trials demonstrates significant and superior dersson, G., & Carlbring, P. (2018). Adding a
efficacy compared to waitlist control conditions, that smartphone app to internet-based self-help for
app-based interventions appear to be approximately or social anxiety: A randomized controlled trial.
marginally superior to internet-based applications, and Computers in Human Behavior, 87, 98–108.
that the type of the design of the smartphone applica- https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2018.04.052
tionhasalargeimpactontheefficacywithmoretradi- Clarke, P. J. F., Bedford, K., Notebaert, L., Bucks, R. S.,
tionalcognitive-behavioralinterventionsdemonstrating Rudaizky, D., Milkins, B. C., & MacLeod, C.
promising early efficacy in apps. Given the potential (2016). Assessing the therapeutic potential of
benefit standalone app-based interventions have com- targeted attentional bias modification for in-
paredtotheappropriatenotreatmentcomparisoncon- somnia using smartphone delivery. Psychother-
dition and lack of any evidence suggesting negative ef- apyandPsychosomatics,85(3),187–189.https:
fects, the current level of evidence is adequate to rec- //doi.org/10.1159/000442025
ommend further investigation and trial of these inter- Dagöö, J., Asplund, R., Bsenko, H., Hjerling, S., Holm-
ventions. Clearlymoreresearchisneededbeforedraw- berg, A., Westh, S., Öberg, L., Ljótsson, B.,
ingdefinitiveconclusions,includingexaminingtheper- Carlbring, P., Furmark, T., & Andersson, G.
formance of applications outside of highly developed (2014). Cognitive behavior therapy versus in-
countries. We recommend further research examining terpersonal psychotherapy for social anxiety
standalone app-based intervention effects before draw- disorder delivered via smartphone and com-
inganydefinitiveconclusions,butthecurrentevidence puter:Arandomizedcontrolledtrial.Journalof
basesuggeststhatappsshowpromisingearlyefficacyin Anxiety Disorders, 28(4), 410–7. https://doi.
treatinganxietyanddepressivesymptoms. org/10.1016/j.janxdis.2014.02.003
===== PAGE 4/4 =====
4
Enock, P. M., Hofmann, S. G., & McNally, R. J. (2014). 13(1), 49. https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-
Attention bias modification training via smart- 244X-13-49
phone to reduce social anxiety: A randomized, Weisel,K.K.,Fuhrmann,L.M.,Berking,M.,Baumeister,
controlled multi-session experiment. Cognitive H., Cuijpers, P., & Ebert, D. D. (2019). Stan-
Therapy and Research, 38(2), 200–216. https: dalone smartphone apps for mental health—a
//doi.org/10.1007/s10608-014-9606-z systematic review and meta-analysis. npj Digi-
Firth, J., Torous, J., Nicholas, J., Carney, R., Pratap, A., tal Medicine, 2(1), 1–10. https://doi.org/10.
Rosenbaum,S.,&Sarris,J.(2017).Theefficacy 1038/s41746-019-0188-8
of smartphone-based mental health interven- Wilhelm, S., Weingarden, H., Ladis, I., Braddick, V.,
tionsfordepressivesymptoms:Ameta-analysis Shin, J., & Jacobson, N. C. (2019). Cognitive-
of randomized controlled trials. World Psychia- behavioraltherapyinthedigitalage:Presiden-
try: Official Journal of the World Psychiatric As- tialaddress.BehaviorTherapy.https://doi.org/
sociation (WPA), 16(3), 287–298. https://doi. 10.1016/j.beth.2019.08.001
org/10.1002/wps.20472
Firth,J.,Torous,J.,Nicholas,J.,Carney,R.,Rosenbaum,
S.,&Sarris,J.(2017).Cansmartphonemental
health interventions reduce symptoms of anx-
iety? a meta-analysis of randomized controlled
trials.JournalofAffectiveDisorders,218,15–22.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2017.04.046
Ivanova, E., Lindner, P., Ly, K. H., Dahlin, M., Vern-
mark,K.,Andersson,G.,&Carlbring,P.(2016).
Guided and unguided acceptance and commit-
menttherapyforsocialanxietydisorderand/or
panic disorder provided via the internet and
a smartphone application: A randomized con-
trolled trial. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 44,
27–35. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.janxdis.
2016.09.012
Trusler, K., Doherty, C., Mullin, T., Grant, S., &
McBride, J. (2006). Waiting times for primary
carepsychologicaltherapyandcounsellingser-
vices. Counselling and Psychotherapy Research,
6(1), 23–32. https://doi.org/10.1080/
14733140600581358
Villani, D., Grassi, A., Cognetta, C., Toniolo, D., Ci-
presso, P., & Riva, G. (2013). Self-help stress
management training through mobile phones:
An experience with oncology nurses. Psychol
Serv, 10(3), 315–322. https://doi.org/10.
1037/a0026459
Wang, P. S., Berglund, P., Olfson, M., Pincus, H., Wells,
K., & Kessler, R. (2005). Failure and delay
in initial treatment contact after first onset of
mental disorders in the national comorbidity
survey replication. Arch Gen Psychiatry, 62(6),
603–613. https://doi.org/10.1001/archpsyc.
62.6.603
Watts, S., Mackenzie, A., Thomas, C., Griskaitis, A.,
Mewton, L., Williams, A., & Andrews, G.
(2013). Cbt for depression: A pilot rct compar-
ingmobilephonevs.computer.BMCPsychiatry,