
===== PAGE 1/13 =====
Meta-Psychology,2025,vol9,MP.2020.2643 Opendata:Yes Editedby:RickardCarlsson
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2020.2643 Openmaterials:Yes Reviewedby:UlrichSchimmack,ErinMBuchanan
Articletype:OriginalArticle Openandreproducibleanalysis:Yes Analysisreproducedby:FedericoD’Atri
PublishedundertheCC-BY4.0license Openreviewsandeditorialprocess:Yes AllsupplementaryfilescanbeaccessedatOSF:
Preregistration:Yes https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/PZ296
A Multi-faceted Mess: A Review of Statistical Power Analysis in
Psychology Journal Articles
Nataly Beribisky1, Udi Alter1, and Robert A. Cribbie1
1QuantitativeMethodsProgram,DepartmentofPsychology,YorkUniversity,Toronto,Ontario,Canada
Manybodiesrecommendthatasampleplanningprocedure,suchastraditionalNHST
a priori power analysis, is conducted during the planning stages of a study. Power
analysisallowstheresearchertoestimatehowmanyparticipantsarerequiredinorder
to detect a minimally meaningful effect size at a specific level of power and Type I
error rate. However, there are several drawbacks to the procedure that render it “a
mess.” Specifically, the identification of the minimally meaningful effect size is very
challenging,theprocedureisnotprecisionoriented,anddoesnotguidetheresearcher
tocollectasmanyparticipantsasfeasiblypossible. Inthisstudy,weexplorehowthese
threetheoreticalissuesarereflectedinappliedpsychologicalresearchinordertobetter
understand whether these issues are concerns in practice. To investigate how power
analysis is currently used, this study reviewed the reporting of 443 power analyses
in high impact Psychology journals in 2016 and 2017 using Google Scholar. It was
found that researchers rarely use the minimally meaningful effect size as a rationale
for the chosen effect in a power analysis. Further, precision-based approaches and
collecting the maximum sample size feasible are almost never used in tandem with
power analyses. In light of these findings, we offer that researchers should focus on
toolsbeyondtraditionalpoweranalysiswhensampleplanning,suchascollectingthe
maximumsamplesizefeasible.
Keywords: poweranalysis,statisticalpower,TypeIIerrorrate,precision-basedsample
planning,minimallymeaningfuleffectsize
Introduction parameters (effect size, alpha level, power) in order to
obtain a sample size that is attainable. Accordingly, al-
Psychology researchers are continually critiqued for
thoughNHST-basedpoweranalysisismeanttohelpre-
conducting studies that are underpowered (Maxwell,
ducepowerproblemsinpsychologicalresearch,itsome-
2004). One of the consistently suggested recommen-
timescomplicatesthemfurther.
dations to address the problem of low power is to con-
There are three reasons why traditional NHST-based
duct sample planning procedures like power analysis
power analysis is a problematic sample planning pro-
(Mistler, 2012; Association for Psychological Science,
cedure. The first is the difficulty and feasibility of de-
2018; Wilkinson, 1999). In traditional null hypothesis
termining the MMES parameter. The MMES, or the
significance testing (NHST) a priori power analysis, a
smallesteffectsizethattheresearcherwouldfindprac-
researcherestimatesthenumberofsubjectsrequiredto
tically (e.g., clinically) important, is often challenging
detect a minimally meaningful effect size (MMES) at a
or impossible to estimate (Dienes, 2014). Quantify-
givenlevelofpower(1−β,whereβrepresentstheType
ing it properly requires a thorough understanding of
II error rate), and Type I error rate (α) (Dienes, 2014;
themeasures,targetpopulation,andtheoriessurround-
SedlmeierandGigerenzer,1992). Accordingly,byspec-
ing the study. However, specifying it appropriately is
ifying the desired power to detect an MMES, NHST-
necessary in order to conduct power analyses correctly
based power analysis is meant to decrease the likeli-
(Dienes, 2014). Second, unlike other sample planning
hood of a study being underpowered. Unfortunately,
procedures such as accuracy in parameter estimation
in practice, when conducting traditional NHST a priori
(AIPE) (Kelley and Maxwell, 2012), traditional NHST-
power analysis, researchers often do not consider what
based power analysis does not consider precision but
anappropriateMMESmightbeandinsteadrelyonpast
insteadfocusesondetectingthepresenceorabsenceof
experiences to come up with a target effect size. Fur-
an effect. With no focus on confidence intervals, tradi-
ther, upon seeing a large (and maybe infeasible) sam-
tionalNHSTpoweranalysismaybeanoutdatedtoolas
ple size, researchers may try different variations of the
===== PAGE 2/13 =====
2
Psychologyresearchmovestowardsanincreasedusage SensitivityPowerAnalyses
ofestimationtools(Cumming,2012). Third,traditional
Sensitivity power analyses are often used when re-
NHST-basedpoweranalysisdoesnotsupportcollecting
searchers are working with existing datasets or other-
the maximum sample size feasible (MSSF) for a given
wise constrained sample sizes. These types of power
research study. The MSSF strategy weighs practicality
analyses have become increasingly common and even
constraints explicitly in the sample planning process,
recommended as sample planning options by certain
unliketraditionalNHSTpoweranalysis.
journals(Aberson,2018;Elsevier,2020). Therearetwo
The paper is organized in the following manner: 1)
types of sensitivity analyses: (a) effect size as the out-
We begin by providing a brief introduction to sam-
come, and (b) power level as the outcome. In sensitiv-
ple size planning/power analysis; 2) We describe in
ity power analysis with the effect size as the outcome
detail each of the theoretical issues with sample size
(also referred to as effect-size sensitivity analysis), re-
planning/power analysis raised in the previous para-
searchers use a pre-determined sample size along with
graph; 3) We conducted a review of sample size plan-
a specified α and power level to estimate what can be
ning/power analysis reporting in high-impact peer-
calledtheminimallydetectableeffectorminimaleffect
reviewedPsychologyjournalstoascertainhowthispro-
size (Giner-Sorolla et al., 2019). In sensitivity analysis
cedure is used; and lastly, 4) We provide recommenda-
with power as the outcome, a pre-determined sample
tionstoresearchersregardingbestpracticesforsample
size,anMMES,andagivenlevelofαareusedestimate
sizeplanning/poweranalysis.
theexistingpowerinagivensample.
TypesofPowerAnalyses
Post-HocPowerAnalyses
Statistical power is a function of sample size, Type I
In post-hoc power analysis, researchers use an ob-
error rate, and the MMES. In traditional NHST a pri-
servedeffectsize,utilizedsamplesize,andαtoestimate
ori power analysis, a researcher estimates the required
the observed power within the study conducted. This
sample size from the other three parameters (power
type of power analysis has been noted to have many
level, Type I error rate and MMES). For example, as-
issues, in addition to the ones it shares with a priori
sume a researcher is looking to detect a difference in
andsensitivityanalyses,suchastheobservedpowerbe-
means with a two-group independent-samples t-test.
ingaone-to-onefunctionwiththep-value(Hoenigand
Assume also that 1 - β = .95, α = .05 (two-tailed
Heisey, 2001). It has been noted to be especially prob-
test),andwithinthecontextofthestudy,theresearcher
lematicanditsuseisnotrecommended.
has reason to believe that the MMES is a Cohen’s d =
Theunderlyingproblemsaffectingallversionsofthis
.70. Entering these into a power calculator, such as
procedure are the same. The first issue, the difficulty
the pwr.t.test function within the pwr package in R
and importance in choosing a correct MMES, may be
(Champely,2020),producesanestimateoftherequired
themostcritical.
sample size, which is a total sample of 108, or 54 per
group.
Issue 1: The Importance and Necessity of MMES
Hypothetically, any three of these four parameters
Specification
(sample size, power, α, MMES) could be used to solve
for the fourth. For instance, a researcher might want To avoid potentially under-powering a study, a re-
to use a pre-existing dataset (with a fixed sample size) searcher should specify an MMES (Algermissen and
to find the minimally detectable effect size. Another Mehler,2018;Dienes,2014;Zodpey,2004). TheMMES
researcher might want to determine how much power and the power level are directly related, such that the
they had to detect an observed effect size for data that smallertheMMES,thelowerthestatisticalpower(hold-
has already been collected. It is worth noting that ing sample size and α constant). Another way to say
whensamplesizeisusedasoneoftheinputparameters thisisthatthesmallertheMMES,thelargerthesample
(rather than as the estimated outcome), a procedure is size must be in order to achieve an acceptable level of
necessarilynolongerasampleplanningtool. However, power(relativetothesamplesizerequirediftheMMES
for the purposes of the review, we analyzed the report- is larger). Accordingly, specifying an effect (e.g., ob-
ingofallfourvariantsofthisprocedure. Thethreeout- servedinapreviousstudy)thatislargerthananappro-
lined reasons power analysis is problematic (difficulty priate MMES can cause the study to be underpowered
knowing the MMES, not precision-based, and not con- for detecting the MMES (Dienes, 2014). For example,
ducive to choosing the MSSF) also apply to these ver- let’ssaytheMMESforagivenstudy/contextisd=0.80,
sions of power analysis. For clarity, we briefly outline buttheresearchermistakenly/inappropriatelyconducts
thethreealternativeversionsofpoweranalysisbelow. a traditional power analysis using an effect size of d
===== PAGE 3/13 =====
3
= 1.00 (maybe based on results from a pilot study). erable degree of subjectivity in choosing an MMES for
The sample size required for a given power (let’s say power analysis can render the procedure quite difficult
0.90)willbelowerford=1.00thanford=0.80,and for both exploratory and confirmatory research, as in
thus if the researcher adopts the sample size required both instances choosing an MMES may require an un-
for achieving 90% power with d = 1.00, they will not reasonable amount of guesswork about new phenom-
haveachieved90%powerfordetectingtheMMESofd ena. Practically, this parameter is often unknown and
= 0.80. In contrast, specifying an effect that is smaller difficulttoidentify(Lipsey,1990).
than an appropriate MMES may suggest a sample size Examples within other disciplines, such as medical
larger than what is necessary or feasible in the given research, state that the MMES should be both real-
study. For example, a researcher may expect a small istic and important, and of substantial interest based
effect size, but it would not be appropriate to use this on the phenomenon under study (Fayers et al., 2000).
small effect size as the MMES in a power analysis be- Thus, the selection of an MMES should be a multi-
causeitmightnotbemeaningful. faceted process involving a review of prior research in
If the observed effect size for the relationship of in- the area, which includes combining existing quantita-
terest is expected to be larger in magnitude than the tive information about effects (the magnitude of which
MMES, and power is the only consideration, then an may also be overestimated: see Open Science Collabo-
effectlargerthantheMMEScouldbeusedinthepower ration, 2015; Albers and Lakens, 2018) with opinions
analysis (with the obvious limitation that if an effect from stakeholders via panels and focus groups (Cook
isobservedthatislargerinmagnitudethantheMMES, et al., 2018). However, depending on the nature of
butsmallerinmagnitudethantheexpectedeffect,there theresearch,idealmethodsforselectinganappropriate
would be reduced power for such an effect). Addition- MMES may not be available, which could lead to the
ally, even in this scenario, an MMES must be explicitly selection of an arbitrary value for the effect size used
defined in order to know its relative position to any ef- in a traditional power analysis. To summarize, the se-
fect specified in a power analysis. Otherwise, there is lection of the MMES parameter is extremely challeng-
no guarantee that, for instance, the specified effect is ing. Despite this, correct specification of an MMES is
not smaller than the MMES, meaning that the corre- unavoidable if a researcher wishes to elicit meaningful
sponding power analysis would aim to detect a poten- informationfromatraditionalpoweranalysis.
tially unimportant effect. Accordingly, there is no way
to conduct a power analysis correctly without clearly Issue2: Precision-BasedSamplePlanning
expressing the appropriate MMES; it must be specified
Thespecificationandinterpretationofconfidencein-
a priori for both traditional a priori power analysis and
tervals provide more information than statistical signif-
sensitivityanalysiswithpowerastheoutcome. Further,
icance alone when analyzing results (Cumming, 2012;
it should coincide with the effect obtained for sensitiv-
Thompson,2002). Intheplanningphaseofastudy,tra-
ity analysis with the effect as the outcome. Relatedly,
ditional power analysis aims to detect the presence or
another setting where the MMES is extremely useful is
absence of an effect, based on statistical significance,
in equivalence testing where the MMES can be used to
rather than the precision or width around the effect
create an equivalence bound. In equivalence testing,
size estimate. Less commonly utilized sample planning
anyvaluethatfallswithintheequivalenceboundiscon-
tools, such as precision-based sample planning (e.g.,
siderednegligible(formoreinformationonequivalence
AIPE or accuracy in parameter estimation), allow re-
testingseeWellek,2010).
searcherstoestimatethesamplesizerequiredtoobtain
Specification of the MMES requires a thorough con-
a desired confidence interval width (Corty and Corty,
siderationofastudy’scontext(Aberson,2015);inother
2011). The use of precision-based sample planning is
words, determining the smallest effect size that would
not restricted to an NHST framework, making it useful
bepracticallysignificantgiventhenatureandmeasure-
inmanymorescenariosthantraditionalpoweranalysis
ment of the variables under study. The MMES cannot
(e.g., Bayesian statistics and equivalence testing). Fur-
simply be defined as an observed effect from a small-
ther,advancementsinthisareamakeuseofprocedures
sample pilot study or an observed effect from prior lit-
suchassequentialanalysistoidentifytheoptimalsam-
erature (Algermissen and Mehler, 2018). The MMES
ple size using a given stopping rule (see Kelley et al.,
isalsodifferentthanthesmallestexpectedeffect,since
2018).
itsinterpretationistiedtoimportanceorclinicalvalue.
In order to demonstrate how precision-based sam-
For these reasons, it has been noted that the MMES
ple planning may be used, we present an example of
“may be one of the hardest aspects of a theory’s pre-
precision-based sample planning for a two-sample t-
diction to specify” (Dienes, 2014, p. 3). The consid-
test. For all analyses, the procedure manipulates the
===== PAGE 4/13 =====
4
standardconfidenceintervalformulatosolveforsample the confidence interval, the more precise the measure-
size. In this case, the approximate confidence interval mentoftheeffectofinterest.
formulaforatwo-samplet-testis, It has been recommended that precision-based ap-
proaches be used in tandem with traditional NHST
(cid:114)
1 1 power analysis (Kelley et al., 2003). However, it is
X¯ −X¯ ±2·s + ,
1 2 p n n unknown how often precision-based sample planning
1 2
is used in conjunction with, or instead of, traditional
where s is the pooled standard deviation, 2 approxi-
p
poweranalysis. Thisquestionwillbeaddressedempiri-
mates the two-tailed t critical value (e.g., t =
.975,df=40
callyinthispaper.
2.02),andn andn representthesamplesizesingroup
1 2
one and group two, respectively. Assume α = .05 (for
Issue3: MaximumSampleSizeFeasible
a two-tailed test), a pooled standard deviation of 20,
and a desired 95% confidence interval with a width of WecontendthatusingtheMSSF,byexplicitlyoutlin-
4 points on a given outcome measure. To simplify, also ing how a sample was chosen and what considerations
assume that groups one and two are of equal size such were taken, is a sample planning strategy in and of it-
thattheresultingconfidenceintervalis, self. ObtainingtheMSSFisquitedifferentthanobtain-
ing the maximum sample size possible. In the former
(cid:114)
X¯ −X¯ ±2·s 2 , scenario, factors such as cost (e.g., volunteer, paid or
1 2 p n coursecredit),accessibility(e.g.,easytoaccessvs. rare
where n = n + n . In order to determine the number population),andrisk(e.g.,minimalormorethanmini-
1 2
mal)areallthoroughlyconsideredanddescribedwhen
ofindividualsrequiredpergroup,halfoftheconfidence
estimating the sample size required for a given study.
interval width (for our example, the full width of 4 is
Incontrast,inthelatterscenario,participantscouldpo-
dividedby2)isinsertedintotheformula. Atthispoint,
tentially be recruited with no concrete stopping point,
it is possible to get an estimate of the required sample
without regard to cost, accessibility, or risk; this would
sizepergroup:
qualify as irresponsible research practices. To summa-
(cid:114)
2 rize,eventhoughitmaybepossibletoselectanimpres-
2≈2·20
sivenumberofparticipants/units,itisimportanttocon-
n
siderfeasibilityfactorswhendecidingonafinalsample
(cid:114)
1 2 size.
≈
20 n Forresearchersthatworkwithdifficulttoaccesspop-
1 2 ulations, such as those studying giftedness or the phys-
≈
iology of individuals with rare disorders, small sample
400 n
size is assumed to be “the rule rather than the excep-
n≈800pergroupor1600total
tion” (Rost, 1991, p. 236). Often, this means that any
Ascanbenotedfromtheexample, thetwopiecesof NHST-based power analysis that a researcher conducts
informationthattheresearcherspecifiedinthisscenario will result in an unattainable reference point for the
(other than α) are the confidence interval width and numberofparticipantsrequired(unlesstheMMESisex-
a measure of variability (in this case, pooled standard ceptionallylarge). Asthemoststraightforwardmethod
deviation). A measure of variability may be obtained of increasing power is simply to increase one’s sam-
frompriorresearchand/orpilotstudies,and,unlikethe ple size, obtaining the MSSF within the context of the
MMES,willnotfluctuatebasedonagivenstudy’saims. study is a useful way to approach participant recruit-
To be clear, researchers conducting precision-based mentplanning.
poweranalysisarenotrequiredtoselectextremelynar- To expand on the point made in the previous para-
row confidence intervals that would necessitate a very graph, a researcher working within a small population
largesamplesize. Forexample,inexploratoryresearch, mayactuallybecompelledtoavoidrunningtheirstudy
it may not be necessary to measure effects with high altogetherforfearofbeingunderpowered. Accordingly,
precision and therefore a wider interval would be ap- apotentialcounter-argumentagainstusingtheMSSFis
propriate. In contrast, for more confirmatory studies, that when there is a very limited pool of participants it
higher precision (narrower intervals) may be desired, mightnotbevaluabletoconductthestudyatall. How-
whichwillthenrequirecomparablylargersamplesizes. ever, if a researcher has done all that they can to feasi-
This association is also reflected in equivalence testing blyobtainthemostparticipantspractical,wearguethat
(andothermeasurementsettings),wherethenarrower (withfeasibilityconstraintsclearlyoutlinedinthesam-
pleplanningsection)theirfindingsarestillvaluable(as-
===== PAGE 5/13 =====
5
suming other aspects of the research are satisfactory). searchers that terminate recruitment after reaching the
This is especially true now that replication and meta- sample size suggested from an a priori power analysis
analysesareroutinelyconductedwithinthediscipline. estimate (i.e., ignoring the MSSF) may lose the bene-
In other words, we contend that it is much better fitsthatcomefromutilizingalargersampleifagreater
to conduct valuable research with a small MSSF than sample can be feasibly and responsibly obtained. It is
to abandon the research altogether because of a small worth investigating, therefore, how often researchers
sample. Necessitating researchers to consistently have use power analysis in conjunction with the strategy of
large sample sizes can cause either an abandonment obtaining the largest number of participants practical
of the study or downgrades in study quality; both of forthegivenstudy.
these consequences can lead to less original research
and study design (e.g., changing features of a study to ThePresentStudy: PowerAnalysisfromIntentionto
facilitateswitchingfromin-persontoonlineparticipant Use
platforms for greater recruitment). Indeed, many have
Thepresentstudyaimedtoexplorethestateofthese
noted the importance of multi-site studies and meta-
three issues within the reporting of power analyses,
analyses,asopposedtosimplyrelyinguponalargesam-
by reviewing recently published articles in high impact
plesizewithinasinglestudy(e.g.,SchauerandHedges,
peer-reviewed Psychology journals. First, we investi-
2020;KelleyandRausch,2006). Accordingly,insteadof
gated the proportion of researchers that used power
fixating on whether a single study has sufficient power
analyses as an a priori sample size planning tool, com-
to detect an MMES, explicitly defining what concerns
paredtoalternativeusesofthemethod,suchassensitiv-
came into sample planning decisions may allow for re-
ity and post-hoc power analyses. Second, we recorded
search to be integrated more efficiently into the litera-
how often the MMES, as recommended, was used as
ture.
the effect size in the power analysis. Third, we looked
ObtainingtheMSSFalsoalignswiththenotionthat,
for instances of researchers using precision-based sam-
when done correctly, power analyses really only allow
pleplanningtoplanforthewidthofaconfidenceinter-
researcherstheopportunitytoestimate,ratherthancal-
val around an effect size, rather than planning for the
culate, a sample size for their study (Batterham and
presence of the effect itself. Finally, we looked at how
Atkinson, 2005). In actuality, the estimate may only
oftenresearchersstatedtheyusedtheMSSFtoselectan
serve to provide researchers with a reference point for
appropriatesamplesize.
whether their study will require, “tens, hundreds, or
It is important to highlight the relationship between
thousands of participants” (Williamson et al., 2000,
the theoretical discussion above and the empirical in-
p.10). Accordingly, as NHST-based power analysis is
vestigation of the reporting practices in power analy-
a procedure that estimates, rather than calculates, the
sis/sample size planning. Although the theoretical is-
sample size required, calls for power analysis to be the
sues associated with traditional power analysis/sample
soledecision-makerfordeterminingtheprecisesample
size planning methods that we discussed above alone
size necessary (e.g., to avoid subjecting participants to
render these practices a mess, and hence lead to the
protocolsthatmaybehigherrisk)areunfounded.
conclusion that these practices should be abandoned,
There is another argument in support of the MSSF
the suggestion that researchers should abandon these
thatlooksattheproblemfromadifferentangle;ifare-
traditional methods is indefensible if the power analy-
searcher is feasibly and practically able to obtain more
ses conducted by Psychology researchers do not suffer
participants than the estimated sample size from a tra-
from the issues raised above. For example, maybe we
ditional power analysis, there is little reason to termi-
arewrongoroutdatedandinpracticeresearchershave
nateenrolmentatthepoweranalysisestimate. Specifi-
no issue selecting an appropriate MMES. Or, maybe
cally,recruitingmoreparticipantsbeyondtheestimated
researchers are frequently conducting precision-based
valuewouldgiveastudygreaterlikelihoodtodetectan
sample planning. Further, maybe researchers typically
existing effect and, even more important, greater pre-
ignore the recommendation to conduct a traditional
cision (Tanaka, 1987). Specifically, larger sample sizes
poweranalysisandconducttheresearchwiththeMSSF.
lead to a greater non-centrality parameter between the
If the theoretical issues we highlight in the sections
null and alternate distributions, while also minimizing
above do not actually exist in practice, then there is no
thevariabilityineachdistribution(KelleyandMaxwell,
need to modify recommendations regarding best prac-
2012). Both of these features allow for the difference
tices for determining appropriate sample sizes for re-
between null and alternative distributions to be ampli-
search (since researchers are already abiding by best
fied, leading to a higher likelihood of detecting a true
practices). Weknowofnootherstudythathasexplored
effect (Kelley and Maxwell, 2012). Accordingly, re-
the reporting of power/sample size planning analyses
===== PAGE 6/13 =====
6
withinPsychology. sizeisaninputparameter(i.e.,foraprioripoweranal-
yses and sensitivity analyses with the power as the
Method outcome), the following pieces of information were
recorded:
JournalArticles
1. Is any effect size reported within the power anal-
Journalarticlespublishedin2016and2017from12
ysis?
high impact Psychology journals were chosen for this
analysis. We sampled journals from primary research
2. Is any justification given for the effect size re-
areas within Psychology which had an impact factor
portedwithinthepoweranalysis?
greaterthan1.80,basedontheJournalCitationReports
(Clarivate Analytics, 2018). The journals and their im- 3. What is the justification presented for the effect
pactfactorsarepresentedinTable1.1 size chosen (prior research, average effect size in
ThesearchwascompletedinMay2018. Articlesfrom sub-field,MMES)?
these journals that employed a power analysis were
4. What was the scale and magnitude of the effect
located by entering search terms into Google Scholar.
sizeadopted?
Specifically, articles containing either the term “power
analysis” or “power analyses”, that were published in
Precision-BasedSamplePlanningUse
the desired years and journals, were identified via a
Google Scholar advanced search. From this initial col- Toassesshowoftenprecision-basedsampleplanning
lection, articles that did not conduct any type of power is conducted relative to traditional NHST a priori anal-
analysis were excluded. Two reviewers, working inde- yses, the instances of precision-based sample planning
pendently,foundthatfromthe3,524articlespublished withinthearticleswererecorded.
in 2016-2017 within the selected journals, there were
MeetingSampleSizeTargets
623 articles that met our search criteria. After the re-
viewers removed articles that did not conduct a power For traditional NHST a priori power analyses, we
analysis, 443articlesremainedforreview. Thenumber assessed whether researchers met their estimated re-
ofarticlesfromeachjournalispresentedinTable1. quired sample size, by coding: (1) whether the re-
searchers reported the estimated participants required
Measures
from their analysis, (2) whether researchers used the
Eachpoweranalysisreportedinanarticlewascoded MSSF, (3) how closely the number of participants en-
based on the research questions. Coding information rolled in the study met the number of participants sug-
thus addressed: (a) the type of power analysis con- gested by the power analysis, and (4) whether the re-
ducted,(b)thereportingoftheMMES,(c)theinstances searchers met this target after any exclusionary criteria
of precision-based sample planning, and (d) the collec- and/oroutlierremoval.
tionofparticipantsbasedupontheMSSF.Inadditionto If there was more than one power analysis within
these primary variables, we also collected supplemen- an article, only the first power analysis was coded to
taryinformationincludingpsychologicalsubfield(toal- eliminateanynonindependenceissues. Further,ifthere
low for comparisons in reporting), frequency and mag- were multiple power conditions included within a sin-
nitude of reporting of α and power levels, and the spe- gle power analysis, only the first power condition was
cificsoftwareusedforconductingthepoweranalyses. recorded. For example, if an article stated that a calcu-
latedsamplesizehad90%powertodetectaCohen’s d
TypeofPowerAnalysisConducted of 0.90 and 80% power to detect a Cohen’s d of 0.65,
onlytheformerpowerconditionwasrecorded.
To determine the relative frequency of the different
forms of power analysis, we coded: (1) the type of
Procedure
power analysis reported (a priori, sensitivity, or post
hoc); and, if the power analysis was a sensitivity anal- Aftergatheringthesetofrelevantarticles,twocoders
ysis, (2) the outcome of interest (effect size or power read through these articles and coded the reported
level).
1Note that we deviated from our original preregistration
TheReportingoftheMMES whereweindicatedthatwewouldaimtocollectdatafrom20
journals;wewereabletoobtainasufficientsampleofpower
ToanswerquestionssurroundingtheuseofanMMES analysesfromonly12journals.
in power analysis reporting in cases where the effect
===== PAGE 7/13 =====
7
Table1
ListofHighImpactPeer-ReviewedPsychologyJournals
Number of Journal Impact Factor
Articles (2017)
8 JournalofChildPsychologyandPsychiatry 6.486
56 PsychologicalScience 6.128
40 JournalofPersonalityandSocialPsychology 5.733
10 JournalofAppliedPsychology 4.643
9 JournalofAbnormalPsychology 4.642
39 JournalofConsultingandClinicalPsychology 4.537
131 JournalofExperimentalPsychology 4.107
45 ComputersinHumanBehavior 3.536
4 JournalofCognitiveNeuroscience 3.468
19 BiologicalPsychology 2.891
64 PersonalityandSocialPsychologyBulletin 2.498
18 MotivationandEmotion 1.837
power analyses. Initially, the two coders practiced cod- basedpoweranalyses. Themajorityofsensitivityanaly-
ing a subset of the articles to ensure consistency be- seshadpower,ratherthaneffectsize,astheoutcomeof
tweencodersforeachclassification. Inthisinitialstage, interest. Specifically, within the sensitivity analyses, 81
when coders found inconsistencies in their recording, (74.31%) had power as the outcome and 28 (25.69%)
the coders discussed the discrepancies and mutually hadeffectsizeastheoutcome.
agreed upon the best categorization. After this train-
ing stage, the two coders reached 96.78% agreement TheReportingoftheMMES
on a subset of 9 articles (based on the cells from the
Out of the 376 a priori and sensitivity analyses
coding spreadsheet containing the same information).
with the power as the outcome recorded, 269 analy-
After the training stage, the coders worked indepen-
ses(71.54%)includedtheutilizedeffectsizewithinthe
dently. When classification questions arose during the
power analysis reporting. Further, from the 376 power
coding process, they would be discussed by the coders
analyses, 168 (44.80%) provided some justification for
untiltherewasamutuallyagreedsolutiononhowbest
the effect size chosen (of the 269 analyses that did re-
tocategorizetheresults.
portaneffectsize,132[49.07%]justifiedtheeffectsize
reported). Itisworthnoting,giventhenumbersabove,
Results
that a small subset of the articles would provide justifi-
The results below are presented either as frequen- cations for the effect size selected while failing to state
cies and proportions or using histograms. As dis- theeffectmagnitudeitself.
cussed above, in addition to the reported results, there Table 2 lists the justifications presented for the se-
werealsotangentialquestionsthatwereaddressedand lection of the effect size chosen for the power analysis.
are reported in the supplementary information. These Only two power analyses out of the 376 power analy-
questions and analyses, along with the coding sheet, ses used the MMES as a justification for an effect’s se-
PRISMAchecklistforthestudy,Rfiles,anddataset(for lection! Prior research (including prior meta-analyses)
all primary and secondary variables) can be found at wasthemostcommonjustificationpresented(n=135,
https://osf.io/5jy9h. The preregistration of the study 35.90%)withinthepoweranalyses. Lessfrequentlyre-
(conducted through the Open Science Framework) can ported justifications included prior power analyses and
befoundathttps://osf.io/tzhdj. pilot studies. Lastly, the justifications contained in the
“Other” category of Table 2 included the average effect
TypeofTraditionalNHSTPowerAnalysisConducted sizeinresearch,Cohen’ssmalleffect,theresultofasim-
ulationstudy,orasmallestexpecteddifferencebetween
Ofthe443poweranalysesconducted,295(66.59%)
conditions.
were a priori power analyses, 39 (8.80%) were post
Figures 1, 2, and 3 provide the frequencies of the
hocpoweranalyses,and109(24.60%)weresensitivity-
three most common effect sizes used in traditional
===== PAGE 8/13 =====
8
Table2
JustificationsfortheEffectSizesSelectedwithinPowerAnalysesforAPrioriPowerAnalysesandtheSensitivityAnalyses
withPowerastheOutcome
Justification RawCount Percentage
Notincluded 208 55.20%
Included 168 44.80%
MMES 2 0.005%
PriorResearch 135 34.67%
PilotStudy 18 4.80%
PriorPower-Analysis 1 0.003%
Other 12 3.20%
Total 376 100%
NHST a priori and sensitivity analyses with power as
the outcome (Cohen’s d, Pearson’s ρ and Cohen’s f).
Cohen’s d was, by far, the most commonly used effect
size for power analyses, appearing in 102 of 269 anal-
yses that reported any effect size (37.92%), compared
to Cohen’s f and Pearson’s ρ which were recorded 52
times (19.33%) and 34 times (12.64%), respectively.
The most frequently utilized effect size for Cohen’s d
was0.50. MostcommonlyusedPearson’sρvalueswere
around .20 and .30. Finally, the most common Cohen’s
f value reported was .25. Interestingly, most of these
valuesfallatornearthecutoffforamediumeffectsize
according to Cohen (1988). Other reported effect sizes
included η2 and R2. A notable proportion of analyses
would also report effect sizes without a unit (e.g., sim-
Figure1
plystating“amediumeffect”or.50).
ReportedCohen’sdEffectSizesforAPrioriPowerAnalyses
InstancesofPrecision-BasedSamplePlanning
andSensitivityAnalyseswithPowerasOutcome.
Out of the 443 recorded power analyses, only one
analysis(lessthan1%)wasprecision-based.
togramofparticipantsrequiredforpoweranalysesthat
MeetingSampleSizeTargets
reportedrequiringasampleof500orless.
RecordingtheNumberofParticipantsRequired Toassesshowfrequentlyresearcherswereabletoob-
tain a sample size near the power analysis reference
For the 295 a priori power analyses, the number of
point, we adopted an estimation-based approach and
participants required was reported in 90.20% of cases
recordedtheproportionofinstanceswherestudieswere
(266 analyses), with 257 (87.12%) requiring a total
able to obtain at least 90% of the sample size required
sample size of 500 participants or less. The range for
during enrolment and analysis (the choice of 90% was
therequiredtotalsamplesizewasbetween5and2600,
made in order to avoid penalizing power analyses that
with the median total sample size required being 84.
werestillwithinareasonablerangeoftherequiredsam-
Thedistributionofestimatedtotalsamplesizesrequired
ple size). Most power analyses met their sample size
is presented in Figure 4. The left graph presents the
targets. Only 11 studies obtained a sample size that
distribution of participants required for all power anal-
waslessthan90%ofthesamplesizerequiredattheen-
yses recorded. In order to present a magnified view of
rolment stage (before exclusionary criteria and outlier
themajorityofthedistribution,therightgraphisahis-
removal). However,29analysesdidnotprovideenough
===== PAGE 9/13 =====
9
information to assess how or whether they met sample
size targets. At the analysis stage (after exclusionary
criteriaandoutlierremoval), outof295aprioripower
analyses,17additionalstudies(28total)werenotable
toobtain90%ofthesamplesizerequired. Onehundred
sixty-four studies (55.59%) reported having more par-
ticipantsthanrequiredfortheirpoweranalysis. Further,
11 studies (3.73%) discussed the MSSF by describing
theirfeasibilityrestrictionsinparticipantrecruitmentin
someway.
Discussion
Statistical power analysis is a heavily-relied upon
sample planning tool, traditionally used by researchers
Figure2 to estimate how many participants are required to de-
tect an MMES, at a given level of power and α. In this
Reported Pearson’s ρ Effect Sizes for A Priori Power Anal- study,wehaveoutlinedthreeprominentissueswithtra-
ysesandSensitivityAnalyseswithPowerasOutcome. ditional power analysis. First, the specification of the
MMES in power analysis is difficult to quantify in ad-
vance but necessary in order to conduct the procedure
properly. Second, traditional power analysis does not
consider confidence intervals or precision at the outset
of a study like approaches such as AIPE. Finally, tradi-
tionalpoweranalysisdoesnotexplicitlyrequireobtain-
ing as many participants as feasibly possible, which is
a practical sample planning strategy in its own right.
Althoughthesethreeissuesprovideevidencethattradi-
tional power analysis may not be a reasonable sample
planning strategy, before this study it was unclear how
theseissueswerereflectedinreportingpractices. More
precisely, power analysis could be a valuable tool if re-
searchers were consistently selecting the MMES as the
effectsize,conductingprecision-basedsampleplanning
in conjunction with traditional power analyses, or se-
Figure3
lectingtheMSSF.
To investigate whether these theoretical issues were
ReportedCohen’sfEffectSizesforAPrioriPowerAnalyses
reflected in practice we conducted a review of power
andSensitivityAnalyseswithPowerasOutcome.
analysis reporting in high impact Psychology journals.
Generally,ourfindingsshowthatresearchershavediffi-
cultyreportingandprovidingarationalefortheirpower
analyses. Accordingly, it may be worth modifying rec-
ommendationsregardingbestpracticesforsampleplan-
ning.
Although the majority of traditional NHST power
analyses recorded were a priori power analyses, a no-
table portion still analyzed power after the fact, and a
large number of studies conducted sensitivity analyses
with pre-existing data sets. Therefore, although tradi-
Figure4 tional NHST power analyses were mainly presented as
asampleplanningtool,differentvariationsofthesame
NumberofParticipantsthatareEstimatedasanOutcome procedure were used to analyze the existing power to
in A Priori Power Analyses. Note that N = 266 for left detect an effect, to find the smallest effect one may de-
histogramandN=257forrighthistogram. tectinagivensample,andfinallytocalculatehowmuch
===== PAGE 10/13 =====
10
poweronehadtodetectanobservedeffect. Thesevari- analysisasaspecificrequirement,ratherthanasaguide
ationsfromaprioripoweranalysissuggestthatthepro- regarding what approximate sample size might be nec-
cedureisbeingimplementedindifferenttimepointsof essary to detect an MMES. This can be evidenced by
research and with goals beyond sample planning. It is the fact that less than 5% reported using the MSSF by
worth reiterating that all variations of this procedure mentioning feasibility constraints. Further, the median
arestillimpactedbythesametypesofproblemsastra- absolutedifferencebetweenthenumberofparticipants
ditionalNHSTaprioripoweranalysis. obtained for the study and the number of participants
TheMMESunfortunatelywasalmostneverrecorded suggested by the power analysis was only 8. Taken to-
as a rationale for an effect size used within a power gether,thesefindingsimplythateither: (a)researchers
analysis. Withoutchoosingtheeffectsizeinthisway, a responsibly(andveryaccurately)obtainthesamplesize
researcher risks wasting resources (if the chosen effect suggested by the power analysis, (b) researchers may
sizeislessthantheMMES)orhavingreducedpowerfor be manipulating the parameters of their power analy-
detecting the MMES (if the chosen effect size is larger sis to match their already obtained sample size or to a
than the MMES) (Lipsey, 1990). Our findings suggest sample size they can feasibly obtain, or (c) commonly
that rather than being used to detect an MMES, con- used power analysis parameters in the field of Psychol-
temporary power analyses largely aim to detect effects ogy ensure that the sample size required can easily be
found in prior research, which are known to fluctuate recruited. The results found in our review may have
inmagnitudejustasmuchasp-values(Gelman,2019). resultedfromacombinationofthesefactors.
This finding is consistent with other research that has
found that effect sizes for power analyses have been Limitations
largelybasedonCohen’sdcut-offs,priorliteratureora
There are some limitations of this study. First, we
priorstudy(Bakkeretal.,2020). Accordingly,selecting
focused our review on 12 high-impact Psychology jour-
an effect size in this way severely limits the value/ap-
nals, focusingontheyears2016and2017. Ourresults
plicability of the sample sizes determined via such a
may not extend to articles published in other journals
procedure. Although the difficulty of choosing an ap-
or years. Further, although we tested different vari-
propriate MMES cannot be overstated, quantifying an
ations to ensure our search criteria could capture as
MMES is necessary for properly conducting all NHST-
manypoweranalysesaspossible(e.g.,usingthesearch
basedpoweranalyses.
terms separately versus together), it may have missed
Precision-based approaches were almost never used
analyses within articles that did not match our search
asamethodofsampleplanningwithinthepoweranal-
terminology. In other words, our recording of power
yses surveyed. Our results suggest that precision-based
analyses relied quite heavily upon the precise wording
approaches are not common sample planning tools in
used to describe these sorts of analyses within each ar-
Psychology. Oneoftheadvantagesofaprecision-based
ticle.
approachisafocusonconfidenceintervals,whichallow
Precision-based approaches may have also been
researchers to move beyond the dichotomous thinking
under-representedwithinourreview,becausethetermi-
of whether or not an effect exists (that is often associ-
nology for these types of analyses may not be reflected
atedwithinterpretingp-valuesalone),andbegintoan-
by our search criteria. However, it is worth noting that
swerquestionsrelatedtothemagnitudeofeffects,such
we conducted a post hoc search of precision-based ter-
as how much an intervention has caused a variable to
minologyonGoogleScholarandwerenotbeenableto
change(Cumming,2014). However,evenforprecision-
locateanyextensiveevidenceofitsuseinPsychologyin
based sample planning, there are many instances in
2016 or 2017. Specifically, searching "precision based
which an effect must be specified to estimate the re-
sample size calculation", “precision-based power analy-
quired sample size, even for designs such as bivariate
sis”, “AIPE”, or "precision based sample calculation” in
correlationsandchi-squarecontingencytabletests(see
GoogleScholarfor2016and2017producednofurther
CortyandCorty,2011,forexamples). Asanalysesgrow
empirical articles from psychological journals that con-
more complicated (e.g., moving from t-tests to linear
ductprecision-basedsampleplanning.
regression), the number of pieces of information that
are required to estimate the sample size grows. This
Recommendations
unfortunately leads to the same difficulty as traditional
NHSTpoweranalysisandmayresultintheguessingof Our review supports the notion that when using a
anumberofparameters. statistical tool that has many theoretical challenges re-
When recruiting participants, researchers appeared searchers inevitably run into difficulties implementing
to use the sample size estimate determined by a power the tool. These challenges in implementation often
===== PAGE 11/13 =====
11
makethepoweranalysisprocedureinfeasibleorrender ON,Canada.Email: cribbie@yorku.ca
itsresultsmisleadingatbest. ORCIDIDs:
Although power analyses that are precision-oriented NBhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-1081-0125
aresuperiortotraditionalapproachesofpoweranalysis UAhttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-3133-839X
because the focus is placed on estimation rather than RChttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-9247-497X
reject/notreject,theystillrequirepre-specificationofa
confidenceintervalwidth,anestimateofthepopulation ConflictofInterestandFunding
variability, and often times the effect of interest itself.
The authors have no competing interests to declare.
Further,liketraditionalpoweranalysisapproacheswith
TheauthorsthankSSHRCfortheirfinancialsupport.
a small MMES, high precision confidence intervals can
require large sample sizes which can be infeasible for
AuthorContributions
innovativeresearch.
In contrast, the MSSF does not require the quantifi- All authors developed and aided with writing the
cation of specific parameters and considers feasibility manuscript. NBandUAwerethetwocodersofthearti-
issues that affect sample size. We contend that many cles.
researchersmayalreadydothisinformally, whereeven
before sample planning begins they have an under- OpenSciencePractices
standing of practical constraints on their sample size.
We believe that responsibly outlining how many and
how these feasibility concerns (e.g., access difficulties,
financial cost, and risk) came into play when deter-
miningasamplesizemayprovidemoreinformationon This article earned the Preregistration+, Open Data,
sample planning than a traditional NHST based power OpenMaterialsandOpenCodebadgeforpreregistering
analysis. We recommend that researchers adopt the the hypothesis and analysis before data collection, and
MSSF strategy and justify these constraints when de- for making the data, materials, and code openly avail-
scribing how they selected their sample size. Although able. It has been verified that the analysis reproduced
there are power analysis procedures that explicitly fac- the results presented in the article. The entire editorial
tortheideaof“cost”(seeGuoandLuh,2009),theyare process, including the open reviews, is available in the
all nested within traditional NHST-based power analy- onlinesupplement.
sis (and therefore face the same challenges). To con-
References
clude, our study highlights the multi-faceted mess that
is traditional NHST-based power analysis. Some read-
Aberson, C. L. (2015). Statistical power analysis [Ad-
ers of this paper might conclude that it is necessary to
vanceonlinepublication].InR.A.Scott&S.M.
accurately specify the MMES or more thoroughly out-
Kosslyn (Eds.), Emerging trends in the behav-
linetheirowntraditionalNHST-basedpoweranalysisin
ioralandsocialsciences.Wiley.
their paper. However, as the field of Psychology moves
Aberson,C.L.(2018).Improvingscientificpracticesand
toward estimation as the primary goal, we argue that
increasing access. Analyses of Social Issues and
researchers should move away from exclusively focus-
Public Policy, 18(1), 7–10. https://doi.org/10.
ingonthedichotomousdetectionofasingleeffect,and
1111/asap.12152
instead focus on replication and meta-analysis. More
Albers, C., & Lakens, D. (2018). When power analyses
specifically, because it does not have a unique focus on
based on pilot data are biased: Inaccurate ef-
statisticalpowerinNHST,anditdoesnotrequireguess-
fectsizeestimatorsandfollow-upbias.Journal
ing many difficult parameters, we argue that obtaining
ofExperimentalSocialPsychology,74,187–195.
the maximum sample size feasible is a better approach
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jesp.2017.09.004
to sample planning than traditional power analysis. In
Algermissen,J.,&Mehler,D.M.(2018).Maythepower
this way, through replication via multi-site studies and
be with you: Are there highly powered stud-
meta-analysesofexistingliterature,wecanshiftthefo-
ies in neuroscience, and how can we get more
cus from the statistical power of a single study to a cu-
of them? Journal of Neurophysiology, 119(6),
mulativeliteratureofmanyfindings.
2114–2117. https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.
00765.2017
AuthorContact
Robert A. Cribbie, Quantitative Methods Program,
Department of Psychology, York University, Toronto,
===== PAGE 12/13 =====
12
Association for Psychological Science. (2018). Guo,J.H.,&Luh,W.M.(2009).Optimumsamplesize
Submission guidelines. https : / / www . allocationtominimizecostormaximizepower
psychologicalscience . org / publications / for the two-sample trimmed mean test. British
psychological_science/ps-submissions JournalofMathematicalandStatisticalPsychol-
Bakker, M., et al. (2020). Recommendations in pre- ogy,62(2),283–298.https://doi.org/10.1348/
registrations and internal review board pro- 000711007X267289
posals promote formal power analyses but do Hoenig, J. M., & Heisey, D. M. (2001). The abuse of
not increase sample size. PLOS One, 15(7), power: The pervasive fallacy of power calcu-
e0236079. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal. lations for data analysis. The American Statis-
pone.0236079 tician,55(1),19–24.https://doi.org/10.1198/
Batterham,A.M.,&Atkinson,G.(2005).Howbigdoes 000313001300339897
my sample need to be? a primer on the murky Kelley, K., Darku, F. B., & Chattopadhyay, B. (2018).
world of sample size estimation. Physical Ther- Accuracyinparameterestimationforageneral
apy in Sport, 6(3), 153–163. https://doi.org/ classofeffectsizes:Asequentialapproach.Psy-
10.1016/j.ptsp.2005.05.004 chological Methods, 23(2), 226–243. https://
Champely, S. (2020). pwr: Basic Functions for Power doi.org/10.1037/met0000127
Analysis [R package version 1.3-0]. https:// Kelley, K., & Maxwell, S. E. (2012). Sample size plan-
CRAN.R-project.org/package=pwr ning. In H. Cooper et al. (Eds.), APA handbook
Cook, J. A., et al. (2018). Delta2 guidance on choos- of research methods in psychology, Vol. 1. Foun-
ing the target difference and undertaking and dations, planning, measures, and psychometrics
reporting the sample size calculation for a (pp. 181–202). American Psychological Associ-
randomised controlled trial. BMJ, 363, k3750. ation.https://doi.org/10.1037/13619-012
https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.k3750 Kelley, K., Maxwell, S. E., & Rausch, J. R. (2003). Ob-
Corty, E. W., & Corty, R. W. (2011). Setting sample tainingpowerorobtainingprecision:Delineat-
size to ensure narrow confidence intervals for ing methods of sample-size planning. Evalua-
precise estimation of population values. Nurs- tion The Health Professions, 26(3), 258–287.
ingResearch,60(2),148–153.https://doi.org/ https://doi.org/10.1177/0163278703255242
10.1097/NNR.0b013e318209785a Kelley, K., & Rausch, J. R. (2006). Sample size plan-
Cumming, G. (2012). Understanding the new statis- ning for the standardized mean difference: Ac-
tics: Effect sizes, confidence intervals, and meta- curacyinparameterestimationvianarrowcon-
analysis.Routledge. fidence intervals. Psychological Methods, 11(4),
Cumming,G.(2014).Thenewstatistics:Whyandhow. 363–385. https://doi.org/10.1037/1082-
Psychological Science, 25(1), 7–29. https://doi. 989X.11.4.363
org/10.1177/0956797613504966 Lipsey,M.W.(1990).Designsensitivity:Statisticalpower
Dienes, Z. (2014). Using bayes to get the most out of forexperimentalresearch.Sage.
non-significant results. Frontiers in Psychology, Maxwell, J. A. (2004). Causal explanation, qualitative
5, 781. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2014. research, and scientific inquiry in education.
00781 Educational Researcher, 33(2), 3–11. https://
Elsevier. (2020). Guide for authors. https : / / doi.org/10.3102/0013189X033002003
www. elsevier. com / journals / journal - of - Mistler, S. (2012). Planning your analyses: Advice for
experimental-social-psychology/0022-1031/ avoiding analysis problems in your research.
guide-for-authors https://www.apa.org/science/about/psa/
Fayers, P. M., et al. (2000). Sample size calculation 2012/11/planning-analyses
for clinical trials: The impact of clinician be- OpenScienceCollaboration.(2015).Estimatingthere-
liefs.BritishJournalofCancer,82(1),213–219. producibility of psychological science. Science,
https://doi.org/10.1054/bjoc.1999.0902 349.https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aac4716
Gelman, A. (2019). Don’t calculate post-hoc power us- Rost, D. H. (1991). Effect strength vs. statistical sig-
ing observed estimate of effect size. Annals of nificance: A warning against the danger of
Surgery, 269(1). https://doi.org/10.1097/sla. small samples. European Journal of High Abil-
0000000000002908 ity, 2(2), 236–243. https://doi.org/10.1080/
Giner-Sorolla, R., et al. (2019). Power to detect what? 0937445910020212
Considerations for planning and evaluating Schauer, J. M., & Hedges, L. V. (2020). Assessing het-
samplesize[Preprint].https://osf.io/jnmya/ erogeneityandpowerinreplicationsofpsycho-
===== PAGE 13/13 =====
13
logical experiments [Advance online publica- 31(3), 25–32. https://doi.org/10.3102/
tion]. Psychological Bulletin. https://doi.org/ 0013189X031003025
10.1037/bul0000232 Wellek,S.(2010).Testingstatisticalhypothesesofequiv-
Sedlmeier, P., & Gigerenzer, G. (1992). Do studies of alenceandnoninferiority.Chapman Hall/CRC.
statistical power have an effect on the power Wilkinson,L.(1999).Statisticalmethodsinpsychology
of studies? In A. E. Kazdin (Ed.), Method- journals: Guidelines and explanations. Ameri-
ological issues strategies in clinical research can Psychologist, 54(8), 594–604. https://doi.
(pp. 389–406). American Psychological Associ- org/10.1037/0003-066X.54.8.594
ation.https://doi.org/10.1037/10109-032 Williamson, P., et al. (2000). Statistical review by re-
Tanaka,J.(1987)."howbigisbigenough?":Samplesize search ethics committees. Journal of the Royal
andgoodnessoffitinstructuralequationmod- StatisticalSocietyA,163(1),5–13.https://doi.
els with latent variables. Child Development, org/10.1111/1467-985X.00152
58(1), 134–146. https://doi.org/10.2307/ Zodpey, S. P. (2004). Sample size and power analysis
1130296 in medical research. Indian Journal of Derma-
Thompson, B. (2002). What future quantitative social tology, Venereology, and Leprology, 70(2), 123–
scienceresearchcouldlooklike:Confidencein- 128.
tervals for effect sizes. Educational Researcher,