
===== PAGE 1/24 =====
Editedby:RickardCarlsson
Meta-Psychology,2025,vol9,MP.2021.2927 Opendata:Yes Reviewedby:Aberson,C.,Williams,M.N.,
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2021.2927 Openmaterials:Yes Beribisky,N.,Vanhove,J.
Articletype:OriginalArticle Openandreproducibleanalysis:Yes Analysisreproducedby:LucijaBatinovi´c
PublishedundertheCC-BY4.0license Openreviewsandeditorialprocess:Yes AllsupplementaryfilescanbeaccessedatOSF:
Preregistration:No https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/E4RDM
Overview on the Null Hypothesis Significance Test: A Systematic
Review on Essay Literature on its Problems and Solutions in
Present Psychological Science
Noah van Dongen1 and Leonie van Grootel2
1DepartmentofPsychology,UniversityofAmsterdam,TheNetherlands
2RathenauInstituut,DenHaag,TheNetherlands
Fordecades,waxingandwaning,therehasbeenanongoingdebateonthevaluesand
problems of the ubiquitously used null hypothesis significance test (NHST). With the
start of the replication crisis, this debate has flared-up once again, especially in the
psychology and psychological methods literature. Arguing for or against the NHST
method usually takes place in essays and opinion pieces that cover some, but not all
the qualities and problems of the method. The NHST literature landscape is vast, a
clear overview is lacking, and participants in the debate seem to be talking past one
another. Tocontributetoaresolution,weconductedasystematicreviewonessaylit-
eratureconcerningNHSTpublishedinpsychologyandpsychologicalmethodsjournals
between 2011 and 2018. We extracted all arguments in defense of (20) and against
(70)NHST,andweextractedthesolutions(33)thatwereproposedtoremedy(some
of)theperceivedproblemsofNHST.Unfiltered,these123itemsformalandscapethat
is prohibitively difficult to keep in one’s sights. Our contribution to the resolution of
theNHSTdebateistwofold. 1)Weperformedathematicsynthesisofthearguments
andsolutions,whichcarvesthelandscapeinaframeworkofthreezones: mild,mod-
erate,andcritical. Thisreductionsummarizesgroupsofargumentsandsolutions,thus
offering a manageable overview of NHST’s qualities, problems, and solutions. 2) We
providethedataontheargumentsandsolutionsasaresourceforthosewhowillcarry-
onthedebateand/orstudytheuseofNHST.
Keywords: nullhypothesissignificancetest;systematicreview;essayliterature;
opinionliterature;thematicsynthesis
Introduction for statistical inference (e.g., Cumming, 2014; Wagen-
makers et al., 2011). NHST is the procedure that is
Between2011and2015,thesocialsciences,psychol-
ubiquitously used in the social sciences for the analysis
ogy in particular, entered what has become known as
of quantitative data. Roughly summarizing NHST, the
the replication crisis (Baker, 2016). For instance, the
test statistic of data that are produced by a study usu-
Open Science Collaboration (2015) attempted to repli-
allycomparedtoanullhypothesisofno-effect(e.g.,no
cate 100 landmark studies in the field of psychology,
differencebetweentwogroupsontheinvestigatedmea-
from which less than half yielded results similar to the
sure). Thenullhypothesisisrejectediftheteststatistic
original publication. Replication attempts in other aca-
issufficientlyimprobableaccordingtothisnullhypoth-
demic fields showed comparable results, such as eco-
esis. Specifically, the null hypothesis is rejected if, un-
nomics, (e.g., Camerer et al., 2016), cancer research
der the assumption that the null hypothesis is true, the
(e.g., Begley & Ellis, 2012), and medicine (e.g., Prinz
probability of observing this test statistic or one more
et al., 2011). In addition, Simmons et al. (2011) had
extremelydeviatingfromthenullhypothesisisbelowa
shown how surprisingly easy it can be to increase the
certainthreshold(i.e.,5%probability;p<.05). Insuch
probability of obtaining positive results for a (n obvi-
acase,thenullhypothesisisgenerallyrejectedinfavor
ously) false hypothesis, using research practices that
ofanunspecifiedalternativehypothesis(e.g.,thereisa
were considered conventional. According to many, one
differencebetweenthetwogroups).
ofthemajorculpritsofthisstateofcrisis,nexttopubli-
Otherwise, the null hypothesis is retained, though
cationbias(Francoetal.,2014)andresearcherdegrees
one is not supposed to consider this as evidence in its
offreedom(Wichertsetal.,2016),was(themisuseof)
favor. This seemingly simple procedure is associated
theNullHypothesisSignificanceTest(NHST)procedure
===== PAGE 2/24 =====
2
with two major problems: 1) is easily misused and 2) its of hypothesis testing and binary decision-making in
it possesses (hidden) deficiencies. There is abundant the social sciences (e.g., Morey et al., 2014). Instead
empirical evidence (e.g., see Engman, 2013) of social of estimation, they propose a Bayesian version of hy-
scientists1 unwittingly misusing the method and misin- pothesis testing that is supposed to be less prone to er-
terpreting its results (e.g., interpreting the probability ror and misuse (e.g., Wagenmakers et al., 2017). All
ofthedataunderH0astheprobabilityofH0giventhe these groups agree that the current practice involving
data). With regard to the second problem, deficiencies NHST is detrimental to science. However, there is a
andflawsofNHSTthatareindependentofmisusehave worrisomeabsenceofopinionsandsuggestionsofthese
been brought into the limelight (e.g., ease of rejecting groups converging on a semblance of consensus about
H0withalargeenoughsamplewhenitisnotperfectly howtheseproblemsshouldbeaddressed.
true;Wagenmakers,2007). Theliteratureontheproblemsofthesignificancetest
These issues, in combination with publication bias goesbackalmostacentury. Wilson(1923)criticizedthe
(i.e., favoring positive results for publication; Sutton, use of significance tests even before Fisher developed
2009)andapublish-or-perishincentivestructure(i.e., the likelihood and p-values. Berkson (1942) argued
academic careers depending on the number of publi- againsttheuseofsignificancetestsasevidenceandex-
cations and the journals in which they are published; poundedontheproblemsofhavingnospecificalterna-
Szucs and Ioannidis, 2017) are expected to be at the tive hypothesis. Hogben (1956) highlighted the prob-
root of the low replicability rate of social science re- lemoftestinganullhypothesiswithoutsettingthesam-
search. As a response to the first mentioned problem, ple size in advance. Rozeboom (1960) argued against
NHST’s misuse, several proposals have been made in NHSTasaprocedurethatisofvaluetoscience,because
the literature. People have called for and are starting of the absence of inverse probabilities. Bakan (1966),
to implement more transparency (e.g., open data and Greenwald (1975) and Rosenthal (1979) discussed the
methods;Freese&King,2018;Munafò,2016),andde- inherent bias against the null hypothesis in the appli-
sign and analysis specification prior to data collection cation of NHST and the deleterious consequences this
(i.e., preregistration; Lindsay et al., 2016; van ‘t Veer has on reported research. Berger and Sellke (1987)
& Giner-Sorolla, 2016), which makes misuse of NHST, demonstrated the problems of interpreting p-values as
like additional sampling, more difficult. For instance, a measure of evidence against the null hypothesis. Co-
registeredreportshave,atthemomentofwriting,been hen (1994) discussed many misapplications of NHST,
adopted by more than 250 journals (Center for Open among them the misinterpretation of p-values as the
Science, 2020). Roughly speaking, a registered report probability that the null hypothesis is false, the mis-
isastudydesignandanalysisplanthatissubmittedfor interpretation that one minus the p-value is the prob-
peerreviewatajournal(thatacceptsregisteredreports) ability of successful replication, and the mistaken as-
priortothedatacollectionandacceptedonitsmethod- sumption that if one rejects the null hypothesis based
ologicalmeritsandgeneraltheoreticalrelevancealone. on a p-value below 0.05 one thereby affirms the the-
Early meta-scientific results on the effectiveness of reg- ory that led to the test. And, in 2000, Nickerson pub-
isteredreportsarepromising(Scheeletal.,2020). lishedanon-systematicreviewthatdiscussedtheprob-
In response to the second mentioned problem, lemsmentionedaboveandseveralothers(e.g.,thenull
NHST’s deficiencies, researchers and statisticians have hypothesis can almost never be perfectly true and the
calledforreforminstatisticalmethodology. Somehave interpretationofp-valuesaseffectsizes).
proposed that, if we were to retain NHST, we should Although much has been published about the prob-
at least lower the threshold for statistical significance lems with NHST and its application, the method re-
(Benjamin et al., 2018), which would reduce the prob- mained ubiquitous in the social sciences. The current
lem of inflated false-positive rates to some extent. This attempt at methodological reformation is also not the
view is opposed by those that think that there should first time that scientists have tried to change the NHST
not be a default threshold and that the critical value system. For instance, around 2000 there was a serious
should be set and justified by the study design, the re- collective attempt to change the way in which scien-
searchquestion,etc. (Lakensetal.,2018). tistsanalyzedataandreportresults(e.g.,Cohen,1994;
Then there are others who want to abandon the sta- Gigerenzer, 2004; Meehl, 1990, 1992). Meehl (1990,
tistical significance threshold altogether (McShane et p.193)putitsuccinctlywhenhewrote:
al., 2019). In this case, the advice is to refrain from
"Let me say as loudly and clearly as possi-
hypothesis tests and use, for instance, only estimation
methods instead (e.g., Cumming, 2014). This perspec-
1Forbrevity,wewilldrop‘social’andrefertosocialscientist
tive is, in turn, opposed by those who see the mer-
asscientists
===== PAGE 3/24 =====
3
blethatwhatwecriticsofweaksignificance that is established through this research can provide
testingareadvocatingisnotsomesortofmi- valuable information and data for other researchers to
norstatisticalrefinement(e.g.,one-tailedor continuewith.
two-tailedtest? unbiasedormaximumlike-
lihood statistics? pooling higher order un- Method
interpretableandmarginalinteractionsinto
We reviewed opinion literature describing the mis-
the residual?). It is not a reform of signif-
conceptions and limitations of the Null Hypothesis Sig-
icance testing as currently practiced in soft
nificanceTest(NHST).Wesynthesizedessaysandopin-
psychology. Wearemakingamoreheretical
ion pieces, because we are interested in the arguments
point than any of these: We are attacking
researchersusetomaketheirpointfororagainstNHST
the whole tradition of null-hypothesis refu-
and the solutions they provide. To our knowledge, at
tation as a way of appraising theories. The
the moment of writing, there are no specific guidelines
argument is intended to be revolutionary,
forthesynthesisofopinionliteratureyet. Sinceourre-
notreformist.
viewquestionismainlyexploratoryandopen,wemade
Looking back, these events did however not inspire useofexistingguidelinesforreviewsofqualitativeand
the intended methodological revolutions. This could mixedmethodsstudies.
be because papers about (how to solve) NHST’s prob- To ensure transparency, extension, and reproducibil-
lems are focused on only a small number of issues and ity, we adhere to the ENTREQ transparency statement
arecontraindicatedinotherpapersbyauthorswhodis- for qualitative research (Tong et al., 2012). The EN-
agree,insteadofformingacoherentstructurethatpro- TREQ was developed for qualitative reviews of medi-
videsaclearplanofattack. Forinstance,Cohen(1994) cal research to ensure that all relevant information is
claimed that we, scientists, are interested in the prob- explicitly stated in the research report. To aid this en-
ability that the hypothesis is true and should thus use deavor,Table1. providesthelistofapplicableENTREQ
(something akin to) Bayesian statistics. This was then items and in which sections the information is given
contradicted in responses to Cohen’s paper (e.g., Baril thatpertainstothatitem. Fiveoutof21ENTREQitems
& Cannon, 1995; Frick, 1995; McGraw, 1995; Parker, were not addressed. One item (ENTREQ: 18.) is con-
1995). Inturn,Cohentemperedhisclaiminarejoinder cerned with study comparison, which is not applicable
(Cohen, 1995). As it appears, many authors agree on to our review. Four items (ENTREQ: 10. - 13.) are
the fact that there is a problem to be addressed con- concernedwiththequalityappraisalofthedata,which
cerningNHST,butmostdifferinwhichdeficienciesand is absent from our review. We considered the checklist
misuses of the method they address. The papers seem fortextandopiniontoolsfromtheJoannaBriggsInsti-
to talk past each other, each vying for attention, and tute (2017), but we preferred to focus on the quality
in doing so, inhibiting improvement of the practice of of the individual arguments that make up the opinion
statistical inference. A clear overview of the perspec- thatistobeevaluatedwhichthistooldoesnotprovide.
tives on NHST is absent and without such an overview Furthermore, using the tool in spite of this deficiency
- a map of NHST’s qualities, problems, its solutions - it couldhaveledtotheexclusionofpapersbasedontheir
will be nigh impossible to plot a course of action away overallopinion,whereasarticleswith’illogical’opinions
from the replication crisis and towards methodological could still contain arguments with interesting informa-
health. To this end, a framework is required in which tionforouranalysis(e.g.,Carrolletal.,2012). Therest
the different perspectives on NHST can be placed side- of this section contains the formulation of the review
by-side, compared, and evaluated. Such a framework question, the search strategy, the selection of studies,
willallowustoassesstheveracityofeachargumentfor thedataextraction,andthedataanalysisplan.
oragainstNHSTandassessthepotentialconsequences
Reviewquestion
of proposed methodological reform prior to implemen-
tation. We used the acronym SPIDER (Cooke et al., 2012)
Withthesystematicreviewreportedinthispaper,we to aid us in the focus on a review question. The SPI-
aimtoprovidethefoundationsofsuchaframework. By DER acronym allows the reviewer to specify the sam-
collectingandstructuringtheargumentsforandagainst ple, phenomena of interest design, evaluation, and re-
NHSTputforthinacademicpublicationsthatwerepub- searchtype. WespecifiedthecomponentsoftheSPIDER
lishedinpsychologyoverthelastdecade,weprovidean acronymasfollows:
overview of the perspectives put forth during the cur-
rent attempt at methodological reformation. Further- • Sample: Opinion statements (conclusions) sup-
more, the overview of the discussion and the dataset ported by arguments for or against the Null Hy-
===== PAGE 4/24 =====
4
Figure1
SelectionprocessofessayandopinionpiecespertainingtothequalitiesandproblemsofNHST.
===== PAGE 5/24 =====
5
Table1
ENTREQitemsadheredtoandwheretheycanbefoundinthetext.
No. Item Location
1 Aim Section2.1.
2 Synthesismethodology Section2.5.
3 Approachtosearching Section2.2.
4 Inclusioncriteria Section2.2.,AppendixS
5 Datasources Section2.2.,AppendixS
6 Electronicsearchstrategy Section2.2.,AppendixS
7 Studyscreeningmethods Section2.4.,AppendixS
8 Studycharacteristics Section3.1.
9 Studyselectionresults Section2.2.
14 Dataextraction AppendixE
15 Software Section2.5.
16 Numberofreviewers Section2.4.,Section2.5.
17 Coding Section2.5.
19 Derivationofthemes Section2.5.
20 Quotations Section3.2.
21 Synthesisoutput Section3.2.
pothesis Significance Test method and proposed that mitigate or remedy the purported problems;
solutionstoproblems,whichinturnarebasedon c) changes to the NHST method mitigate or rem-
evidence in the form of literature references, ex- edy the purported problems. Conclusions: The
amples, mathematical proofs, and/or data simu- particular conclusions about, perspectives on, or
lations. positions to NHST the writers have that follow
from/arebuiltontheargumentstheyuseintheir
• PhenomenaofInterest: deficienciesofNHST,mis-
paper.
conceptionsaboutNHST,defensesofNHST,solu-
tionstoproblemspertainingtoNHST,andoverall • Design: Discussions/essayonthephenomenaof
conclusionsaboutNHSTaccordingtotheauthors interestusingargumentssupportedbyevidence.
of the papers. NHST deficiencies: Intrinsic prop-
erties of the method that are considered undesir- • Evaluation: Identification and description of per-
able, limiting or pernicious (e.g., p-value is not spectivesandopinionsontheNHST.
an absolute measure of evidence, but relative to
• Research type: Essays and opinion pieces (i.e.,
thesamplesizeandeffect-sizeofthepopulation).
non-empirical scientific publications) in psycho-
NHST misconceptions: Misconceptions about the
logical science and the accompanying method-
results of the Null Hypothesis Significance Test
ological literature published between 2011 and
are specific misinterpretations of the results pro-
2018.
duced by the NHST method that are linked to
(elements of) the method (e.g., interpreting a p- This boils down to the following two general review
value as the probability of the null hypothesis on questions:
the observed data instead of the probability of Whatarethedeficiencies,misconceptions,anddefenses
the data on the assumption that the null hypoth- ofNHST?
esis is true). NHST defenses: Properties of NHST Whataretheproposedsolutionstoproblemspertaining
that speak to its qualities or counterarguments to toNHST?
the misconceptions and deficiencies. Solutions to
NHST:Solutionsthatarepurportedtomitigateor SearchStrategy
remedythementionedproblem. Examplesofsuch
Although this is a novel type of systematic review,
solutionsare: a)alternativemethodsofstatistical
we tried to adhere as much as possible to reporting
inference that supposed to suffer less from limi-
standards already in existence. We adopted the STAR-
tations and potential for misconception than the
LITE reporting standard for literature searches (Booth,
NHSTprocedure;b)safeguardsorpolicychanges
===== PAGE 6/24 =====
6
2006). STARLITEisareportingstandarddevelopedfor Paperswereexcludediftheywereaboutempirical
qualitativesystematicreviewsfromasurveyofexisting research and the concepts were used in the pa-
reviews with the aim to improve the quality and com- per,butthepaperswerenotabouttheseconcepts
pletenessofsystematicreviewreports. Weexplicatethe (e.g., “the results were statistically significant at
itemsthatmakeuptheSTARLITEmnemonic: the p<0.05 level”); or if the papers were about
anotherstatisticalprocedurethathassimilarcon-
• Sampling strategy: We used purposive sampling. cepts (e.g., Bayesian hypothesis test) and the ab-
Specifically, we restricted our search to papers stractdidnotindicateacomparisontoNHST.Fig-
publishedinpsychology,psychologicalmethodsor ure 1 depicts more specific information about the
statisticsliterature. reasonsforexclusionofpapers.
• Typeofstudy: Asindicatedinsection2.1,welim- • Terms used: We used the following search terms:
ited this review to essays and opinion pieces. We ‘null hypothesis’, ‘hypothesis test’, ‘statistical sig-
chose these types of papers because this is where nificance’, ‘significance test’, ‘p-value’, and ‘p
the pros, cons, and solutions of NHST are pre- value’. Weusedtheseterms,becausethesearethe
sented. concepts most commonly associated with NHST.
All search terms with syntax, operators, and ex-
• Approaches: We used electronic subject searches.
clusioncriteriaareprovidedinAppendixS.
No other approaches were used, because we ex-
pectedthatallpublishedpapersonthesubjectare • Electronicsources: Weusedtwodatabasesforthe
reachable through electronic searches on online literature search, PsycInfo (via EBSCOhost) and
databases. WebofScienceCore(viaEndNote8). Welimited
our search to these two databases, because they
• Range of years: We included papers published
coverthewidthofpsychologicalliterature.
from 1 January 2011 up to 31 December 2018.
We choose this restriction because 2011 is recog-
The search was conducted by NVD and was checked
nizedastheyearthereplicationcrisisstartedand
for errors and inconsistencies by [LVG]. Identified am-
psychology is the field in which it takes place or,
biguities and inconsistencies (e.g., does a journal meet
at least, is most engaged with investigating and
our exclusion criteria) were discussed and resolved on
remedying the situation.2 We selected 1 January
mutualagreement. Theschematicrepresentationofthe
as the starting date because Bem’s paper Feeling
selection process is presented in Figure 1. The initial
the Future on precognition, which triggered the
search yielded 6221 potential papers and the final se-
replication crisis, was published in January 2011
lectionconsistedof42papers.
andthatreceivedsomemediacoverageattheend
of 2010 (e.g., Lehrer, 2010). We performed the DataExtraction
search in January 2019. We decided to focus on
thelastdecadeandthereplicationcrisis, because We extracted descriptive information on the arti-
weconsiderthesepublicationstocontainperspec- clesanddescriptiveinformationconcerningtheauthors’
tivesheldbypeoplewhoareactiveinthecurrent opinion on NHST. The descriptive information on the
attemptatmethodologicalreformation. article consisted of the name of the (first) author, year
of publication and journal, and whether or not the ar-
• Limits: The functional limits that were applied ticle was part of a special issue. Furthermore, we ex-
concernEnglishlanguageandpublicationinpeer tracted the purpose of the article if explicitly stated by
reviewed scientific journals. The literature was the author(s) in the abstract or introduction; the read-
limited to peer reviewed journal publications be- ability for non-expert (i.e., absence of advanced math-
cause an adequate quality assessment instrument ematics and assumed technical know-how in the argu-
is lacking for essay literature and peer review of- mentation);theapplicabilityofsolutions(i.e.,solutions
fers some quality control (e.g., Ma et al., 2013).
Inclusion and exclusion: Papers were included in 2We acknowledge that there are several prior papers that
they were about the Null Hypothesis Significance contributed to the commencement of what is now called the
replication crisis. However, Bem’s Feeling the Future paper
Test inference procedure (i.e., the correct Type
canbeconsideredtheproverbialstrawthatbrokethecamel’s
of study); either wholesale or parts of the proce-
back. It elicited a flurry of comments and was a major mo-
dure. Specifically, papers were included if they
tivator for the first large replication project in psychological
were about the concepts ‘p-value’, ‘statistical sig-
science,whichstartedinNovember2011(OpenScienceCol-
nificance’, ‘significance tests’, or ‘null hypothesis’.
laboration,2015).
===== PAGE 7/24 =====
7
do not require costly statistical software or mathemati- Thematicsynthesis
calexperience); andtheconclusion, ifexplicitlystated,
The thematic synthesis contains four steps: 1) iden-
inthelastsectionofthearticle. Descriptiveinformation
tification of claims in the papers, 2) development of
concerningtheauthors’opiniononNHSTconsistsofar-
descriptive themes, 3) the development of analytical
guments and solutions related to NHST was extracted
themes within the phenomena of interest, and 4) de-
from all parts of the papers. Arguments and solutions
velopment of overarching analytical clusters. These
were identified in terms of explicit claims pertaining to
four steps were as follows. First, [NVD] identified
thephenomenaofinterest(asspecifiedinSection2.1).
pertinent text fragments (i.e., the claims pertaining
Specifically, a description in one or more sentences on
to arguments, solutions, or conclusions) from all sec-
their position (or the views/position of others they en-
tions of the articles (top left of the ladder in Fig-
dorse) with respect to, for instance, a particular defi-
ure 2). Second, [NVD] developed descriptive themes
ciencyofNHST.Anexampleofdataextractionofanar-
(Thomas & Harden, 2008) by clustering fragments
gumentfromoneofthepapersisasfollows. Onthefirst
intogroups: usingthesoftwareprogramEPPI-reviewer
page, Trafimow (2013) states: "p-values generally are
4.11.4.0 (Thomas et al., 2020). [NVD] and [LVG] dis-
inaccurate estimators of probabilities of null hypothe-
cussed the descriptive themes upon agreement. Text
ses."ThisclaimindicatesNHST’sdeficiencythatitsout-
fragments were grouped in descriptive themes based
come measure, the p-value, does not provide an accu-
on interpreted overlap in content, meaning, or inten-
rateestimationoftheprobabilityofthenullhypothesis.
tion.4 These descriptive themes were the individual
It was therefore interpreted as a deficiency of NHST.
arguments concerning NHST’s deficiencies, misconcep-
Note that all extracted arguments, solutions, and con-
tions,andqualities,andsolutionsandconclusions(sec-
clusions are claims made by the authors of the papers
ond step in Figure 2). Third, from the 137 descriptive
andarenotnecessarilyvalid.3
themes,analyticalthemesweredevelopedThomasand
Evidence used to support these claims was also ex-
Harden (2008). Analytical themes go beyond the in-
tracted. Empirical research, examples, other litera-
formation from the primary studies in order to address
ture,simulations,and/ormathematicalproofswereex-
ourreviewquestiondirectly. Duringthisstep,theanal-
tracted as evidence if they were referenced for that
ysiswasdoneseparatelyforeachphenomenonofinter-
claim. For example, on page 13, Cumming (2014)
est as specified in the SPIDER research question: Defi-
makes the claim: “[w]hatever the N, a [p-value] gives
ciencies,misconceptions,NHSTdefensearguments,so-
only extremely vague information about replication
lutions, and conclusions. The descriptive themes were
(Cumming, 2008)." In this case, “(Cumming, 2008)” is
firstgroupedinanalyticalsubthemes,basedonsimilar-
used as support for this claim. We interpreted this in-
ities in their semantic content. These analytical sub-
formation as evidence of the type: reference to other
themes were then grouped under overarching analyti-
literature. The extraction form, provided as Appendix
cal themes within each phenomenon of interest (step
E, gives further details concerning what was extracted
three and four in the ladder of Figure 2). Four, overar-
from the indicators that were for their classification.
chinganalyticalclusters5 weredevelopedfromtheana-
Thedatawereextractedby[NVD]andthedataextrac-
lyticalthemesidentifiedwithinthephenomenaofinter-
tion procedure was checked for errors and inconsisten-
est. Theseoverarchingclustersformsemanticallycoher-
cies by [LVG]. Identified ambiguities and inconsisten-
ent zones within the landscape of NHST, containing its
cies, such how to categorize a certain argument, were
qualities,problemsandthesolutiontotheseproblems.
discussedandresolvedonmutualagreement.
3We decided to include all arguments without any judg-
DataAnalysis
mentontheirvalidity,becausewedidnotpossessasystematic
approachtoevaluatethearguments,neitherinisolationnorin
The purpose of our systematic review is to provide
relation to each other. In addition, (in)validity of arguments
an overview of the qualities, deficiencies, and miscon-
seems to be highly dependent on one’s perspective on scien-
ceptions of, and solutions to NHST. The collection of
tific inference / philosophy of science, making a categorical
extracted arguments, arguments, proposed solutions,
judgmentimpossible.
conclusions,andtheirsupportingevidenceprovidethis 4Note that this is a slight deviation from Thomas and
overview, but it is too vast to interpret without some Harden (2008). We adopted this deviation to make the
kindoffocusorfilter. Tothisend,weconductedanini- methodamenabletotheunorthodoxnatureofoursystematic
tial qualitative thematic synthesis (Thomas & Harden, review.
2008)inwhichweidentifiedclustersofargumentsand 5We adopted this term to add an additional layer in the
solutionsdescribedinthearticles. hierarchythatprovidessomeconceptualdistinction.
===== PAGE 8/24 =====
8
Figure2
Example of the analysis hierarchy within a phenomenon of interest. A text fragment is first labeled with a descriptive
theme. Thesedescriptivethemesarethenclusteredinanalyticalsubthemesbasedontheirsimilarityinsemanticcontent.
Thesewerethenclusteredintohigher-orderanalyticalthemeswithineachphenomenonofinterest.
Results mathematical theorems and their proofs. Out of 42
articles, 29 offered one or more potential solutions to
Theresultssectiondescribesthedescriptiveinforma-
the problems pertaining to NHST. In only three out of
tion concerning the included papers and the themes
these 29 cases, no relevant information was given on
generatedinthethematicsynthesis.
how to implement the suggested solution(s). A com-
pleteoverviewofthepapercharacteristicscanbefound
ThematicSynthesis
inTable2.
A total of 42 articles were included in the analysis.
Arguments,solutions,conclusions,andevidence
Of these, 34 were regular articles, two editorials and
sixcommentaries. Elevenarticleswerepartofaspecial
We identified a total of 90 arguments, 33 proposed
issue;ofwhicheightwerepublishedin“Perspectiveson
solutions and 14 conclusions across the 42 articles that
theUseofNullHypothesisStatisticalTesting(NHST)”a
were included. These 137 items provide a first step in
three-part special issue edited by Educational and Psy-
answeringthereviewquestion: theydescribetheNHST
chological Measurement. Most papers (12 out of 42)
landscape. Concerningthearguments,weidentified39
were published in 2017 and only a few papers were
deficiencies of NHST, 31 arguments about how NHST
published in 2012, 2014, and 2018 (respectively, 1, 3,
is misinterpreted and misused, and 20 on the defense
and 2 out of 42). All but one of the papers were con-
of NHST. A rough overview of the distribution of argu-
sideredreadable. Theexceptionwasapaperpublished
mentsandsolutionsacrossthepapersispresentedinTa-
in Statistica Sinica (Martin & Liu, 2014) and required
ble3. Thecompletelistsofthesearguments,solutions,
theunderstandingofmathematicalnotation,thestated
andconclusions,theirdescriptions,andfromwhichpa-
===== PAGE 9/24 =====
9
pers they originate can be found in Appendix A. The TheMildZone
complete dataset that contains further details can be
The mild problem zone of NHST (see Figure 4) can
accessedhttps://osf.io/bktfx/). AsisshowninTable2.,
belabeledas: NHSTitselfisnottheproblem. Theprob-
therangeinthenumberofitemsperpaperislarge(i.e.,
lems with statistical inference, such as inflated false-
from1to30perpaper). Onepapercontainedasmany
positive rates and biased results, have to do with mis-
as 11 deficiencies. Another paper contained as many
conceptions and faulty practices due to the psychology
as 14 misconceptions. The maximum number of NHST
oftheresearchersandtheresearchculture,notwiththe
defenses was 8. The highest number of solutions was
method that is being used. Specifically, these problems
11. Not a single paper had the highest count on more
result from psychological heuristics that lead to misun-
thanasinglecategory.
derstanding, the tendency to dichotomous reasoning,
In total, we identified 508 unique pieces of evidence
and bad research practices that are considered accept-
that were referenced in the 42 papers to support the
able by the community. This means that the problems
123argumentsandsolutions. 15werepublishedbefore
have not so much to do with the method per se, but
1950;139werepublishedbetween1950and1999;181
with peripheral aspects, like the language of NHST in
werepublishedbetween2000and2010;and173were
relationtohumanreasoningandbehavior. Forinstance,
publishedbetween2011and2017(seeFigure3. forthe
Rouse(2016,p.129)writes
distributionofpublicationdates). Thebodyofevidence
isdiverse. Forinstance,somereferencesthatwereused
... the dichotomous language of NHST
asevidencefortheargumentsinthepaperscamefrom
promotes unrealistic and simplistic dichoto-
journals such as Journal of Wildlife Management, The
mous thinking styles. Many aspects of hu-
Journal of Experimental Education, Philosophy of Sci-
man behavior are too complex to be boiled
ence, Political Analysis, Biological Psychiatry, Seminars
downto“TrueorNotTrue”conclusions,and
inHematology,Ecology,andBiologyofBloodandMar-
yet the language of NHST subtly communi-
row Transplantation. A detailed analysis and interpre-
catesfallaciousandabsolutistapproachesto
tation of the evidence extracted from the papers is be-
evaluatingclaims.
yond the scope of our review. We can note that papers
thatcanbeconsideredasclassics, likeBerkson(1942), Within this zone, solutions are geared towards leav-
Bakan (1966), Rosenthal (1979), Cohen (1994), and ingthemethodasitis,thoughaddingsupplementsand
Nickerson (2000) are on several occasions used as evi- safeguardstoNHSTuse,thatmitigatethepsychological
dencetosupportarguments,solutions,andconclusions. andculturalproblems.
For instance, Cohen (1994) was used 22 times to sup- These solutions consist of policy changes (e.g., in
port arguments and conclusions across the 42 papers. education, funding, publication), focus on proper use
See the online supplements for further details on the of NHST (e.g., high enough power, adherence to strict
extractedevidence,https://osf.io/ayf56/. guidelines), and additions to NHST, such as procedure
verification, meta-analyses, and direct replication. For
ThematicSynthesisResults
instance,Rouse(2016,p.132)writes:
The opinions on NHST as presented in the literature
"As the research community is examining
wereanalyzedusingthematicsynthesis. Theindividual
and debating the most appropriate use of
arguments,solutions,andconclusionswereusedasthe
inferentialstatistics,werecommendthatre-
unit of analysis. We generated three overarching ana-
searcherscontinuetousethetoolsofNHST,
lytical clusters from the analysis that can be identified
but to use these tools carefully and effec-
as three zones in the (problems and solutions concern-
tively."
ing)NHSTlandscape: 1)themildproblemszone2)the
moderate problems zone and 3) the critical problems
This zone also contains the analytical themes of de-
zone. For all three zones, we describe the identifying
fenses of NHST and its use. These themes are 1) other
element(s) and we specify the associated arguments,
methods are just as bad or worse: Bayesian hypothe-
solutionsandconclusions,andprovidequotesfromthe
sistestsandestimationmethodseithercomewithaddi-
paperstosupportoursynthesis. Thetermsinitalicsrep-
tionalandmoreperniciousproblems(fortheformer)or
resent the analytical subthemes generated during the
are based on the same principles and thus suffer from
analysis (see Section 2.5.). See Figures 4, 5, and 6 for
thesameproblems(forthelatter). 2)NHSTdoeswhat
anoverviewofthemild,moderate,andhazardouszone
itissupposedtodo: theshortcomings,suchassampling
oftheNHSTlandscaperespectively.
plan affecting results, are actually qualities and what
NHSTissupposedtodo,controllingerrorrates,itdoes
===== PAGE 10/24 =====
10
well. 3) NHST is good enough for what scientists need Thus, although it is well known that nega-
andcando/have: NHSTisactuallyquiteintuitivetoun- tive (null) results are ambiguous and diffi-
derstandoratleastnotmoremisunderstoodthanother culttointerpret,exclusiverelianceonNHST
methods and can be unproblematically operated when makes positive results equally ambiguous,
certainprecautionsaretaken(e.g.,sufficientpowerand because they can be explained by flaws in
replication studies). For instance, Miller (2017, p.664) the way NHST is implemented rather than
writes: by a more theoretically interesting mecha-
nism(Meehl,1967).
To the contrary, the heart of NHST is a sim-
Although these are important criticisms on NHST as
ple, intuitive, and familiar “common sense”
it is currently practiced, not all frequentist hypothesis
logic that most people routinely use when
testing of statistical significance needs to be sensitive
theyaretryingtodecidewhethersomething
to these deficiencies. As another example, the mis-
they observe might have happened by co-
conceptions, such as that statistical significance comes
incidence(a.k.a.,“randomly,”“byaccident,”
in degrees (e.g., ‘0.05<p<0.1’ marginally significant,
or“bychance”).
‘p<0.001’ highly significant and that high p-values in-
This zone can be seen containing the milder con- dicatethatthenullhypothesisistrue,canbeaddressed
clusions concerning NHST, such as the analytical sub- byreconceptualizingseveralcomponentsofNHST(i.e.,
themes use NHST with care and proper practice, use what error probabilities are); as Haig (2017, p. 496)
complete reporting, and improve general practice. In writes about adopting Error statistics theory of Mayo
otherwords,fromwithinthiszone,thereisnothingac- (1999):
tuallywrongwithNHST.Specifically,themethodworks In her initial formulation of the error-
asitissupposedtoworkwhenusedcorrectly. Policyand statistical philosophy, Mayo (1999) mod-
educationchangesareallthatisrequiredtoremedythe ified, and built upon, the classical Ney-
existingproblems. man–Pearsonian approach to ToSS [tests
of statistical significance]. However, in
TheModerateZone
later publications with Spanos (e.g., Mayo
The second zone (see Figure 5.) within the NHST & Spanos, 2011), and in writings with
landscape contains the proposals for moderate, but David Cox (Cox & Mayo, 2010; Mayo &
not fundamental, changes in light of serious misuse of Cox, 2010), her error-statistical approach
NHST and mild shortcomings of the methods. Within has come to represent a coherent blend
the borders of this zone, the general conclusion is of many elements, including both Ney-
that researchers should stick with frequentist hypoth- man–PearsonianandFisherianthinking. For
esistesting,justinadifferentformthanNHST.Thisdif- Fisher, reasoning about p values is based
fers from the mild zone in the sense that the NHST ap- on post-data, or after-trial, consideration
proach, with its singular reliance on p-values to accept of probabilities, whereas Neyman and Pear-
unspecified alternative hypotheses, should be dropped son’s Type I and Type II errors are based on
in favor of different approaches to hypothesis testing, pre-data, or before-trial, error probabilities.
though are still based on the frequentist philosophy of Theerror-statisticalapproachassignseacha
probability (e.g., interval-null hypothesis testing). Sci- properrolethatservesasanimportantcom-
entistsmisunderstandhowNHSTworkswhichleadsto plementtotheother(Mayo&Spanos,2011;
wrongfully interpreted results. This misunderstanding Spanos, 2010). Thus, the error-statistical
is caused by deficiencies concerning the input for the approach partiallyresurrects andcombines,
analysis and the output. To illustrate, within this zone, inacoherentway,elementsoftwoperspec-
the use of NHST is problematic because, for instance, tivesthathavebeenwidelyconsideredtobe
if the sample size is large enough, the null hypothesis incompatible. In the post-data element of
will always be rejected as a result if it is not perfectly this union, reasoning takes the form of se-
true (e.g., "Berkson (1938) was the first to notice de- veretesting,anotiontowhichInowturn.
pendenceofsignificancetestingonthesamplesize. He
FromwhichHaig(2017,p.504)concludes:
objectedthatitispossibletoobtainastatisticallysignif-
icant chi-square test merely by increasing sample size" In more than 50 years of preoccupation
Rao & Lovric, 2016, p. 13) and, as LeBel and Peters with these tests, psychology has concen-
(2011,p.374)states,itoutputsambiguousevidence: trated its gaze on teaching, using, and criti-
cizing NHST in its muddled hybrid form. It
===== PAGE 11/24 =====
11
is high time for the discipline to bring itself Bayes factors are sensitive to how vague or
up-to-date with best thinking on the topic, precise the theory is; P-values are not. But,
andemploysoundversionsofToSSinitsre- normatively, precise theories should be fa-
search. vored over vague ones when data appear
withinthepredictedrange.
In addition, deficiencies, such as claims that the null
hypothesis is always false or that NHST overestimates In addition, NHST is incapable of providing that which
the evidence against the null hypothesis, are reme- researchersmisconceiveittoprovide,suchasinterpret-
died when minor structural changes are made. These ingp-valuesastheprobabilityofthenullhypothesis,the
changesare,forinstance,usingcontext-dependentType replication probability of the results, the realized Type
IandTypeIIerrors(i.e.,incorporatingthecostsofmak- I error probability, the methodological quality of the
ing a Type I and/or Type II error for the particular test study, or that the results are due to chance. This is be-
at hand); interval null hypothesis testing (i.e., using a cause the method only provides, under the assumption
rangeofvaluesaroundthenulleffectinsteadofapoint that the null hypothesis is true, the probability of ob-
null hypothesis); and using a minimum effect-size of servingthedataathandordatadeviatingmorestrongly
interest null hypothesis (i.e., using as null hypothesis from the null hypothesis. As an example, Schneider
thesmallesteffect-sizethatwouldbeofinterestforthe (2015,p.423)writes:
particular research question). As an example, Rao and
Lovric(2016,p.15)writes: Another variant is to believe that p indi-
cates the probability that a result is due to
So,whatshouldwedo? Thisarticleisanini-
chance alone (i.e., sampling error). This is
tialcontributiontomakingaparadigmshift
also not so, as p values are calculated on
in testing statistical hypotheses. Instead of
the assumption that H0 is true, this is the
testinghighlyproblematicandalmostsurely
assumed ‘chance model’, so the probability
false point null hypotheses, as a natural re-
thatchanceistheonlyexplanationofthere-
placement,testanegligiblenullhypothesis.
sultisalreadytakentobe1. Itisthereforeil-
This collection of suggested solutions, and this zone logicaltoviewpassomehowmeasuringthe
in general, is succinctly expressed by Baird and Duerr probabilityofchance(Carver1978).
(2016,p.113):
Other methods might not suffer these deficiencies,
By implementing the concepts from these making their result interpretations correct that would
sources, both traditional and contemporary, have been wrong for NHST results. For example, es-
researchers are engaged in what could be timation methods and other types of hypothesis tests
described as “context-driven NHST” or CD- (e.g.,Bayesianhypothesistests)donothaveadichoto-
NHST. Instead of being driven by conven- mousdecisionrule(i.e.,rejectH0versusretainH0)nor
tion, which may or may not have much rel- do they provide the probability of the data under the
evance, CD-NHST places the researcher in null hypothesis. They are said not to suffer from the
thedriver’sseatofinference. problemsmentionedabove,becausethesemethodsare
not about testing a single null hypothesis and evidence
Consequently,thedeficienciesofNHSTdorequiread-
comesindegrees. AsSchneider(2015,p.427)writes:
justments to the method, but the underlying assump-
tion of falsification and controlling error rates remains Firstofall,thereareinferentialalternatives,
intact. whichcontrarytoNHSTdoinfactassessthe
degree of support that data provide for hy-
TheHazardousZone
potheses,[...] [suchas]likelihoodinference
The hazardous zone (see Figure 6) calls for funda- (e.g.,Royall1997).
mental changes in the way the social sciences prac-
tice statistical inference. This is because the founda-
tionalproblemsofNHST,suchasitsinsensitivitytothe
specificsofthealternativehypothesis,aresevere. Ifthe
alternative hypothesis is what the researcher is actu-
ally interested in, then a method is required that takes
thecharacteristicsofthishypothesisintoaccountwhen
evaluating the data. As Dienes and Mclatchie (2018,
p.214)write:
===== PAGE 12/24 =====
12
Table2
Overviewofthepapersandtheircharacteristics. Thedetailsonthespecialissuesandthesubjectsofthecommentaries
can be found in the online dataset. The cells in the ‘Useful’ column are empty when the paper in question does not
containasolution.
FirstAuthor Year Journal Context SpecialIssue Readable Solutions
Gelman 2013 Journal of Mathematical Commentary Yes Yes No
Psychology
Rouse 2016 Psi Chi Journal of Psycho- Editorial No Yes Yes
logicalResearch
Gelman 2018 PersonalityandSocialPsy- Article No Yes Yes
chologyBulletin
Dienes 2018 Psychonomic Bulletin and Article Yes Yes Yes
Review
Campitelli 2017 Educational and Psycho- Article Yes Yes Yes
logicalMeasurement
Haig 2017 Educational and Psycho- Article Yes Yes Yes
logicalMeasurement
Haggstrom 2017 Educational and Psycho- Article Yes Yes No
logicalMeasurement
Schneider 2015 Scientometrics Article No Yes Yes
Wilcox 2017 Educational and Psycho- Article Yes Yes Yes
logicalMeasurement
Trafimow 2015 Basic and Applied Social Editorial No Yes No
Psychology
Chen 2017 NeuroImage Article No Yes Yes
Trafimow 2013 FrontiersinPsychology Commentary No Yes No
Marsman 2017 Educational and Psycho- Article Yes Yes No
logicalMeasurement
Lu 2015 Shanghai Archives of Psy- Article No Yes Yes
chiatry
Hupé 2015 FrontiersinNeuroscience Article No Yes Yes
Laber 2017 Journal of the American Commentary No Yes No
StatisticalAssociation
Rao 2016 Journal of Modern Ap- Article No Yes Yes
pliedStatisticalMethods
Goddard 2015 METODE Science Studies Article No Yes Yes
Journal
Cumming 2014 PsychologicalScience Article No Yes Yes
Cumming 2013 AustralianPsychologist Article No Yes Yes
Klugkist 2011 International Journal of Article No Yes Yes
BehavioralDevelopment
Garcia-Perez 2017 Educational and Psycho- Article Yes Yes Yes
logicalMeasurement
vanHelden 2016 NatureMethods Commentary No Yes No
Perezgonzalez 2014 Theory&Psychology Article No Yes Yes
Citrome 2011 Bulletin of Clinical Psy- Article No Yes Yes
chopharmacology
Konijn 2015 Communication Methods Article Yes Yes Yes
andMeasures
Hasley 2015 NatureMethods Article No Yes Yes
===== PAGE 13/24 =====
13
ContinuationofTable3
FirstAuthor Year Journal Context SpecialIssue Readable Solutions
Chang 2017 Educational and Psycho- Article Yes Yes No
logicalMeasurement
LeBel 2011 Review of General Psy- Article No Yes Yes
chology
Miller 2017 Educational and Psycho- Article Yes Yes Yes
logicalMeasurement
Lambdin 2012 Theory&Psychology Article No Yes No
Hofmann 2011 Psychotherapy Commentary No Yes No
Perezgonzalez 2015 FrontiersinPsychology Article No Yes Yes
Szucs 2017 Frontiers in Human Neu- Article No Yes Yes
roscience
Savalei 2015 FrontiersinPsychology Article No Yes Yes
Bradley 2016 PsychologicalReports Article No Yes No
Baird 2016 Journal of Modern Ap- Article No Yes Yes
pliedStatisticalMethods
Garamszegi 2017 Trends in Neuroscience Commentary No Yes Yes
andEducation
Martin 2014 StatisticaSinica Article No No Yes
Hubbard 2011 Journal of Applied Statis- Article No Yes No
tics
Johanson 2011 Scandinavian Journal of Article No Yes Yes
Psychology
Engman 2013 Quality & Quantity: Article No Yes No
International Journal of
Methodology
===== PAGE 14/24 =====
14
Table3
Overviewofthenumberofargumentsandsolutionsperpaper. SeeAppendixAfordetailsonwhichargumentorsolution
ispresentinwhichpaperandinhowmanypaperseachitemispresent.
FirstAuthor Year Deficiencies Misconceptions NHSTdefenses Solutions Total
Gelman 2013 3 0 0 0 3
Rouse 2016 0 3 4 0 7
Gelman 2018 1 2 0 5 8
Dienes 2018 3 0 0 1 4
Campitelli 2017 0 0 0 1 1
Haig 2017 1 3 0 2 6
Haggstrom 2017 0 8 0 0 8
Schneider 2015 11 8 0 10 29
Wilcox 2017 0 0 0 1 1
Trafimow 2016 0 3 0 0 3
Chen 2017 2 3 2 1 8
Trafimow 2013 4 0 0 0 4
Marsman 2017 2 0 0 0 2
Lu 2015 1 1 0 1 3
Hupé 2015 6 1 0 3 10
Laber 2017 0 0 1 0 1
Rao 2016 2 0 0 1 3
Goddard 2015 1 0 0 1 2
Cumming 2014 2 0 0 3 5
Cumming 2013 2 0 0 2 4
Klugkist 2011 2 1 0 1 4
Garcia-Perez 2017 0 0 8 0 8
vanHelden 2016 0 0 1 0 1
Perezgonzalez 2014 2 0 0 1 3
Citrome 2011 1 0 0 1 2
Konijn 2015 2 3 0 1 6
Hasley 2015 4 0 0 1 5
Chang 2017 1 0 3 0 4
LeBel 2011 5 0 0 4 9
Miller 2017 1 0 4 1 6
Lambdin 2012 5 14 0 1 20
Hofmann 2011 2 0 0 0 2
Perezgonzalez 2015 0 3 0 2 5
Szucs 2017 7 12 0 11 30
Savalei 2015 0 0 3 3 6
Bradley 2016 3 1 0 1 5
Baird 2016 4 1 0 4 9
Garamszegi 2017 7 2 0 1 10
Martin 2014 1 1 0 1 3
Hubbard 2011 1 1 0 0 2
Johanson 2011 6 0 0 1 7
Engman 2013 3 5 0 0 8
Note. All extracted arguments, solutions, and conclusions are claims made by the authors of the papers and are
notnecessarilyvalid.
===== PAGE 15/24 =====
15
TheperspectiveonNHSTfromthiszonefindsaclear statistical inference (i.e., continue with frequentist hy-
expressioninSzucsandIoannidis(2017,p.13): pothesis testing in a different form than NHST). The
hazardous zone incorporates fundamental deficiencies
NHST [...] does not allow for systematic and a systematic desire in the researchers that NHST
knowledge accumulation. In addition, both willneverbeabletosatisfy,inanyshapeorform. Inthis
because of its shortcomings and because case,acompletebreakfromNHSTisrequiredandadif-
it is subject to major misunderstandings it ferentstatisticalinferencemethodneedstobeadopted.
facilitates the production of non-replicable
false positive reports. Such reports ulti- EmbeddingandImplications
mately erode scientific credibility and re-
Atthemoment,thereplicationcrisisisnot(yet)con-
sultinwastingperhapsmostoftheresearch
sideredsolved,thereisstillfiercedebateonhowtoad-
fundinginsomeareas.
dress the misuse of NHST, and disagreement continues
In summary of this zone, the deficiencies and on if and how NHST should be changed or replaced by
their resulting misconception concerning NHST are which alternative. The contribution of our systematic
severe to the extent that scientific progress is im- reviewtothissituationistwofold.
peded to dangerous levels and radical methodolog- Firstly,ourresultsofferapossibleexplanationofwhy
ical change is required. The online available data these debates have not been resolved. The NHST land-
(https://osf.io/bktfx/) gives a complete breakdown of scape is vast. Vast enough that no single paper on the
the three zones from their analytic themes and sub- topic provides a complete overview of NHST’s machi-
themes to descriptive themes (i.e., arguments, solu- nation, its application, its consequences, and how it is
tions,conclusions). perceived. There is more than enough space for its in-
habitantstoholdincompatibleviewswithoutthethreat
Discussion ofdevastatingconflict,becausetheirperspectivesdonot
or minimally overlap and they have the internal coher-
Summary
ence of their standpoint to fall back on. For instance,
As this systematic review shows, NHST and its prac- the proponents of open science (Freese & King, 2018;
ticearediverseandintricate. Weextracteddatafrom42 Lindsayetal.,2016;Munafò,2016;van‘tVeer&Giner-
paperspublishedbetween2011and2018inpsychology Sorolla, 2016) build their position on arguments con-
andpsychologicalmethodsjournals. Combined,thepa- cerning human psychology and research culture (i.e.,
pers discussed 39 deficiencies of NHST, 31 misconcep- howresearchisbeingdone),whichentailtheimprove-
tionsormisuses,20argumentsindefenseofNHST,and ment of replication rates. From another position in the
33 solutions to NHST problems in particular or statis- landscape, these solutions are insufficient, because the
tical inference problems in general. Across the papers, inference method is considered at fault and these su-
these 123 items were supported by 508 unique pieces perficial cosmetic fixes only give a false sense of bet-
of evidence (i.e., references to other papers, examples, terment (e.g., Szollosi et al., 2019). However, they
simulation studies, or mathematical proofs). The 123 are too far apart for a deciding conflict to ensue where
argumentsandsolutionsareemployedtoreach14types one emerges as the victor. Their positions are not built
of conclusions. Collectively, these 137 items make up on the same or neighboring arguments; thus, their op-
the landscape NHST within which the author’s posi- posing conclusions do not threaten that on which it is
tions, or perspective if you will, on NHST – in terms foundedandconflictsremainunresolved. Conflictsthat
of its qualities, problems, and their solutions – can be do concern these foundations would be dialectic: each
interpretedastheareaofthelandscapethatisvisibleto needs to improve or move (i.e., change) their positions
theauthorfromtheirpointofview. in response to the other’s attack, eventually leading to
Within this landscape, we identified general zones. surrender/victory or consensus. Without such threats
Based on their content, the arguments, solutions, and toone’sposition,one’spositionremainssafe;outofthe
conclusions can be synthesized into three overarch- reachoftheargumentsofothersandwherethereisthe
ing zones enclosing certain practices and problems of internalconsistencyofone’sownargumentstofallback.
NHST. The mild zone houses that which is actually in Asaresult,publisheddenouncementsofeachother’s
favorofNHSTandonlyenclosesproblemsinandsolu- positions do not have to be perceived as carrying the
tions for policy, education, human psychology, and re- force that would motivate change in one’s position. As
search culture. The moderate zone contains acknowl- another example, there are several many-authors pa-
edgmentsofsomedefectsandmisuseofNHSTincom- pers that call for different changes in the application
binationwithstructuralbutnotfundamentalchangein ofstatisticalmethods. Onesuchpapersuggestsleaving
===== PAGE 16/24 =====
16
Figure3
Distribution of publications dates of the pieces of evidence extracted from the papers. These pieces of evidence were
referencedinthepaperstosupporttheparticularclaimsthatwereextractedasthedescriptivethemes.
NHST as it is, but only lowering the threshold of sta- are being critiqued on their NHST positions or want to
tistical significance (Benjamin et al., 2018)6, which is critique others can identify their position and that of
consistentwithourmildzone. Anothersuggeststaking others within the landscape, hopefully giving them in-
both Type I and Type II error rates into account and sight into the broader themes the critique is or should
have scientists set them with respect to the particulari- benestedin?
tiesoftheirresearchaimandsubject(i.e.,theNeyman- Secondly, our data can be used to move towards
Pearsonapproachtofrequentisthypothesistesting;Lak- a resolution of these debates on how scientific prac-
ens et al., 2018), which is consistent with our moder- tice should be improved. The overview our data pro-
atezone. Athirdpapersuggestsabandoninghypothesis videscouldserveasastartingpointforstatisticiansand
testsandthresholdsinfavorofcontinuousmeasuresof methodologists to formulate alternatives that are more
estimationandmodeladequacy(McShaneetal.,2019), likely to have the support from a large group of re-
which is consistent with our hazardous zone. Hence, searchers. Moreover, it provides a neutral classification
thesepapersdrawondifferentpartsoftheNHSTland- for academic researchers using NHST to reflect upon
scape (i.e., arguments). As a result, they argue against their own position and account for the advantages and
each other without really affecting the position of their drawbacks of using NHST. More particular, our results
opponents. Consequently, as long as those trying to re- can be used to identify where in the NHST landscape
solve these problems do not consider each other’s posi- particular positions overlap. The arguments and solu-
tionintheNHSTlandscapeanddonottargetthosear-
6It needs to be noted that (many of) the authors actually
easwheretheirconflictingpositionsoverlap, itislikely
preferBayesianhypothesistests,butseethissolutionasmore
thatconflictswillnotbethreateningenoughtomotivate
feasibleforthenearfuture. However,takingthisintoaccount
defense or change. More specifically, researchers who
doesnotchangetheargument.
===== PAGE 17/24 =====
17
Figure4
ThemildzoneintheNHSTlandscape: NHSTitselfisnottheproblem. ThiszoneconsistsofthreeNHSTdefensesthemes
(orange), one misconception theme (green); one solution theme (blue), and one conclusion theme (yellow). 14 of the
42papersascribetoaconclusionthatispartofthiszone. Thereareanadditionalfourpapersthatcontainatleastone
misconception and at least one solution that are part of this zone. There are seven papers that only have one or more
misconceptions,oneormoredeficiencies,oroneorsolutionsthatarepartofthiszonewhilealsocontainingdescriptive
themes belonging to the other phenomena of interest whose analytic theme(s) are part of another zone (these papers
are: Bradley and Brand, 2016; Cumming, 2013, 2014; Engman, 2013; Gelman, 2013; Konijn et al., 2015; Trafimow
andMarks,2015.)
tions in these overlapping areas could be the focus of terial could be of assistance to those intent on improv-
evaluation or the subject of empirical research. This ingthesocialsciences(e.g.,policy-makers,journaledi-
would allow a systematic comparison and assessment tors,educators,methodologists,etc.) whendecidingon
oftheparticulardebatepositions. how to allocate limited resources. For instance, those
Inaddition,ourdataprovidessomeindicationofrel- workingtowardstheimprovementofscientificpractice
evanceandinterconnection. Somedeficienciesandmis- through better statistics education could benefit from
conceptions are more prevalent in the papers than oth- selecting those misconceptions of NHST that are most
ers. One explanation for this prevalence is that these prevalent and evaluate if these curricular changes re-
problemsaremorerelevantandsevereandthusgarner ducethesemisconceptions.
more attention, at least according to the authors of the Furthermore, an overview such as this could prove
includedpapers. Withinthepapersandourzones,these usefulforthosedevelopingresearchmethodsandwant
potentially relevant problems are connected to partic- to take its adequate application by fallible human sci-
ular solutions, which could therefore be favored over entists into account. Even though scientists might be
theiralternatives. Inparticularandasanexample,edu- perceivedbylaypeopleandotherscientistsasmorera-
cators in (more senior) methodology courses could use tional, objective, and open-minded than non-scientists
ourdata(e.g.,TableAinAppendixA)asreferencema- (Veldkamp et al., 2017), they are not infallible. As our
terial to introduce the NHST debate or as embedding data shows, there are many misconceptions and mis-
to discuss the various perspectives that scientists have uses possible when it comes to statistical inference via
onstatisticalinference. Inmoregeneralterms,ourma- NHST,whichmightresultfrompsychologicalbiasesand
===== PAGE 18/24 =====
18
Figure5
Themoderatezone: Moderate,non-fundamentalchangesareneeded. Thiszoneconsistsofonedeficiencytheme(purple),
one misconception theme (green); one solution theme (blue), and one conclusion theme (yellow). 9 of the 42 papers
ascribetoaconclusionthatispartofthiszone. Thereareanadditionalsixpapersthatcontainatleastonemisconcep-
tion, deficiency or solution that is part of this zone and also one item that is part of another theme in this zone. There
are ten papers that only have one or more misconceptions, one or more deficiencies, or one or more solutions that are
part of this zone while also containing descriptive themes belonging to the other phenomena of interest whose analytic
theme(s)arepartofanotherzone(thesepapersare: Chenetal.,2017;GaramszegianddeVillemereuil,2017;Gelman,
2013; Häggström, 2017; Halsey et al., 2015; Hupé, 2015; Johansson, 2011; LeBel and Peters, 2011; Perezgonzalez,
2014;Trafimow,2013.
researchculturesthatdonotincentivizemethodological oftextfragmentscouldhavebeenusedasdata;andthe
rigor. Also, research shows that reporting errors in sta- phenomena of interest could have been combined, fur-
tistical results are prevalent in published papers (e.g., thersubdivided,ordifferentlydelineated. Forinstance,
Veldkamp et al., 2014). It is thus advisable that these the requirement of a positive element or alternative in
shortcomingsofscientistsshouldbetakenintoaccount, a proposed solution would have precluded ‘stop using
towhichouroverviewcanbeofassistance,whendevel- NHST’ from being an instance of that phenomenon of
oping or implementing alternatives to NHST with the interest. Different choices would have led to differ-
aimofimprovingthequalityofscientificinference. ent results. However, without proper methodological
guidelines,itisimpossibletopredictifthesealternative
Limitations choiceswouldhaveledtomeaningfuldifferencesinre-
sults and if these alternative results would be better or
This review suffers from several limitations. First
worse.
and foremost, the methodology for the systematic re-
Secondly, a quality assessment of the included liter-
view of opinion literature is not yet fully developed.
ature is lacking. It is general practice for systematic
Weadoptedmethodsformixed-methodsandqualitative
reviews to evaluate the quality of the data and either
systematicreviews,whichofferedguidelines. However,
onlyincludedatathatmeetcertainqualitycriteria(e.g.,
on several occasions, choices had to be made that had
Tong et al., 2012) or conduct sensitivity analysis of the
no precedent in the current methodological literature.
review results with respect to the quality assessments
The most prominent of these choices were the exclu-
ofthedata(e.g.,Patsopoulosetal.,2008). However,at
sion of empirical papers; using claims in the papers as
themoment,thereisnotoolavailablefortheevaluation
ourdata;andcategorizingthephenomenaofinterestin
ofthequalityofparticulararguments,northestructure
deficiencies,misconceptions,NHSTdefenses,solutions,
of a set of arguments to their conclusion. Thus, we
andconclusions. EmpiricalstudiesofNHSTanditsuse
included all arguments even though some would con-
mightalsocontainargumentsandsolutions;othertypes
===== PAGE 19/24 =====
19
Figure6
ThehazardouszoneonNHST:fundamentalchangeisneeded. Thiszoneconsistsoftwodeficiencythemes(purple),one
misconceptionstheme(green);onesolutiontheme(blue),andoneconclusiontheme(yellow). 19ofthe42papersascribe
to a conclusion that is part of this zone. There are an additional five papers that contain at least one misconception,
deficiency, or one solution that is part of this zone and also on item that is part of another theme in this zone. There
aretenpapersthatonlyhaveoneormoremisconceptions,oneormoredeficiencies,oroneorsolutionsthatarepartof
thiszonewhilecontaininganydescriptivethemesbelongingtotheotherphenomenaofinterestwhoseanalytictheme(s)
arepartofanotherzone(thesepapersare: Baird&Harlow,2016;Chang,2017;Garamszegi&deVillemereuil,2017;
Häggström, 2017; Haig, 2017; Lu & Belitskaya-Levy, 2015; Martin & Liu, 2014; Perezgonzalez, 2014, 2015; Rouse,
2016).
sider them to be clearly false or of such a low quality ical, historical, and other factors also play a role in the
thattheyshouldnotbeincludedintheoverview. When positionofbordersbetweencountries. Thesamemight
comparingthearguments,someclearlycontradicteach be said of what is included or excluded in the area oc-
other,suchasMillerclaimingthat“theheartofNHSTis cupied by an author in the NHST landscape. Conse-
a simple, intuitive, and familiar “common sense” logic” quently,thisdoesnotnecessarilyhavetobeconsidered
(Miller, 2017, p.664) while others claim that NHST is as a limitation factor, but could be seen as highlighting
incoherent(andthusillogical). Thisisaclearindication thediversityandintricaciesoftheNHSTlandscape.
thatatleastoneofthemmustbewrong. Insuchacase, Finally, the scope of our review is limited. Time and
aqualityassessmentmightbeabletoarbitratebetween resources required constraints. We only included essay
conflictingcases. and opinion literature from psychology and method-
Thirdly, although the identified zones within the ological journals, published between 2011 and 2018.
NHSTlandscapegenerallyoverlapwiththeperspectives The replication crisis and the consequent attention for
of the authors, there is a lack of complete correspon- methodologicalevaluationandreformmadethis,inour
dence. However,itdoesnothavetobeunexpectedthat opinion, the most promising boundaries to work in.
some authors use arguments or solutions across more However,otherfieldsmighthaveadifferentperspective
than one zone. It is not necessary that the authors’ po- on NHST. Specifically, researchers in those fields might
sitions are exclusively dependent on what is present in differ from psychologists in their misconceptions and
the landscape. For instance, personal agenda, position misuses. Or,theauthorsofNHSTpapersinthesefields
within their academic field, or their particular educa- mightemphasizedeficienciesofNHSTthatareignored
tion might play a role as well. To extend the landscape by authors of such papers working in psychology and
metaphor: borders are notalways drawn alongnatural viceversa. Furthermore,differentdeficienciesandmis-
structures, such as rivers or mountains. Logistic, polit- conceptionsmighthavebeeninthespotlightbeforethe
===== PAGE 20/24 =====
20
advent of the replication crisis in 2011 and it could be ORCID-NoahvanDongen: 0000-0003-0387-7388
possiblethatdifferentproblemsareaddressedinempir- ORCID-LeonievanGrootel: 0000-0001-6675-9018
icalliteratureconcerningNHST.Inshort,thereisample
roomforbroadeninganddeepeningtheunderstanding
ofNHSTinparticularandstatisticalinferenceingeneral ConflictofInterestandFunding
viasystematicliteraturereview.
There are no conflicts of interest to declare. The re-
search by NvD was supported by Starting Investigator
SuggestionsforfurtherResearch
Grant No. 640638 (“OBJECTIVITY – Making Scientific
Our paper offers handholds for the extension of Inferences More Objective”) of the European Research
our review and the development of systematic review Council(ERC).
methodology for essay and opinion literature. The ac-
cessweprovidetoourmethodsandprogressnoteswill AuthorContributions
notonlyallowotherstoevaluateourwork,butalsoex-
Noah van Dongen was responsible for the conceptu-
tend and improve it. Specifically, this review can be
alization,datacollection,analysis,andwritingtheorig-
extended to other academic fields and further back in
inaldraftofthearticle. LeonievanGrootelwasrespon-
time. These extensions will allow us to gain insight
sibleforsupervision,assistedwiththeconceptualization
into the differences and similarities between fields and
andanalysis,andreviewedandeditedthearticle.
across time on the perspectives and practice of NHST.
Suchanuancedoverviewwillbeofvalueinthecontin-
OpenSciencePractices
uing debate on how statistical inference is and should
bepracticed.
This paper also counts as a proof of principle. As
far as we know, this is the first systematic review of es-
say and opinion literature. Its successful completion,
This article earned the Open Data and Open Mate-
apart from the quality control, is an indication that
rials badge for making the data and materials openly
such reviews are possible in principle. We expect that
available. It has been verified that the analysis repro-
ourmethodscanbedevelopedintoasystematicreview
ducedtheresultspresentedinthearticle. Theentireed-
methodology with general application, which itself can
itorialprocess,includingtheopenreviews,ispublished
be investigated and evaluated. The academic literature
intheonlinesupplement.
isteemingwithessaysonawidevarietyoftopics. Many
of them have a shared topic and argue against or sup-
References
porteachother. Atthemoment,essaysconcerningopen
science, the replication crisis, and preregistration and Baird,G.L.,&Duerr,S.R.(2016).Reflectionsconcern-
methodological rigor are prime examples of topics on ing recent ban on NHST and confidence inter-
which many such essays are published. When further vals.JournalofModernAppliedStatisticalMeth-
developed,anadequatesystematicreviewmethodology ods,15(2),821–824.
could be used to catalog the copious amounts of such Baird,G.L.,&Harlow,L.L.(2016).Doesonesizefitall?
papers and get a clear perspective on topics that are of Acaseforcontext-drivennullhypothesisstatis-
clearcurrentrelevance. ticaltesting.JournalofModernAppliedStatisti-
calMethods,15(1),100.
Concludingremarks
Bakan,D.(1966).Thetestofsignificanceinpsychologi-
In this paper, we provided an overview on the per- calresearch.PsychologicalBulletin,66(6),423–
spectives on NHST and its practice. The extensive 437.
datasetthatresultedfromourreviewcontainsmorein- Baker, M. (2016). 1,500 scientists lift the lid on repro-
formationthanwecouldproperlydescribeandanalyze ducibility.Nature,533(7604),452–454.
inonepaper. Thusweconcludewiththewishthatoth- Baril, G. L., & Cannon, J. T. (1995). What is the prob-
ers might use our data and further investigate this fas- ability that null hypothesis testing is meaning-
cinatingtopic. less?AmericanPsychologist,50,1098–1099.
Begley,C.G.,&Ellis,L.M.(2012).Raisestandardsfor
AuthorContact preclinicalcancerresearch.Nature,483(7391),
531–533.
Corresponding author: Noah van Dongen, nnnvan-
dongen@gmail.com
===== PAGE 21/24 =====
21
Benjamin, D. J., Berger, J. O., Johannesson, M., Nosek, Cohen, J. (1994). The world is round (p<.05). Ameri-
B. A., Wagenmakers, E.-J., & Berk, e. a., canPsychologist,49(12),997–1003.
Richard. (2018). Redefine statistical signifi- Cohen,J.(1995).TheEarthIsRound(p<.05):Rejoin-
cance.NatureHumanBehaviour,2(1),6–10. der.AmericanPsychologist,50(12),1103.
Berger, J. O., & Sellke, T. (1987). Testing a point null Cooke,A.,Smith,D.,&Booth,A.(2012).BeyondPICO:
hypothesis:Theirreconcilabilityofpvaluesand theSPIDERtoolforqualitativeevidencesynthe-
evidence.JournaloftheAmericanStatisticalAs- sis. Qualitative health research, 22(10), 1435–
sociation,82(397),112–122. 1443.
Berkson, J. (1942). Tests of significance considered as Cumming,G.(2008).Replicationandpintervals:Pval-
evidence.JournaloftheAmericanStatisticalAs- ues predict the future only vaguely, but confi-
sociation,37(219),325–335. dence intervals do much better. Perspectives on
Booth, A. (2006). "Brimful of STARLITE": Toward stan- psychologicalscience,3(4),286–300.
dards for reporting literature searches. Journal Cumming, G. (2013). The new statistics: A how-to
of the Medical Library Association, 94(4), 421– guide.AustralianPsychologist,48(3),161–170.
429. Cumming,G.(2014).Thenewstatistics:Whyandhow.
Bradley, M. T., & Brand, A. (2016). Significance test- PsychologicalScience,25(1),7–29.
ingneedsataxonomy:OrhowtheFisher,Ney- Dienes,Z.,&Mclatchie,N.(2018).Fourreasonstopre-
man–Pearson controversy resulted in the infer- fer Bayesian analyses over significance testing.
ential tail wagging the measurement dog. Psy- Psychonomicbulletin&review,25(1),207–218.
chologicalReports,119(2),487–504. Engman, A. (2013). Is there life after P<0.05? Sta-
Camerer,C.F.,Dreber,A.,Forsell,E.,Ho,T.-H.,Huber, tistical significance and quantitative sociology.
J.,Johannesson,M.,&Heikensten,e.a.,Emma. Quality & Quantity: International Journal of
(2016). Evaluating replicability of laboratory Methodology,47(1),257–270.
experiments in economics. Science, 351(6280), Franco, A., Malhotra, N., & Simonovits, G. (2014).
1433–1436. Publication bias in the social sciences: Unlock-
Campitelli, G., Macbeth, G., Ospina, R., & Marmolejo- ing the file drawer. Science, 345(6203), 1502–
Ramos,F.(2017).ThreeStrategiesfortheCrit- 1505.
ical Use of Statistical Methods in Psychological Freese, J., & King, M. M. (2018). Institutionalizing
Research. Educational and Psychological Mea- transparency.Socius:SociologicalResearchfora
surement, 77(5), 881–895. https://doi.org/ DynamicWorld,4,1–7.
10.1177/0013164416668234 Frick, R. W. (1995). A problem with confidence inter-
Carroll,C.,Booth,A.,&Lloyd-Jones,M.(2012).Should vals.AmericanPsychologist,50,1102–1103.
weexcludeinadequatelyreportedstudiesfrom Garamszegi, L. Z., & de Villemereuil, P. (2017). Pertur-
qualitative systematic reviews? An evaluation bations on the uniform distribution of p-values
of sensitivity analyses in two case study re- can lead to misleading inferences from null-
views. Qualitative Health Research, 22(10), hypothesis testing. Trends in neuroscience and
1425–1434. education,8,18–27.
Center for Open Science. (2020). Registered reports. García-Pérez, M. A. (2017). Thou shalt not bear false
Retrieved September 22, 2020, from https:// witness against null hypothesis significance
www.cos.io/initiatives/registered-reports testing. Educational and Psychological Measure-
Chang, M. (2017). What constitutes science and sci- ment,77(4),631–662.
entific evidence: Roles of null hypothesis test- Gelman, A. (2013). Interrogating p-values. Journal of
ing. Educational and Psychological Measure- MathematicalPsychology,57(5),188–189.
ment,77(3),475–488. Gelman, A. (2018). The failure of null hypothesis sig-
Chen,G.,Taylor,P.A.,&Cox,R.W.(2017).Isthestatis- nificance testing when studying incremental
ticvalueallweshouldcareaboutinneuroimag- changes, and what to do about it. Personality
ing?NeuroImage,147,952–959. andSocialPsychologyBulletin,44(1),16–23.
Citrome, L. (2011). The Tyranny of the P-value: Effect Gigerenzer, G. (2004). Mindless statistics. Journal of
Size Matters. Klinik Psikofarmakoloji Bülteni- Socio-Economics,33(5),587–606.
Bulletin of Clinical Psychopharmacology, 21(2), Goddard, S., & Johnson, V. E. (2015). The Lack of
91–92. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5455 / bcp . Reproducibility in Research. METODE Science
20110706020600 Studies Journal, 5, 175–179. https://doi.org/
17.7203/metode.83.3913
===== PAGE 22/24 =====
22
Greenwald, A. G. (1975). Consequences of prejudice Lambdin, C. (2012). Significance tests as sorcery: Sci-
against the null hypothesis. Psychological Bul- ence is empirical—significance tests are not.
letin,82(1),1–20. Theory&Psychology,22(1),67–90.
Häggström, O. (2017). The need for nuance in the null LeBel, E. P., & Peters, K. R. (2011). Fearing the future
hypothesis significance testing debate. Educa- ofempiricalpsychology:Bem’s(2011)evidence
tional and psychological measurement, 77(4), of psi as a case study of deficiencies in modal
616–630. researchpractice.ReviewofGeneralPsychology,
Haig,B.D.(2017).Testsofstatisticalsignificancemade 15(4),371–379.
sound. Educational and Psychological Measure- Lehrer, J. (2010). Feeling The Future: Is Precognition
ment,77(3),489–506. Possible?[Accessedon11August2020].https:
Halsey,L.G.,Curran-Everett,D.,Vowler,S.L.,&Drum- //www.wired.com/2010/11/feeling-the-
mond, G. B. (2015). The fickle P value gen- future-is-precognition-possible/
erates irreproducible results. Nature methods, Lindsay,D.S.,Simons,D.J.,&Lilienfeld,S.O.(2016).
12(3),179–185. Research preregistration 101. APS Observer,
Hofmann, S. G. (2011). Some more fundamental prob- 29(10).
lemsinclinicalresearch:Commenton’Statisti- Lu,Y.,&Belitskaya-Levy,I.(2015).Thedebateaboutp-
cal significance testing and clinical trials’. Psy- values. Shanghai Archives of Psychiatry, 27(6),
chotherapy, 48(3), 223–224. https://doi.org/ 381–385.
10.1037/a0023198 Ma, Z., Pan, Y., Yu, Z., Wang, J., Jia, J., & Wu, Y.
Hogben, L. (1956). The present crisis in statistical the- (2013). A quantitative study on the effective-
ory.TheIncorporatedStatistician,7(1),3–21. ness of peer review for academic journals. Sci-
Hubbard, R. (2011). The widespread misinterpretation entometrics,95(1),1–13.
ofp-valuesaserrorprobabilities.JournalofAp- Marsman, M., & Wagenmakers, E. J. (2017). Three In-
pliedStatistics,38(11),2617–2626. sights from a Bayesian Interpretation of the
Hupé,J.-M.(2015).StatisticalinferencesundertheNull One-SidedPValue.EducationalandPsychologi-
hypothesis: common mistakes and pitfalls in cal Measurement, 77(3), 529–539. https://doi.
neuroimagingstudies.Frontiersinneuroscience, org/10.1177/0013164416669201
9,18. Martin, R., & Liu, C. (2014). A note on p-values inter-
Johansson,T.(2011).Hailtheimpossible:P-values,ev- preted as plausibilities. Statistica Sinica, 1703–
idence,andlikelihood.ScandinavianJournalof 1716.
Psychology,52(2),113–125. McGraw,K.O.(1995).Determiningfalsealarmratesin
Klugkist, I., van Wesel, F., & Bullens, J. (2011). Do We null hypothesis testing research. American Psy-
Know What We Test and Do We Test What We chologist,50,1099–1100.
Want to Know? International Journal of Behav- McShane, B. B., Gal, D., Gelman, A., Robert, C., &
ioralDevelopment,35(6),550–560.https://doi. Tackett, J. L. (2019). Abandon statistical sig-
org/10.1177/0165025411425873 nificance. The American Statistician, 73(sup1),
Konijn,E.A.,vandeSchoot,R.,Winter,S.D.,&Fergu- 235–245.
son, C. J. (2015). Possible solution to publica- Meehl,P.E.(1990).Whysummariesofresearchonpsy-
tion bias through Bayesian statistics, including chological theories are often uninterpretable.
proper null hypothesis testing. Communication PsychologicalReports,66,195–244.
MethodsandMeasures,9(4),280–302. Meehl, P. E. (1992). Cliometric metatheory: The actu-
Laber, E. B., & Shedden, K. (2017). Statistical Signif- arial approach to empirical, history-based phi-
icance and the Dichotomization of Evidence: losophyofscience.PsychologicalReports,71(2),
The Relevance of the ASA Statement on Statis- 339–467.
ticalSignificanceandp-ValuesforStatisticians. Miller, J. (2017). Hypothesis testing in the real
Journal of the American Statistical Association, world. Educational and Psychological Measure-
112(519),902–904.https://doi.org/10.1080/ ment,77(4),663–672.
01621459.2017.1311265 Morey,R.D.,Rouder,J.N.,Verhagen,J.,&Wagenmak-
Lakens, D., Adolfi, F. G., Albers, C. J., Anvari, F., Apps, ers, E.-J. (2014). Why hypothesis tests are es-
M. A. J., Argamon, S. E., & Buchanan, e. a., sentialforpsychologicalscience:Acommenton
EmilyM.(2018).Justifyyouralpha.NatureHu- cumming. Psychological Science, 25(6), 1289–
manBehaviour,2(3),168–171. 1290.
===== PAGE 23/24 =====
23
Munafò, M. (2016). Open science and research repro- Simmons,J.P.,Nelson,L.D.,&Simonsohn,U.(2011).
ducibility.ecancermedicalscience,10,10:ed56. False-positive psychology: Undisclosed flexibil-
Nickerson, R. S. (2000). Null hypothesis significance ity in data collection and analysis allows pre-
testing:Areviewofanoldandcontinuingcon- senting anything as significant. Psychological
troversy.PsychologicalMethods,5(2),241–301. Science,22(11),1359–1366.
OpenScienceCollaboration.(2015).Estimatingthere- Szollosi, A., Kellen, D., Navarro, D. J., Shiffrin, R., van
producibility of psychological science. Science, Rooij,I.,VanZandt,T.,&Donkin,C.(2019).Is
349(6251),aac4716.https://doi.org/10.1126/ preregistration worthwhile. Trends in Cognitive
science.aac4716 Sciences,24(2),94–95.
Parker, S. (1995). The “difference of means” may not Szucs, D., & Ioannidis, J. P. A. (2017). When null hy-
be the “effect size”. American Psychologist, 50, pothesis significance testing is unsuitable for
1101–1102. research: A reassessment. Frontiers in Human
Patsopoulos, N. A., Evangelou, E., & Ioannidis, J. P. A. Neuroscience,11,390.
(2008). Sensitivity of between-study hetero- Thomas, J., Graziosi, S., Brunton, J., Ghouze, Z.,
geneityinmeta-analysis:Proposedmetricsand O’Driscoll, P., & Bond, M. (2020). EPPI-
empirical evaluation. International Journal of Reviewer:Advancedsoftwareforsystematicre-
Epidemiology,37(5),1148–1157. views,mapsandevidencesynthesis.
Perezgonzalez, J. D. (2014). A reconceptualization of Thomas, J., & Harden, A. (2008). Methods for the the-
significancetesting.Theory&Psychology,24(6), matic synthesis of qualitative research in sys-
852–859. tematicreviews.BMCMedicalResearchMethod-
Perezgonzalez, J. D. (2015). The meaning of signifi- ology,8(1),45.
canceindatatesting. Tong,A.,Flemming,K.,McInnes,E.,Oliver,S.,&Craig,
Prinz, F., Schlange, T., & Asadullah, K. (2011). Believe J.(2012).Enhancingtransparencyinreporting
it or not: How much can we rely on published the synthesis of qualitative research: Entreq.
data on potential drug targets? Nature Reviews BMCMedicalResearchMethodology,12(1),181.
DrugDiscovery,10(9),712–712. Trafimow, D., & Marks, M. (2015). Editorial. Basic and
Rao,C.R.,&Lovric,M.M.(2016).Testingpointnullhy- AppliedSocialPsychology,37(1),1–2.
pothesis of a normal mean and the truth: 21st Trafimow, D. (2013). Descriptive vs. inferential cheat-
century perspective. Journal of Modern Applied ing.
StatisticalMethods,15,2–21. van Helden, J. (2016). Confidence Intervals Are No
Rosenthal, R. (1979). The file drawer problem and tol- Salvation from the Alleged Fickleness of the P
erance for null results. Psychological Bulletin, Value. Nature Methods, 13(8), 605–606. https:
86(3),638–641. //doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.3933
Rouse, S. V. (2016). Of teacups and t tests: Best prac- van ‘t Veer, A. E., & Giner-Sorolla, R. (2016). Pre-
tices in contemporary null hypothesis signifi- registrationinsocialpsychology—Adiscussion
cance testing. Psi Chi Journal of Psychological and suggested template. Journal of Experimen-
Research,21(2),127–133. talSocialPsychology,67,2–12.
Rozeboom, W. W. (1960). The fallacy of the null- Veldkamp, C. L. S., Hartgerink, C. H. J., van Assen,
hypothesis significance test. Psychological bul- M.A.L.M.,&Wicherts,J.M.(2017).Whobe-
letin,57(5),416. lieves in the storybook image of the scientist?
Savalei,V.,&Dunn,E.(2015).IstheCalltoAbandonP- AccountabilityinResearch,24(3),127–151.
Values the Red Herring of the Replicability Cri- Veldkamp, C. L. S., Nuijten, M. B., Dominguez-Alvarez,
sis?FrontiersinPsychology,6,1–4.https://doi. L., van Assen, M. A. L. M., & Wicherts, J. M.
org/10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00245 (2014). Statistical reporting errors and collab-
Scheel, A. M., Schijen, M., & Lakens, D. (2020). An ex- oration on statistical analyses in psychological
cessofpositiveresults:Comparingthestandard science.PLoSOne,9(12),e114876.
Psychology literature with Registered Reports Wagenmakers, E.-J. (2007). A practical solution to the
[Accessedon14August].https://psyarxiv.com pervasive problems of p values. Psychonomic
Schneider, J. W. (2015). Null hypothesis significance Bulletin&Review,14(5),779–804.
tests. A mix-up of two different theories: the Wagenmakers, E.-J., Verhagen, J., Ly, A., Matzke, D.,
basis for widespread confusion and numer- Steingroever, H., Rouder, J. N., & Morey, R. D.
ous misinterpretations. Scientometrics, 102(1), (2017). The need for Bayesian hypothesis test-
411–432. ing in psychological science. In S. O. Lilienfeld
===== PAGE 24/24 =====
24
& I. D. Waldman (Eds.), Psychological science ning, analyzing, and reporting psychological
under scrutiny: Recent challenges and proposed studies: A checklist to avoid p-hacking. Fron-
solutions(pp.123–138).JohnWiley&Sons. tiers in Psychology, 7, 1832. https://doi.org/
Wagenmakers, E.-J., Wetzels, R., Borsboom, D., & Van 10.3389/fpsyg.2016.01832
Der Maas, H. L. (2011). Why psychologists Wilcox,R.R.,&Serang,S.(2017).HypothesisTesting,p
must change the way they analyze their data: Values,ConfidenceIntervals,MeasuresofEffect
Thecaseofpsi:Commentonbem(2011).Jour- Size,andBayesianMethodsinLightofModern
nal of Personality and Social Psychology, 100, RobustTechniques.EducationalandPsychologi-
426–432. cal Measurement, 77(4), 673–689. https://doi.
Wicherts, J. M., Veldkamp, C. L., Augusteijn, H. E., org/10.1177/0013164416667983
Bakker, M., Van Aert, R., & Van Assen, M. A. Wilson, E. B. (1923). The statistical significance of ex-
(2016). Degrees of freedom in planning, run- perimentaldata.Science,58(1493),93–100.