
===== PAGE 1/20 =====
Opendata:Yes
Meta-Psychology,2025,vol9,MP.2022.3300 Openmaterials:NotApplicable Editedby:FelixD.Schönbrodt
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2022.3300 Opencode:Yes Reviewedby:Invitedcommentaries
Articletype:Commentary Openandreproducibleanalysis:Yes Analysisreproducedby:LucijaBatinovi´c
PublishedundertheCC-BY4.0license Openreviewsandeditorialprocess:Yes AllsupplementaryfilescanbeaccessedatOSF:
Preregistration:No https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/PQ26C
Replication value as a function of citation impact and sample size
Peder Mortvedt Isager1, Anna E. van ’t Veer2, and Daniël Lakens3
1DepartmentofPsychology,OsloNewUniversityCollege
2MethodologyandStatisticsunit,InstituteofPsychology,LeidenUniversity
3DepartmentofIndustrialEngineering&InnovationSciences,EindhovenUniversityofTechnology
Researchers seeking to replicate original research often need to decide which of sev-
eralrelevantcandidatestoselectforreplication. Severalstrategiesforstudyselection
havebeenproposed,utilizingavarietyofobservedindicatorsascriteriaforselection.
However, few strategies clearly specify the goal of study selection and how that goal
isrelatedtotheindicatorsthatareutilized. Wehavepreviouslyformalizedadecision
modelofreplicationstudyselectioninwhichthegoalofstudyselectionistomaximize
the expected utility gain of the replication effort. We further define the concept of
replicationvalueasaproxyforexpectedutilitygain(Isageretal.,2023). Inthisarticle,
weproposeaquantitativeoperationalizationofreplicationvalue. Wefirstdiscusshow
valueanduncertainty–thetwoconceptsusedtodeterminereplicationvalue–couldbe
estimatedviainformationaboutcitationcountandsamplesize. Second,weproposean
equation for combining these indicators into an overall estimate of replication value,
whichwedenoteasRV . Third,wesuggesthowRV couldbeimplementedaspartof
Cn Cn
a broader study selection procedure. Finally, we provide preliminary data suggesting
thatstudiesthatwereinfactselectedforreplicationtendtohaverelativelyhighRV
Cn
estimates. The goal of this article is to explain how RV is intended to work and, in
Cn
doingso,demonstratethemanyassumptionsthatshouldbeexplicitinanyreplication
studyselectionstrategy.
Keywords: replicationvalue,replication,studyselection,expectedutility,RVcn
Introduction benefit from clearly communicating which replication
studies will be accepted. Given that there will often be
After close to a century of repeated reminders that
a large number of replication targets to choose from,
replication studies play an important role in establish-
and assuming we can distinguish which targets would
ingrobustscientificknowledge,andfollowinganumber
be most useful to replicate, study selection strategies
of high-profile replications published in the last decade
areneededthatwillallowstakeholderstotransparently
(Hagger et al., 2016; e.g., Open Science Collaboration,
discuss and compare the need for replication of candi-
2015; Ranehill et al., 2015; Ritchie et al., 2012; Wa-
datetargets.
genmakers et al., 2016), researchers from many scien-
In response to this need, there has been an increas-
tificdisciplinesareincreasinglycallingforarenewedfo-
ing interest in developing quantitative, indicator-based
cus on replication research (Blaszczynski & Gainsbury,
strategiesforestimatingwhichtargetsaremostinneed
2019; Button et al., 2013; Heirene, 2021; Murphy et
ofreplication(seeIsageretal.,2023forareview). Pro-
al., 2021; Plucker & Makel, 2021; Sale & Mellor, 2018;
posed quantitative strategies tend to focus on different
Zwaan et al., 2018). Given the exponential growth
indicators. Field et al. (2019) base selection on Bayes
of the empirical literature (Bornmann & Mutz, 2015;
Factors,Makeletal.(2012)formulateaselectioncrite-
Parolo et al., 2015) and the low rates of replication up
rionbasedonnumberofcitations,Matiaszetal.(2018)
until this point (Makel et al., 2012; Mueller-Langer et
deviseastrategybasedonthenumberofexistingrepli-
al., 2019), researchers interested in conducting repli-
cations of the same target, and so on (see supplemen-
cations of original research will often have to choose
tary documents in Isager et al., 2023 for additional ex-
which of several replication targets to focus limited re-
amples). Common to all such strategies is that they
sources on. Similarly, funding bodies have to decide
are all fundamentally measurement instruments. For
which of several proposed replication efforts to direct
a quantitative indicator-based strategy to make sense,
limited grant money towards, and journals that limit
theremustexistsometargetattribute(e.g.,"replication
thenumberofarticlestheyacceptforpublicationmight
importance")thatisrelatedtoourreplicationgoals,and
===== PAGE 2/20 =====
2
that can be quantified in a meaningful way. Further- definitionofthetermandoutlineofimportantunderly-
more,wemustassumethattheobservedindicator(s)of ingassumptions). Replicationvalueisafunctionofthe
interest(Bayesfactor,citationcount,numberofreplica- valueofhavingaccurateknowledgeaboutareplication
tions,etc.) issomehowavalidandaccuratemeasureof targetclaim, andouruncertainty aboutthetruthstatus
thetargetattribute(Borsboometal.,2004). ofthetargetclaimbeforeitisreplicated:
Sofartherehasbeenlittleformalanalysisofthemea-
surementassumptionsunderlyingproposedstudyselec- RV = f(value,uncertainty) (1)
tion indicators. For any given indicator it is often not
If we further define value as "value of being correct
made explicit (1) what goal we are working towards,
about the truth status of a claim", and uncertainty as
(2) how that goal is related to the target attribute we
"theprobabilityofbeingincorrectaboutthetruthstatus
aretryingtomeasure, and(3)howwellweareableto
ofaclaim",thenwecanexpressreplicationvaluemore
measure that target attribute through the proposed in-
concretelyastheproductofvalueanduncertainty:
dicator. This makes validation of proposed study selec-
tionstrategieschallenging; itis difficulttosaywhether
RV =value×uncertainty (2)
astrategyworksasintendedifitisnotfirstmadeclear
how the strategy is intended to work. To examine the Ifwearenotwillingtodefineuncertaintyintermsof
qualityofagivenindicator-basedstrategy,stakeholders probability,wewouldneedadifferentfunctiontorelate
must therefore specify the goal of replication, formal- value and uncertainty. In the remainder of this article
ize how this goal can be achieved by selecting studies wewillassumethedefinitionsofvalueanduncertainty
based on a particular target attribute, and specify the stated above, and consequently assume that equation
measurement model that connects the target attribute (2) is an appropriate function for combining value and
totheindicator(s)beingmeasured. uncertainty into an expected utility estimate. Expected
The aim of this article is to address the need for utility gain is thus our ultimate target attribute, and
measurement models by demonstrating how important replication value is our proximate target attribute (un-
measurementassumptionscouldbeworkedoutandre- dertheassumptionthatexpectedutilitygaincanbesat-
ported for a particular quantitative indicator. We begin isfyingly approximated by replication value as defined
by clearly stating the goal we want our study selection inequation2).
strategytoachieve,andthetargetattributerelevantfor
achieving this goal. We then propose a quantitative in- Definingrelevantmeasurementproperties.
dicator to measure the target attribute. As part of this
To create an indicator that is useful for replication
process, we discuss the various assumptions that must
study selection we must ensure that the indicator is
be met for the indicator to work as intended, and we
a valid, reliable and unbiased measure of replication
showhowtheseassumptionsleadtoobservationalpre-
value. Given equation (2), this implies finding valid,
dictionsthatletustestthevalidityoftheproposedindi-
reliable and unbiased operationalizations of value and
cator. Wearenotadvocatingthattheindicatorwepro-
uncertainty. Following Isager (2020), we consider an
poseshouldbeusedforstudyselectionwithoutfurther
indicator to be valid for measuring replication value if
validationofitsusefulness,norareweclaimingthatitis
(a) the attribute replication value exists and (b) repli-
superiortoalreadyproposedstudyselectionstrategies.
cation value is d-connected to the indicator (i.e., the
two variables are joined by an unblocked path in the
Thetargetattributeofreplicationstudyselection.
causal model that describes their true relationship; see
The first step in working out the measurement as- finepoint6.1inHernánandRobins,2020).
sumptions of a replication study selection strategy is to Following the APA Dictionary of Psychology, we con-
clearlydefinetheassumedgoalofthereplicationeffort. sider an indicator to be a reliable measure of replica-
What are we trying to achieve that should lead us to tion value if quantitative estimates of replication value
prefer one replication target over another? Here, we are free of random error (Reliability – APA Dictio-
build on the decision model of replication study selec- nary of Psychology, n.d.-a). For most measurement
tion proposed by Isager et al. (2023). This model pro- instruments, complete freedom from random error is
poses that the ultimate goal of replication study selec- unattainable, and reliability is thus a matter of degree.
tionistoselectthereplicationtargetthat,outofalltar- In practice, we will have to decide how reliable an in-
gets considered, will yield the largest gain in expected dicator should be before we can use it for replication
utility if replicated. Under certain additional assump- studyselection.
tions,expectedutilitygaincanbeapproximatedbyrepli- We consider an indicator to be an unbiased measure
cation value (RV; see Isager et al., 2023 for a formal ofreplicationvalueifindicatorrank-orderestimatesdo
===== PAGE 3/20 =====
3
notsystematicallydivergefromthetruerank-orderdif-
ference in replication value between the claims being
RV =value×uncertainty
considered (Isager et al., 2023; Test Bias – APA Dictio-
(3)
nary of Psychology, n.d.-b). It matters less whether ab- ≈ f(citationcount)× f(samplesize)
solute replication value is over/under-estimated by the
Inwhatfollows,weprovidearationaleforthechoice
same amount for all candidates in a set of replication
of these operationalizations, define the functions f(),
targets, since only relative rank-order replication value
and discuss known and potential issues related to va-
withinthesetmattersforanswering"whichofthecan-
lidity,reliabilityandbias.
didates in this set would I increase expected utility the
mostbyreplicating?". Likereliability,biasisamatterof
Citationcountasanindicatorofvalue
degree.
The validity, reliability and bias of an indicator com- Wedefinethevalueofaclaimasthestakesinvolved
bine to form the measurement quality of the indicator. in decision outcomes based on the claim. Suppose a
Qualityisoftenreferredtoasvalidityinpractice,butva- mining company is considering whether to establish a
lidityreferstosomethingmorespecifichere(Borsboom new mine. Research suggests "there is gold in them
et al., 2004; Isager, 2020). For an indicator of replica- there hills". If the claim is correct and the company
tionvaluetohavehighmeasurementqualityitmustbe chooses to believe it, the new mine will turn a huge
validandreliableandunbiased1. profit. If the claim is false and the company chooses
to believe it, the mine will be a complete waste of re-
Operationalizinganindicatorofreplicationvalue. sources. Thus, the value of the claim “there is gold in
them there hills” depends on the interaction between
Many replication value indicators have already been
thedecisionswemakebasedontheclaimandthetruth
proposed. Ofthese,mostfocusexclusivelyoneitherthe
status of the claim, which will determine the decision
value- or the uncertainty-side of equation (2). Some
outcome. In other words, value is the utility of being
suggested indicators take both value and uncertainty
correct about the truth status of the claim (relative to
into account (Isager et al., 2023, supplementary ma-
theutilityofbeingwrong). Thevalueofaclaimisusu-
terials), but suffer from at least one of two problems.
ally related to the impact of the claim in science and
In some cases, indicators are operationalized in obvi-
society. Scientific claims can be used to build theories
ously problematic ways. For example, if an indicator
and research lines, transform clinical treatment, guide
uses p-values in their operationalization of uncertainty
education, inform public policy, etc. The potential ben-
(e.g., https://osf.io/x73rk/) it is not possible to differ-
efitsofsuchapplicationsofscientificclaimswilldepend
entiate between ambiguous statistical evidence (high
onthetruthstatusoftheclaim. Considertheclaim"nal-
uncertainty) and strong evidence for the null (low un-
trexone is an effective treatment for drug craving". If
certainty, see Field et al., 2019). In other cases, indi-
true, this could have a huge impact on addiction treat-
cators depend on information that is not easily avail-
ment policy. Because the stakes are high (we might
able in practice, such as whether the claim studied is
drastically improve the life of drug dependent patients
considered"surprising"(https://osf.io/v8nkd/). Indica-
if the claim is true, but we risk maltreating the same
torsthataredifficulttocalculatewillbedifficulttouse
individuals if the claim is false) the value of having ac-
and to validate, since validation depends on our ability
curate knowledge about the claim is high. Finding a
to collect data about the indicator. For these reasons
validmeasureofvaluethusentailsoperationalizingone
wehereproposeanovelquantitativeindicatorofrepli-
ormoreindicatorsofimpact.
cation value rather than analyze an existing indicator.
Here we propose to focus on scientific impact, and
However,weemphasizethatworkingoutthegoalsand
operationalize impact in terms of citation count, which
assumptions of already proposed indicators would also
isgenerallyconsideredavalidindicatorofscientificim-
beahighlyworthwhileexercise.
pact (Aksnes et al., 2019). Scientific impact can be
We propose to operationalize the value of a claim as
roughly defined as the impact of a claim on future re-
a function of the citation count of the original paper in
search decisions (such as whether to run a follow-up
which the claim is reported. We propose to operational-
study, build on a previous finding, etc.). If we can as-
ize the uncertainty of the claim before replication as a
sumethatresearcherstendtocitearticlesassupportfor
functionofthesamplesizeofthereplicationtargetstudy
(orstudies). Theoperationalizedindicatorofreplication
1Formally, we might say that a high-quality indicator im-
valuethusbecomes:
plies high mutual information (DeDeo, 2018) between ex-
pectedutilitygain,replicationvalue,andtheindicatorweuse
toestimatereplicationvalue.
===== PAGE 4/20 =====
4
importantresearchdecisions,thencitationcountwillbe Figure1
sensitivetovariationinvaluethatiscausedbyvariation
inscientificimpact(Figure1). Basedoncomprehensive Proposed causal relationship between value and citation
reviews of the literature on citation behavior (Aksnes count (citation count is outlined by a square to signal it
et al., 2019; Bornmann & Daniel, 2008) and empirical isobservable). Thefigurecanbeinterpretedasadirected
studies of the relationship between citation count and acyclic graph model, where value and citation count are
perceived scientific impact by researchers (Ioannidis et d-connected through scientific impact, and all other vari-
al., 2014; Radicchi et al., 2017), we consider this as- ablesactasindependentnoisefactorsonthisrelationship.
sumption to be plausible in many fields of science. By Yellow-coloredvariablesrepresentthosewewantinforma-
definition, it then follows that the number of citations tionabout. Dashedcirclesrepresentvariablesd-separated
ofanarticleisavalidmeasureoftheperceivedvalueof from citation count, which we want to but do not have
the claims in that article (Isager, 2020). Citation count knowledge about. Since they are unmeasured causes of
also has several other desirable measurement proper- value they also act as noise factors by distorting the rela-
ties. Its interpretation is relatively straight-forward. A tionship between value and citation count. Grey-colored
meticulousrecordofcitationcountiskeptbymanybib- variables represent noise factors that influence citation
liometric sources, which means that reliability of the countbutared-separatedfromvalue. Additionalsources
count across sources can be studied (Martín-Martín et ofimpactrefertoanyadditionalnon-confoundingcauses
al., 2018). Bibliometric recordkeeping also means that of valuethatwecouldthinkof. Absenceofacausalarrow
citation counts can be obtained with little effort in any betweenanytwovariablesinthemodelimpliesthestrong
scientific discipline, which is crucial for being able to assumption that there is no causal relationship between
utilizecitationcountforstudyselectioninpractice. thesevariables.
However, citation count is clearly an imperfect indi-
cator of value. First, citation count is not considered a
Scientific Citation
very good measure of other sources of impact that we Value Age
impact Count
oftenhavegoodreasontocareabout,suchassocietalor
clinicalimpact. Impactonthesedimensionsislesslikely
togeneratecitationsfromarticlespublishedinscientific
outlets listed in major bibliometric databases (Aksnes Clinical Citation
et al., 2019; van Eck et al., 2013). Consequently, a tra- impact source
ditionalcitationcountmetricwilllikelynotbesensitive
tovariationinvaluethatiscausedbyvariationinthese
dimensions of impact (see dashed circles in figure 1).
Political Research
When these other sources of impact are the most im-
impact field
portanttoouroveralldefinitionofvalue,citationcount
isgoingtobeapoormeasureofvalue(which,byexten-
sion,willleadtopoorestimatesofreplicationvalue).
Second, even in cases where scientific impact is of Citation
Educational
conventions
primary interest, articles are cited for a myriad differ- impact
and norms
entreasonsthatneednothaveanythingtodowiththe
scientific impact of claims put forward in them. Non-
relevant influences on citation count include (but are
Additional
notlimitedto)thetimeofpublication,thebibliometric
sources of
sourcethatisdoingthecounting,arbitrarycitationcon- impact
ventions within scientific fields, the language in which
an article is written, reputation of article authors, pref-
erenceforcitingpersonalacquaintances,bandwagonef-
fects, self-citations to increase academic standing, etc.
(Aksnes et al., 2019; Bornmann & Daniel, 2008). To
could be controlled to increase reliability of the mea-
the extent that such factors are independent of article
surement. In some cases this will be challenging. For
impact, they act as random noise factors that reduce
example, while it might be possible to classify whether
the reliability of citation count for measuring scientific
citations occured due to arbitrary citation conventions,
impactandvalue(seegreycirclesinfigure1).
citations would need to be manually classified for each
It is worthwhile to consider whether noise factors
replication target (though see Nicholson et al., 2021
===== PAGE 5/20 =====
5
for an example of innovations in citation classifica- citationtrajectory(Paroloetal., 2015). Inthiscontext,
tion). However, three common and substantial sources predicting the future trajectory based on past average
of noise could likely be corrected for or held constant yearly citation count leads to a considerable overesti-
to improve the reliability of citation counts for measur- mate of future citations. In fact, average yearly cita-
ing impact; the age of the article (Bornmann & Daniel, tion count will systematically over- or underestimate
2008; D. Wang et al., 2013), the source of the citation the future citation trajectory whenever the trajectory
count (Martín-Martín et al., 2018), and the research is not converging towards the past average yearly ci-
field the target claims are part of (Waltman & van Eck, tation count. We therefore recommend that, whenever
2013). possible, prediction of future citation impact should be
Replication can only increase the expected utility of basedonmoresophisticatedpredictiontechniquesthat
researchdecisionsthathavenotyetbeenmade. There- utilize the entire distribution of past citation rate and
fore, we specifically want to know the future scientific other bibliometric features of the target article (e.g.,
impactofareplicationtarget. Ifcitationimpactistaken Chakraborty et al., 2014; Yuan et al., 2018)2. How-
as an indicator of simultaneous scientific impact, it fol- ever, these methods require advanced expertise to un-
lowsthatwhatweareinterestedinisthefuturecitation derstand and implement, and the information required
impact of a replication target article. Current total ci- to implement them may not always be available. For
tation count of an article is a measure of past citation now,wefocusonthesimplermethodofaveragingover
impact,butislikelypredictiveoffuturecitationimpact article age, which provides a rough but useful method
(M. Wang et al., 2019). However, total citation count for adjusting citation impact estimates so replication
is not a useful predictor of future citations as soon as targetsofdifferentagescanbecompared.
we start comparing target articles across different pub- In addition to controlling for age, we also need to
licationyears,asolderarticleshavehadmoretimetobe consider the source that the citation count estimate is
cited. Asanexample,imaginetwoarticles,AandB,that derived from. Citation counts retrieved from differ-
are both cited exactly 10 times every year. However, at ent sources (such as Google Scholar, Crossref, Scopus
thetimeofcomparisonstudyAis3yearsoldandhasa or Web of Science) differ both in terms of their ref-
total citation count of 30, while study B is 9 years old erence coverage and in their exact citation counts for
and thus has a total citation count of 90. If we would the same reference (Martín-Martín et al., 2018). How-
useAandB’stotalcitationcountasalinearpredictorof ever, rank-order correlations between citation counts
their relative future citation count we will erroneously fromdifferentsourcesappeartobeveryhigh(Burgers,
conclude that B will receive three times as many cita- 2019; Martín-Martínetal., 2018). Thus, aslongasthe
tionsasA.Itisthereforesensibletoadjustthetwototals same source is consistently used for all replication can-
fortheirrespectiveagesandestimatetheyearlycitation didatesunderconsideration,therelativerank-orderdif-
rate(i.e.theslope, orthederivative)ofarticleAandB ferenceincitationcountbetweentwocandidatesshould
whendeterminingtheirreplicationvalue. behighlysimilarregardlessofwhichsourceweuse.
Hereweproposetoadjustforpublicationagebysim- Finally, we need to consider the fact that article ci-
plydividingcitationcountbythenumberofyearssince tation counts tend to systematically vary between re-
the article was published. That is, we operationalize search fields for reasons that have nothing to do with
the value of a claim as the average citations per year the value of claims (Bornmann and Daniel, 2008, e.g.,
of the paper that claim was reported in. In practice Waltman and van Eck, 2013). Two fields may differ in
this assumes that past average yearly citation rate is a averagearticlecitationcountduetodifferencesincita-
good predictor of the future trajectory of citations per tionconventions, theamountofjournalsorissuespub-
year. This adjustment method works well when the fu- lished per year, word limits and the maximum number
ture citation trajectory is relatively constant and simi- of references that is allowed for a specific article type,
lar to the past citation trajectory. Figure 2A displays etc. A common approach to control for such variation
the 50-year citation trajectory for an imagined article. istoreplace rawcitationcountwith field-weightedcita-
The yellow line shows the predicted citation trajectory tion impact (FWCI; see Waltman and van Eck, 2019),
based on summing the citations from the first 25 years in which citations are normalized against the average
(yellow bars) and dividing by the number of years. As citationcountofarticlesfromthesamefieldofscience.
expected,thepredictionoftheactualcitationtrajectory
2Even detailed access to the past citation record of an ar-
(greyline)isveryaccurate.
ticle will not always allow for accurate prediction of future
Adjustment by averaging over age works less well
citation count however, due to phenomena such as "sleeping
whenthecitationtrajectoryofanarticleisnotconstant
beauties" (Ke et al., 2015) and other hard-to-predict fluctua-
over time. Figure 2B displays a more realistic 50-year
tionsincitationrate.
===== PAGE 6/20 =====
6
Figure2
Simulated50yearcitationratefortwoimaginedarticles. Theyellowbarsdisplaythecitationrateforthefirst25years
inthearticle’shistory. Thegreybarsrepresentthefuturerate(year26-50)thatwewanttopredict. Theyellowlabeled
linedisplaysthepredictedtrajectoryoffuturecitationsbasedontakingthesumofcitationsfromthefirst25yearsand
dividing by the number of years. (A) The true citation trajectory is defined as a constant citation count per year plus
random error. The predicted trajectory is a very good approximation of the true citation rate. (B) The true citation
trajectory is defined as a gamma function of the year since publication plus random error. The predicted trajectory
substantiallyoverestimatesthetruecitationrate.
PPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrreeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiicccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccctttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttteeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeedddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddd ccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccoooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooouuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuunnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnntttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttt
0 10 20 30 40 50
snoitatic
ylraeY
A
PPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrreeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiicccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccctttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttteeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeedddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddd ccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccoooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooouuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuunnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnntttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttt
0 10 20 30 40 50
Year since publication
snoitatic
ylraeY
B
One prominent difficulty with FWCI is determining Another challenge when using FWCI to measure value
thereferenceclasstonormalizecitationcountsagainst. is that some systematic differences in citation counts
Thatis, whentakingtheaveragecitationcountofare- between fields may genuinely be due to differences in
search field, which articles in the literature belong to the value society places on knowledge produced in dif-
that field? While it is common to use Web of Science ferent fields. For example, according to Web of Sci-
field categories for this delineation, these are consid- ence, the field of oncology (cancer research) is nearly
ered too heterogeneous to accurately control for varia- four times the size of dermatology (skin condition re-
tions in citation practices (Waltman & van Eck, 2013). search) in terms of sheer volume of articles published
van Eck et al. (2013) have demonstrated that FWCI (1,802,676 vs 481,033 records, as of 2021-04-09) and
fails to account for within-field variations in citations at the time of writing, CA: A Cancer Journal for Clini-
practices in medical science, and this can lead to a se- cians is the highest impact factor journal in the world
vereunderestimationoftheimpactofclinicalresearch. with an impact factor of 509 as of 2022. If the re-
===== PAGE 7/20 =====
7
searchfieldofoncologycontainsmoreresearchersthan studyselectiondecisionsthatincreaseutilitymorethan
dermatology-leadingtomorepapersgettingpublished randomselection.
andmorecitationsgenerated,onaverage,foreachpub-
lishedpaper-thiscouldreflectthefactthatresearchin Samplesizeasanindicatorofuncertainty
oncologyis,onaverage,consideredmorevaluablethan
Uncertainty, like value, is a multi-determined at-
researchindermatology(tosociety,toclinicians,tothe
tribute. We may be uncertain about a claim for a va-
research community etc.). In this case, FWCI becomes
riety of reasons. The study design(s) used to test the
problematicbecauseitpartlysuppressestheassociation
claim may lack internal or external validity, we may
betweencitationimpactandvalue. Researchersshould
haveahighpriorthatcounteractsexistingresearch,sta-
think carefully about whether FWCI or raw citation
tistical power might be too low to detect effect sizes of
countismoreappropriateforestimatingvaluegiventhe
interest, original findings may not have been indepen-
goals of their replication effort, and should also con-
dentlyreplicated(orindependentreplicationhasfailed
sider whether some approaches to field-normalization
to reproduce the original study results), we may sus-
aremoreappropriatethanothers(Waltman&vanEck,
pect that the evidence base is influenced by publica-
2019).
tion bias, selective reporting, p-hacking, or fraud, and
With the above-mentioned issues in mind, if we
so on. Many factors related to uncertainty could be
are still willing to assume that scientific impact has a
quantified. Forexample,wecanexpressouruncertainty
reasonably reliable causal effect on (age/source/field-
aboutparameterestimatesusingconfidenceintervalsor
corrected) citation count, and if we are willing to as-
othervariabilityindices,andwecanexpressuncertainty
sume that scientific impact has a reasonably reliable
about the relative likelihood of data given different hy-
causal effect on value, then citation count should be a
potheses using likelihood ratios or Bayes factors. We
useful measure of value. Based on these assumptions,
could incorporate uncertainty due to publication bias
weproposethefollowingoperationalizationofvaluefor
into Bayesian prior beliefs, which we could then com-
thepurposesofstudyselection:
bine with data into informed posterior beliefs about
w(C ) claims. Alternatively, we could quantify uncertainty in
value= Y+S
1
(4) termsofentropyusingprinciplesfrominformationthe-
ory (DeDeo, 2018). If our uncertainty depends on re-
where C stands for citation count of the article in
sults from multiple studies, we could combine their es-
which the claim in question is published, w() stands
timates through meta-analysis. The list goes on. How-
for the weighting function that should be applied to
ever, the information required to compute informative
the citation count (a field normalization, a utility func-
Bayesian posteriors, Shannon entropy, etc., is often dif-
tion, etc.3), S denotes the source the citation count is
ficult to curate from published research reports, which
retrieved from, and Y denotes the age of the article in
makesthetaskofestimatinguncertaintybasedonthese
years. We add 1 to Y in order to prevent the equation
indicators difficult in practice. To offer an indicator of
from evaluating to infinity when the article was pub-
uncertainty that is more easily determinable we here
lished less than a year ago and Y = 0.4 Thus, value is
propose to estimate uncertainty about a claim via the
not identical but closely related to the average yearly
samplesizeoftheexistingstudy(orstudies)thatinves-
(weighted)citationcountofthearticle.
tigatetheclaim.
We could substitute equation (4) with a more intri-
cateestimatorandlikelygetamoreaccurateimpactes- 3Ifrawcitationscoresareusedthennoweightingfunction
timate (Martin, 2011). However, there is an effort/ac- isappliedtoC ,w(C ) =C ,andw()cansimplyberemoved
S S S
curacy tradeoff involved in replication study selection. fromtheequation.
Thebenefitsgainedbymoreaccurateestimatesofvalue 4Since all articles less than a year old will be adjusted by
needtobeworththeadditionaleffortsexpendedincol- thesameamount,anarticlepublishedinJanuarywillbecon-
lecting those estimates (e.g., in reviewing documenta- sideredofthesameageasanarticlepublishedinDecember,
tion, interviewing key stakeholders, running case stud- even though the former has had many more months to ac-
quirecitations. Thiswilllikelymatterlesswhenbotharticles
ies, etc; Klautzer et al., 2011), since all effort could
are several years old, but for young articles the monthly age
be avoided by simply choosing a replication candidate
difference may lead to substantial differences in their value
quickly based on random chance or personal interest,
estimates. Ifpossible,insteadofadding1tothecitationesti-
which would still lead to some expected utility gain.
mateonecouldconsidercollectingtheexactpublicationdate
Consequently,itmaybepreferabletousealessaccurate
ofeacharticle, treateachdayas1/365thofayear, andsim-
but more easily derivable operationalization of value, plydividecitationslessthanayearoldby1/365thtimesthe
solongasthatmeasureisstillaccurateenoughtoyield numberofdayssincepublication.
===== PAGE 8/20 =====
8
Establishing the validity of sample size for measur- poorly conducted, or if the claim suggests that experi-
ing uncertainty requires a small chain of measurement mental effects can be generalized to a widely different
assumptions (figure 3). First, given a set of findings context. This uncertainty may be completely indepen-
comprising the original and the replication literature, dent of the sample size of the study. In addition, there
we propose to approximate uncertainty as the preci- are instances where participant sample size is not a
sion with which a parameter relevant to the claim has strong determinant of the standard error. For example,
been estimated (e.g., for the claim "stretching reduces participant sample size is a poor estimator of the stan-
theriskofathleticinjury"wemightbeinterestedinthe dard error in mixed model designs where the random
precision of risk ratio estimates from relevant random- effect of participants is low compared with other ran-
izedcontrolledtrials). Precisionofparameterestimates dom factors, such as stimulus (DeBruine & Barr, 2021;
is obviously only one factor that makes up our overall Rouder & Haaf, 2018; Westfall et al., 2014). The same
uncertainty about a claim (Isager et al., 2023). Even happens in repeated measures designs where the num-
so, it seems reasonable to assume that (all else being berofrepeatedsamplesperparticipantcanmattermore
equal)increasingprecisionofaparameterestimatealso than the number of participants per se, depending on
decreases the uncertainty about claims based on that the within-subject correlation (see supplementary ma-
parameter. Statistically we can define precision of the terial 2 for a method of correcting the sample size esti-
estimate as the standard error of the parameter esti- mate in such cases). In general, because sample size is
mate5. a cause of uncertainty, all determinants of uncertainty
Second,whenthestandarddeviationisnotavailable thatareindependentofsamplesizewilltendtoreduce
we propose to make the assumption that it is constant thereliabilityofsamplesizeasameasureofuncertainty.
across all replication candidates, and to subsequently This problem is mitigated in more complex uncertainty
estimate the precision of the estimate using only the estimatorssuchasBayesianposteriors,whichcanincor-
sample size of the estimate. This assumption will ob- porate several independent causes of uncertainty into
viously always be false to some extent, which will lead theestimate.
toreducedestimatereliability. However,itdoescapture However, there are also advantages to using sam-
the fact that, all else being equal, the higher the sam- ple size as a measure of uncertainty. Sample size con-
ple size the more precise the estimate. Based on the tributes substantially to determining many of the pre-
assumptions above, we propose the following equation viously mentioned factors that influence uncertainty,
foruncertainty: such as Bayesian posteriors, confidence/credible inter-
vals, etc., without invoking particular statistical infer-
σ 1 1
uncertainty= √ =σ√ ∝ √ (5) ence philosophy. Sample size is also very often readily
n n n available in published articles, regardless of the study
where σ is the standard deviation of the estimate, design and statistical analysis methods used (which is
andnisthecorrespondingsamplesize(i.e.thenumber not the case for other potential uncertainty estimators
of participants). When σ is constant, the equation is such as Bayesian posteriors). In summary, we believe
√
proportionalto1÷ n. Inotherwords,weassumethat sample size will be valid for estimating overall uncer-
thestandarddeviationisthesameforallreplicationtar- taintyinmostcircumstances,butthereliabilityofthese
gets compared, and we assume that no other variance estimatesmaybelowduetothemanyindependentfac-
componentsbutparticipantvariancearerelevanttoour torsinfluencingoveralluncertainty. Reliabilitycouldal-
standard error estimate (Westfall et al., 2014). When ways be improved by substituting sample size with the
aclaimdependsonparameterestimatesthathaveonly fullstandarderrorinequation(4),butthiswillrequire
been estimated in a single study, we can set n to the information that is not always available. To facilitate
sample size of that study. When parameters have been more efficient estimates of uncertainty it is important
estimatedinmultiplestudies,weshouldsetntotheto- that researchers begin to share statistical information
talsamplesizeoverallstudies(seesupplementaryma- consistently and in machine-readable formats (Lakens
terial 1 for a rationale and relevant equations). Equa- &DeBruine,2021).
tion (4) behaves in line with the definition of uncer-
5Thisdefinitionofprecisionoftheestimatewillonlymake
taintygivenby(Isageretal.,2023)whenevern>0.6
senseforquantitativeparameters
A limitation of this operationalization of uncertainty 6Whenn=1itisnotpossibletoestimatebetween-subject
isthatitignoresseveralimportantfactorsthatalsocon-
variance,soweshouldbemaximallyuncertain. Whenweare
tribute to uncertainty (dashed circles in figure 3). For maximallyuncertain,uncertainty = 1,whichiswhatequation
example, we may be highly uncertain about a claim if 4yieldsforn=1.
the experiment used to support it is poorly designed,
===== PAGE 9/20 =====
9
Replicationvalueasafunctionofcitationcountand
samplesize
If we operationalize value and uncertainty as speci-
Figure3
fiedinequations(4)and(5)andassumethestructural
equation for replication value defined in Isager et al.
Proposed causal relationship between uncertainty and
(2023) (equation 2 in this article), we can construct a
samplesize(samplesizeisoutlinedbyasquaretosignalit
quantitative operationalization of replication value by
isobservable). Thefigurecanbeinterpretedasadirected
multiplyingequation(4)(ourvalueestimator)with(5)
acyclicgraphmodel,wheresamplesizehasacausaleffect
(our uncertainty estimator), which yields the following
onuncertaintybyreducingthestandarderrorofrelevant
operationaldefinitionofreplicationvalue:
parameter estimates. Dashed circles represent variables
d-separated from sample size, which we want to but do w(C ) 1
not have knowledge about. Since they are unmeasured RV Cn =value×uncertainty= Y+S
1
× √
n
(6)
causes of uncertainty, dashed circles also act as noise fac-
tors distorting the relationship between uncertainty and where RV Cn denotes a particular operationalization
samplesize. Additionalsourcesofuncertaintyrefertoany of replication value in terms of citation count C, and
additionalnon-confoundingcausesofuncertaintythatwe participant sample size n, w() stands for the weighting
couldthinkof. Absenceofacausalarrowbetweenanytwo function that should be applied to the citation count, S
variablesinthemodelimpliesthestrongassumptionthat denotes the source the citation count is retrieved from,
thereisnocausalrelationshipbetweenthesevariables. andY standsfortheageofthearticleinyears.
Figure4representsthemeasurementmodelforRV .
Cn
It summarizes the causal assumptions that justify the
use of RV as a measure of expected utility gain. As-
Internal Cn
sumingthatthecasualrelationshipsinthemodelholds,
validity
RV is d-connected with, and hence a valid measure
Cn
of, expected utility gain. However, due to known un-
measured relationships (the U nodes in figure 4, which
denotealltheunmeasuredvariablesinfigures1and3)
RV can not be expected to be perfectly reliable. The
Standard External Cn
exactreliabilityofRV isanimportantempiricalques-
deviation validity Cn
tion for future studies. Clearly, we must require a cer-
tainlevelofreliabilityinordertoconsiderRV auseful
Cn
measureofexpectedutilitygain.
Figure 5 displays the distribution of RV over varia-
Cn
tions in the input parameters. RV estimates increase
Sample Standard Cn
Uncertainty astheaverageyearlycitationrateincreases. Conversely,
size error
RV estimates decrease as the sample size increases.
Cn
The axes in figure 5 cover a limited range of all possi-
bleinputparametervalues,butthedistributionofRV
Cn
remainssimilarforanyrangeofinputvalues.
In summary, RV is an appropriate operationaliza-
Cn
Prior beliefs tion of replication value when the following assump-
tionsaremet:
1. The goal of replication is to maximize expected
utility gain for the claim(s) targeted for replica-
Additional tion.
sources of
2. Replication value, as defined in Isager et al.
uncertainty
(2023) is a valid measure of the expected utility
gainthatareplicationstudywouldyield.
3. Equation(4)isvalidandsufficientlypositivelyas-
sociatedwiththetruevalueoftheto-be-replicated
claim.
===== PAGE 10/20 =====
10
Figure4
Measurement model justifying the validity of RV as a measure of expected utility gain. RV is d-connected with
Cn Cn
expected utility gain, as required for valid measurement by the d-connection definition of validity (Isager, 2020). The
causal relations value → expected utility gain and uncertainty before replication → expected utility gain represent
a simplified version of the structural causal model defined in Isager et al. (2023). All relations U → represent sources
of noise due to unmeasured variables, such as the noise factors contained in figure 1 and figure 3. Absence of a causal
arrowbetweenanytwovariablesinthemodelimpliesthestrongassumptionthatthereisnocausalrelationshipbetween
thesevariables.
Average
U yearly + Value U
citation count
+ +
Expected
RV U
Cn
utility gain
- +
Uncertainty
Sample size - before U
replication
4. Equation(5)isvalidandsufficientlypositivelyas- evaluationallowsforqualitycontrolandnuanceduring
sociatedwiththetrueuncertaintyabouttheto-be- study selection. Given that multiple noise factors ob-
replicatedclaim. scure the relationship between RV and expected util-
Cn
ity,acertainamountofqualitycontrolwilllikelyalways
5. Equation(2)remainsanappropriatespecification
bebeneficial. However,detailedevaluationisalsotime-
of equation (1) when value is operationalized as
consuming and difficult to conduct in a systematic and
equation(4)anduncertaintyisoperationalizedas
unbiasedway. Tomaximizetheaccuracyofstudyselec-
equation(5).
tionwhilesimultaneouslyminimizingthetimespenton
Insituationswhereanyoftheseassumptionsarevio- assessment, we propose a study selection procedure in
lated,RV willceasetobeausefulindicatorofreplica- whichRV isusedtonarrowdownthefullsetofrepli-
Cn Cn
tionvalue. cationcandidatestoasmallersubsetoftargetsthatare
likelytobethemostworthwhiletoreplicate. Amorede-
Generalstudyselectionstrategy tailedevaluationprocesscanthenbeappliedefficiently
to the highest RV candidates before a replication tar-
HavingprovidedthemeasurementrationaleforRV , Cn
Cn
get is finally selected. Replication study selection thus
we must now specify how RV can be implemented in
Cn
followsageneralfour-stepprocedure,outlinedinfigure
a study selection strategy. In line with recommenda-
6.
tionsbyFieldetal.(2019),weproposeaprocedurefor
First,asetofcandidatereplicationtargetsiscurated.
study selection that combines RV with a more com-
Cn
This set should contain all claims that are relevant to
prehensiveevaluationofexpectedutilitygain. In-depth
===== PAGE 11/20 =====
11
Figure5
DistributionofRV forarangeofinputparameters.
Cn
6
5
4
3
2
1
20 30 40 50 60
Sample size
etar
noitatic
ylraey
egarevA
Distribution of replication value over input
RV
Cn
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
ourinterestsandexpertise. Targetsthatcannotberepli- should increase the probability that the studies evalu-
catedduetofeasibility-constraintscanbeexcludedfrom ated further are those most likely to lead to high ex-
the initial candidate set for efficiency. For example, pected utility gain if replicated. We can then invest a
suppose we want to form an initial candidate set of moresubstantialamountoftimecollectingbothqualita-
all experimental studies on the psychoactive effects of tiveandquantitativeinformationaboutwhichstudiesin
cannabis in healthy human participants. Curation of this subset would be most worth replicating. How this
this set could begin by extracting all empirical articles evaluationshouldproceedisatopicofdiscussion(Field
on the psychoactive effects of cannabis from a biblio- et al., 2019; KNAW, 2018; Pittelkow et al., 2020), and
metric database. Subsequently, non-experimental stud- should probably be adapted depending on the goals of
ies, studies in non-human populations, studies in pa- thestakeholder. However,themodelputforthinIsager
tient populations, etc., could be pruned away until the etal.(2023)suggeststhatevaluationshouldalwaysin-
remaining set of candidates matches our research in- clude some consideration of (1) the perceived value of
terests and feasibility constraints. Second, RV is cal- the research claim, (2) uncertainty about the truth sta-
Cn
culated for all replication targets in the candidate set, tus of the claim prior to replication, (3) the ability of
so that replication targets can be rank-ordered relative the planned replication study design to reduce uncer-
to each other based on their RV estimates. Third, a tainty about the claim, and (4) the estimated costs of
Cn
subsetconsistingofthehighestRV targetsinourcan- conducting the replication effort. Empirical research to
Cn
didate set is selected for closer inspection. Assuming explore this issue in further detail is currently under-
RV is a valid estimator of expected utility gain, this way(Pittelkowetal.,2020). Finally,thereplicationtar-
Cn
===== PAGE 12/20 =====
12
Figure6 tions it is possible to make statements about what we
expect to observe if RV works as intended. For ex-
Cn
A general procedure for replication study selec- ample, if the true expected utility gain associated with
tion. Quantitative estimation of replication value a claim makes it more likely that researchers will se-
through RV Cn (or through any other operational- lect that claim for replication, then RV Cn estimates and
ization of replication value) can be implemented for researchers’ selection preferences should be correlated
study selection as part of this four-step procedure. under the causal model: RV ← expected utility gain
Cn
→ selected by researchers for replication. Consequently,
STEP 1: studies that have been replicated should have a higher
RV on average than non-replicated empirical studies
Curate an initial set of replication candidates Cn
from the same discipline. We here provide preliminary
based on interest and expertise.
validationofthispredicteddifferenceinasetofempir-
icalarticlesfromthefieldofpsychology.
Methods
STEP 2:
Samples
Calculate RV for all candidates
Cn The sample of replicated studies consisted of
in the set. original study articles listed in the Curate Sci-
ence replication dataset (https://curatescience.org/
app/replications). As of 2020-10-20, the Curate Sci-
ence replication dataset contained information about
1127replicationsof202originalstudies,primarilyfrom
STEP 3:
the field of psychology. For these original studies we
Conduct in-depth inspection of a subset of
estimated RV using sample size information avail-
Cn
candidates with the highest estimated RV .
Cn able in the Curate Science dataset, and using publica-
tion year and citation count information from Cross-
ref (https://www.crossref.org/). Citation counts were
extracted from crossref 2020-10-20 using the rcrossref
package in R (Chamberlain et al., 2020). Due to miss-
STEP 4:
ingDOIinformation,RV couldnotbecalculatedfor35
Cn
Select the candidate most suitable for
studies. Thefinalsampleofreplicatedstudiescontained
replication based on in-depth inspection, or 167studiesfrom145articles.
repeat step 3 and 4. Thecomparisonsampleconsistedof15104empirical
studies referenced in the tables of meta-analyses
published in Psychological Bulletin between the years
1914 and 2017. Since all articles contained findings
that have been referenced in meta-analysis tables in
a general-topic psychology journal, we assumed this
getthatisconsideredthemostpromisingaftercompre- sampling strategy would form a reasonably repre-
hensive evaluation is prioritized for replication. Alter- sentative sample of published empirical psychology
natively, if detailed evaluation suggests no study in the studies. We also assumed, given the generally low
subset would be worthwhile to replicate, step 3 can be rate of replication in psychology (Makel et al., 2012),
repeateduntilasuitabletargetisfound. that the comparison sample would consist largely of
non-replicated original studies. We estimated RV for
Cn
PreliminaryvalidationofRV : assessingthe
Cn eacharticleusingthesamplesizeavailableinthemeta-
replicationvalueofreplicatedstudies.
analysis tables, and using publication year and citation
WhetherRV isavalidandhigh-qualityestimatorof count information from Crossref (citation counts were
Cn
expected utility gain is an empirical question. Valida- extracted from crossref 2020-10-20). To retrieve
tion of replication value indicators will be challenging, citation count information, the DOI of each study had
since there does not exist an observable ground-truth to be retrieved, which was accomplished by applying a
measure of expected utility gain to benchmark indica- text-mining procedure to the bibliometric information
tors against. However, under some additional assump- availableinthemeta-analysistablesandreferencelists.
===== PAGE 13/20 =====
13
However, limited bibliometric information in the meta- hold, and whether there are other assumptions that
analysis tables led to many cases where the DOI could would lead to the same predicted correlation without
notberetrieved. DuetomissingDOIinformation,RV implyingvalidmeasurement,arestillunresolvedissues.
Cn
could not be calculated for 11033 studies. The final Readersshouldthereforeconsidertheseresultsprelimi-
sample of comparison studies contained 4071 studies naryevidenceforthevalidityofRV .
Cn
fromasmanyarticles. Our design is limited in a number of ways. The cita-
tion data used for these analyses was collectedin 2020
- years after the decisions to replicate were made. It
Statisticalanalyses
is unclear what effects this delay may have. In addi-
tion, our comparison sample consisted entirely of em-
Our main hypothesis was that average RV would
Cn
piricalstudiesthatareincludedinmeta-analyses,which
be higher in the sample of replicated studies than in
might differ from empirical studies that are not in sev-
the comparison sample. In addition, we analysed dif-
eral aspects, including citation count and sample size.
ferencesbetween samplesincitation count, averageci-
Furthermore, RV could not be computed for a major-
tations per year, and sample size, to better understand Cn
ity of the comparison sample due to missing DOI in-
thecausesofanypotentialdifferencesinRV between
Cn
formation, and cases may not be missing at random.
the two groups. Because all variables of interest were
Thus, the representativeness of the comparison sample
highly skewed, non-parametric methods were used for
could be questioned. An alternative method for deriv-
allanalyses. Medianvalueandinterquartilerangewere
ing a comparison group would be to count citations of
calculated in both samples for each variable of inter-
studiesfromthedateeachstudywasselectedforrepli-
est. To compare differences between samples, we cal-
cationandselectmatchednon-replicatedcontrolsfrom
culated Vargha and Delaney’s A for each variable of in-
the same year and research field. Finally, the external
terest, which represents the probability that a random
validity of the sample of replicated studies may be re-
observationfromthesampleofreplicatedstudieshasa
duced due to overrepresentation of a few large repli-
higher value than a random observation from the sam-
cation efforts. As one example, a large proportion of
pleofnon-replicatedstudies(Vargha&Delaney,2000).
thestudiesincludedintheCurateSciencedatasetwere
Bootstrapped99%confidenceintervalsarereportedfor
replicated as part of the Reproducibility Project: Psy-
eacheffectsizeA.Analyseswerenotpreregistered.
chology (Open Science Collaboration, 2015). All stud-
The data files and analysis script used to generate
iesreplicatedaspartofthiseffortusedthesamegeneral
all results reported below are openly available on OSF
study selection procedure (see https://osf.io/ezrsc/ for
(https://osf.io/e35pu/).
detailsaboutthesamplingstrategy).
Results A more fundamental limitation of this validation ef-
fort is the relatively low severity of the conclusions
Statisticalresultsarepresentedintable1. Cube-root
(Mayo, 2018). In effect, these data are weak falsi-
transformeddistributionsofthevariablesofinterestare
fiers of the construct validity of RV . Consider what
Cn
presented in figure 7. RV was, on average, substan-
Cn wouldhavehappenedifthedatashowednodifference
tially greater in the sample of replicated studies than
in replication value between the two samples. Would
in the comparison sample (figure 7D). This difference
thishavesuggestedthatRV isapoormeasureofrepli-
Cn
seemedtobedrivenbothbydifferencesincitationsper
cation value? Or would it have suggested that replica-
year,andbydifferencesinsamplesize. Replicatedstud-
tion value is a poor measure of expected utility gain?
ies received a greater number of citations (figure 7A),
Or would it have suggested that researchers’ decisions
even after adjusting for article age (figure 7B). Con-
of what to replicate is a poor measure of expected util-
versely, replicated studies had substantially lower sam-
ity gain? Perhaps RV is a better measure of expected
Cn
plesize,onaverage(figure7C).
utility than researchers are? Conversely, a correlation
The patterns reported above are what we would ex-
betweenresearchers’studyselectiondecisionsandRV
Cn
pect to see if (1) researchers tend to follow the model
doesnotnecessarilymeanthateitherisavalidmeasure
of Isager et al. (2023) when selecting studies to repli-
ofreplicationvalue. Perhapsbothareconsistentlymea-
cate, (2) researchers can reliably predict the expected
suring a different construct than the one we are inter-
utility of replication efforts, and (3) RV is a valid
Cn ested in. The data presented here do not let us resolve
butsomewhatunreliablepredictoroftheexpectedutil-
these issues, so they cannot definitely corroborate the
ity of replication efforts. Under these assumptions, a
validityofRV . Severityisalsoloweredbythefactthat
Cn
higher RV for replicated studies constitutes evidence
Cn thesewereexploratoryanalysesconductedbythesame
for convergent validity between researchers’ selection
researcherswhoproposedthemodelthedataaretrying
decisions and RV . Whether these assumptions truly
Cn
===== PAGE 14/20 =====
14
Table1
Summarystatisticsforvariablesofinterestinthereplicated(CurateScience)andcomparison(Psycholog-
icalBulletin)samples.
variable group n median Q1 Q3 A
citationcount replicated 145 112.00 37.00 301.00 0.71199%CI[0.652,0.767]
citationcount comparison 4071 39.00 17.00 82.50
citationsperyear replicated 145 9.25 3.25 18.33 0.74699%CI[0.686,0.802]
citationsperyear comparison 4071 2.67 1.12 5.63
samplesize replicated 167 57.00 36.00 99.00 0.33499%CI[0.294,0.379]
samplesize comparison 4071 113.00 49.00 297.00
replicationvalue replicated 167 1.01 0.46 2.70 0.79799%CI[0.753,0.841]
replicationvalue comparison 4071 0.22 0.08 0.53
Figure7
Distributions of various parameters in the comparison sample of psychological findings (red) and the sample of repli-
catedfindingsinpsychology(blue). Thescaleinallplotshasbeentransformedbytakingthecuberootofthetruevalues,
which preserves the overall shape of the distribution but compresses the scale towards 1. (A) Distribution of citation
counts. (B) Distribution of average citations per year. (C) Distribution of sample size. The x-axis limit is set to 8000,
whichexcludeslessthan1percentofdatapoints. (D)DistributionofRV replicationvalueestimates.
Cn
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
0 125 1000 3375 8000
Citations
ytisned
A
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0 8 64 216
Citations per year
ytisned
B
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
0 125 1000 3375 8000
Sample size
ytisned
C
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
0 0.125 1 3.375 8
RV
Cn
ytisned
D
sample replicated comparison
===== PAGE 15/20 =====
15
tofalsify. Preregisteredindependentreplicationofthese we could confidently use RV for study selection in
Cn
resultsinnewdataarethereforeneeded. practice. These problems concern the feasibility, valid-
ity, and the overall quality of RV as a measurement
Cn
Generaldiscussion instrument. Weconcludethisarticlewithabriefsketch
ofeachprobleminturn.
Todevelopanystrategyforefficientreplicationstudy
First,inordertostudythevalidityandusefulnessofa
selection, we need to (1) specify the goal we are try-
studyselectionstrategybasedonRV ,weneedtoknow
ing to achieve, (2) specify how this goal is realized Cn
whetherthestrategyisfeasibletoapplyinpractice. Fea-
by the strategy we are proposing, and (3) empirically
sibility depends on a number of factors, including how
validate that the proposed strategy works as intended.
difficult it is to assemble an initial pool of replication
These three steps must be addressed in sequential or-
candidates and how difficult it will be to obtain the ci-
der. We cannot specify how a given strategy achieves
tation count and sample size of each candidate in the
a goal without first specifying the goal, and we cannot
pool. Fortunately, obtaining citation counts will likely
validatewhetherastrategyworksasintendedbeforewe
beasimpletaskregardlessofthenumberofcandidates,
canspecifyhowthestrategyisintendedtowork. Isager
since records of such information are kept by multiple
et al. (2023) address the first of these steps. In this
bibliometric services (e.g., Crossref, Scopus, and Web
article, we have focused on the second. Given the goal
ofScience),andcanbeautomaticallyextractedforfree
of maximizing expected utility gain (and the assump-
through API interfaces such as the rcrossref package in
tion that this attribute can be approximated by replica-
R (Chamberlain et al., 2020). Collecting sample size
tionvalue)wehaveformalizedanobservableindicator
information will likely be more difficult. While sample
-RV . Wehaveformallyspecifiedtheassumptionsun-
Cn size is almost always reported for empirical studies, it
der which study selection based on RV will maximize
Cn will likely have to be obtained manually for each repli-
expected utility gain, and we have discussed a number
cationtarget,andissuesrelatedtoparticipantexclusion
ofobfuscatingfactorsthatlimittheusefulnessofRV .
Cn and multiple samples (e.g., when standard errors de-
To our knowledge, RV is the first replication study
Cn pend heavily on both the number of participants and
selection indicator that is explicitly treated as a mea-
stimuli sampled) will have to be reckoned with. In a
surement instrument. All indicators used for study se-
forthcomingpaper,wewillexplorethefeasibilityofap-
lection are fundamentally measurement instruments,
plyingastudyselectionprocedurebasedonRV within
but RV is currently the only indicator for which a Cn
Cn the context of fMRI research in social neuroscience.
formal measurement model exists. By extension, RV
Cn Similar studies will likely be needed in other areas in
is currently the only indicator whose validity could be
whichRV istobeapplied.
strictlyfalsified. RV isalsothefirstindicatortoincor- Cn
Cn Second, provided it is feasible to collect data about
porate information about both value and uncertainty,
RV it must then be rigorously validated. The lack of
which is important whenever the goal of selection is to Cn
gold-standard indicators of expected utility gain pre-
maximize expected utility gain. Should RV be a valid
Cn vents straightforward benchmarking. As a substitute
and reliable measure of expected utility gain, it holds
we could attempt to identify plausible indicators of ex-
enormouspotentialforimprovingthetransparencyand
pected utility gain and compare RV to these, like is
efficiencyofresourceallocationinreplicationresearch. Cn
done in the study reported above. However, interpre-
The indicator could be utilized by any researcher, fun-
tation of results will be more challenging in such stud-
der, journal, or other stakeholder who wishes to direct
ies because we must add the auxiliary assumption that
limitedresourcestowardsimportantreplicationtargets.
whateverattributewecompareRV withisitselfagood
Becausecalculationonlyrequiresinformationaboutci- Cn
measure of expected utility gain (Meehl, 1997). Alter-
tation impact and sample size RV should be applica-
Cn natively, RV could be validated by corroborating the
ble for study selection across a variety of scientific dis- Cn
individual assumptions it is built on. The constituent
ciplines. The strong measurement rationale on which
causalhypothesesinthechainthatleadsRV estimates
RV isbuiltalsomakesitpossibletoimproveandadapt Cn
Cn tobeavalidmeasureofexpectedutilitygain(figure4)
the indicator to different contexts. For example, in dis-
could be separated and tested in isolation. In princi-
ciplineswheresamplesizeisapoormeasureofparame-
ple, falsifying any single causal assumption would fal-
terestimateprecisionwecanimmediatelyseewhyRV
Cn sify the validity of RV overall, since valid measure-
estimateswouldbeunreliable(assumptionsunderlying Cn
ment requires that all the causal relationships hold. Fi-
equation(5)areviolated)andwhatremedyisrequired
nally,insteadofexaminingthevalidityofRV inisola-
(replacing equation 5 with a valid measure of preci- Cn
tionwecouldtrainmachine-learningalgorithmstopre-
sion).
dictindicatorsofexpectedutilitygainbasedonabroad
Three outstanding problems must be solved before
===== PAGE 16/20 =====
16
Figure8
CausalscenariowhichwillleadRV tobecomeabiasedmeasureofexpectedutilitygainduetotheinfluenceofuncer-
Cn
taintybeforereplicationoncitationcount
.
U Citation count + Value U
+ +
Expected
RV - U
Cn
utility gain
- +
Uncertainty
Sample size - before U
replication
rangeofbibliometricandstatisticalinformation,ashas much higher in the more diverse set of studies. Thus,
recentlybeendonetounderstandpredictorsofresearch thereliabilityofRV willlikelydecreaseasthediversity
Cn
replicability (Altmejd et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2020). ofreplicationtargetsincreases,andtheremightevenbe
This should yield a better understanding of the predic- alimittohowbroadlywecanapplyandcompareRV
Cn
tivepowerofcitationimpactandsamplesizerelativeto estimates without compromising measurement reliabil-
othertypesofinformationwecouldbeconsidering. ityentirely.
Third, evenifRV wouldbevalidformeasuringex- RV could also easily be a biased measure of ex-
Cn Cn
pectedutilitygainwestillneedtoconsiderthebroader pected utility gain. As an example, consider the possi-
issue of overall measurement quality (Borsboom et al., bilitythatresearchersprefertocitearticlesthatprovide
2004). Thatis,weneedtoempiricallyexaminewhether strong support for the claims tested within (i.e., cita-
RV is sufficiently reliable and unbiased. If we accept tion count is reduced by uncertainty about the claims).
Cn
the causal hypotheses outlined in figure 4, then by def- Inthisscenario,RV wouldconsistentlyunderestimate
Cn
inition replication RV must be somewhat unreliable expectedutilitygainsinceuncertaintyendsupsuppress-
Cn
due to the influence of unmeasured noise factors in ing the positive effect of citation count on RV esti-
Cn
the measurement process. The influence of the vari- mates (figure 8). Similarly, overestimation of expected
ous noise factors will likely depend on the diversity of utility gain can happen if research which we are more
the candidate set we are considering. Consider a set of certain will not replicate tends to get cited more often.
studies,allfromthesamesubfield,allpublishedwithin Recent research indicates the latter situation might of-
the span of a few years, and all utilizing similar study ten be the case (Serra-Garcia & Gneezy, 2021). Note
designs. Nowcomparethistoasetconsistingofreplica- that we could in principle repeat this thought experi-
tioncandidatesfromacrossawidetime-spanandmany mentforanytwovariablesinfigure4notalreadyjoined
scientific fields, studying a wide range of topics with by a causal arrow. Whenever the causal relationship
widely different study designs. Variation in the noise implied by such an arrow seems plausible and causes
factors included in figure 1 and figure 3 will likely be systematic differences between the values of RV and
Cn
===== PAGE 17/20 =====
17
expected utility gain, we should be worried about bias OpenSciencePractices
inthemeasurement.
This article earned the Open Data and Open Code
The key insight we wish to leave the reader with in
badges for making the data and code available. The
this paper is that any strategy for replication study se-
analyses in the manuscript have been reproduced. The
lection must be able to demonstrate usefulness, which
entire editorial process, including the open reviews
entails assessing the feasibility and quality of the study
(published commentaries), is published in the online
selection criteria used. This assessment can only hap-
supplement.
pen if we first specify the goal of replication and for-
malize how the goal is achieved through the selection
References
strategy we are proposing. Only then can we evaluate
whether the strategy works as intended. For existing Aksnes, D. W., Langfeldt, L., & Wouters, P. (2019). Ci-
indicator-based strategies where the rationale behind tations, citation indicators, and research qual-
the indicator used remains unclear (e.g., Field et al., ity:Anoverviewofbasicconceptsandtheories.
2019; Isager, 2018; Isager et al., 2023, supplementary SAGE Open, 9(1), 215824401982957. https://
materials;Makeletal.,2012),themeasurementmodel doi.org/10.1177/2158244019829575
shouldbeformalizedsothatvalidationandcomparison Altmejd, A., Dreber, A., Forsell, E., Huber, J., Imai, T.,
of different strategies can take place. The present arti- Johannesson, M., & Camerer, C. (2019). Pre-
cle serves as a general example of how study selection dicting the replicability of social science lab
strategiescouldexplicitlyberelatedtothegoalwewish experiments. PLOS ONE, 14(12), e0225826.
to accomplish when replicating, and how this in turn https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.
enablesustoexaminewhetheragivenstrategyislikely 0225826
to work as intended. In doing so we enable a more APA Dictionary of Psychology. (n.d.-a). Reliability [Ac-
transparentdiscussionofwhatisimportanttoreplicate, cessed: 2025-06-20]. https://dictionary.apa.
whichwillbecrucialforcoordinatingfuturereplication org/reliability
efforts and direct resources to where they are needed APA Dictionary of Psychology. (n.d.-b). Test bias [Ac-
themost. Throughsuchdiscussionandcoordinationwe cessed: 2025-06-20]. https://dictionary.apa.
increasetheoverallimpactofreplicationstudiesonsci- org/test-bias
entific discourse and strengthen the argument for why Blaszczynski, A., & Gainsbury, S. M. (2019). Editor’s
replicationsshouldbeconductedandrewarded. note:Replicationcrisisinthesocialsciences.In-
ternational Gambling Studies, 19(3), 359–361.
AuthorContact https://doi.org/10.1080/14459795.2019.
1673786
Peder Mortvedt Isager: https://orcid.org/0000-
Bornmann, L., & Daniel, H.-D. (2008). What do ci-
0002-6922-3590 Anna E. van ’t Veer:
tation counts measure? a review of studies
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2733-1841 Daniël Lak-
on citing behavior. Journal of Documentation,
ens: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0247-239X
64(1), 45–80. https://doi.org/10.1108/
Correspondence concerning this article should be
00220410810844150
addressed to Peder Mortvedt Isager, Ullevålsveien 76,
Bornmann, L., & Mutz, R. (2015). Growth rates of
0454Oslo,Norway. Email: pederisager@gmail.com
modern science: A bibliometric analysis based
on the number of publications and cited ref-
ConflictofInterestandFunding
erences. Journal of the Association for Infor-
The authors declare no conflicts of interest. This mation Science and Technology, 66(11), 2215–
workwasfundedbyVIDIgrant452-17-013. 2222.https://doi.org/10.1002/asi.23329
Borsboom, D., Mellenbergh, G. J., & van Heerden, J.
AuthorContributions (2004). The concept of validity. Psychological
Review, 111(4), 1061–1071. https://doi.org/
Theauthorsmadethefollowingcontributions. Peder
10.1037/0033-295X.111.4.1061
Mortvedt Isager: Conceptualization, Investigation, Vi-
Burgers,J.(2019).Citationcountsasameasureforsci-
sualization, Writing - Original Draft, Writing - Review
entific impact. https://doi.org/10.31237/osf.
& Editing; Anna E. van ’t Veer: Supervision, Writing
io/y9r7c
- Review & Editing; Daniël Lakens: Conceptualization,
Button, K. S., Ioannidis, J. P. A., Mokrysz, C., Nosek,
Fundingacquisition,Investigation,Supervision,Writing
B. A., Flint, J., Robinson, E. S. J., & Munafò,
-Review&Editing.
M.R.(2013).Powerfailure:Whysmallsample
===== PAGE 18/20 =====
18
sizeunderminesthereliabilityofneuroscience. A. E., Vranka, M., & Lakens, D. (2023). De-
Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 14(5), 365–376. ciding what to replicate: A decision model for
https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn3475 replication study selection under resource and
Chakraborty, T., Kumar, S., Goyal, P., Ganguly, N., knowledge constraints. Psychological Methods,
& Mukherjee, A. (2014). Towards a stratified 28(2), 438–451. https://doi.org/10.1037/
learning approach to predict future citation met0000438
counts. IEEE/ACM Joint Conference on Digital Ke,Q.,Ferrara,E.,Radicchi,F.,&Flammini,A.(2015).
Libraries, 351–360. https://doi.org/10.1109/ Defining and identifying sleeping beauties in
JCDL.2014.6970190 science. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Chamberlain,S.,Zhu,H.,Jahn,N.,Boettiger,C.,&Ram, Sciences,112(24),7426–7431.https://doi.org/
K.(2020).Rcrossref. 10.1073/pnas.1424329112
DeBruine, L. M., & Barr, D. J. (2021). Understanding Klautzer, L., Hanney, S., Nason, E., Rubin, J., Grant,
mixed-effects models through data simulation. J., & Wooding, S. (2011). Assessing policy and
Advances in Methods and Practices in Psycholog- practiceimpactsofsocialscienceresearch:The
ical Science, 4(1), 2515245920965119. https: applicationofthepaybackframeworktoassess
//doi.org/10.1177/2515245920965119 the future of work programme. Research Eval-
DeDeo, S. (2018). Information theory for intelligent uation, 20(3), 201–209. https://doi.org/10.
people[p.15]. 3152/095820211X13118583635675
Field,S.M.,Hoekstra,R.,Bringmann,L.,&VanRaven- KNAW. (2018). Replication studies – improving repro-
zwaaij, D. (2019). When and why to replicate: ducibilityintheempiricalsciences.
As easy as 1, 2, 3? Collabra: Psychology, 5(1), Lakens,D.,&DeBruine,L.M.(2021).Improvingtrans-
46.https://doi.org/10.1525/collabra.218 parency, falsifiability, and rigor by making hy-
Hagger, M. S., Chatzisarantis, N. L. D., Alberts, H., pothesis tests machine-readable. Advances in
Anggono, C. O., Batailler, C., Birt, A. R., & Methods and Practices in Psychological Science,
Zwienenberg, M. (2016). A multilab prereg- 4(2),2515245920970949.https://doi.org/10.
istered replication of the ego-depletion ef- 1177/2515245920970949
fect.PerspectivesonPsychologicalScience,11(4), Makel,M.C.,Plucker,J.A.,&Hegarty,B.(2012).Repli-
546–573. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / cations in psychology research: How often do
1745691616652873 they really occur? Perspectives on Psychological
Heirene, R. M. (2021). A call for replications of addic- Science, 7(6), 537–542. https://doi.org/10.
tion research: Which studies should we repli- 1177/1745691612460688
cateandwhatconstitutesa"successful"replica- Martín-Martín, A., Orduna-Malea, E., Thelwall, M.,
tion?AddictionResearch Theory,29(2),89–97. & Delgado López-Cózar, E. (2018). Google
https://doi.org/10.1080/16066359.2020. scholar, web of science, and scopus: A system-
1751130 atic comparison of citations in 252 subject cat-
Hernán,M.,&Robins,J.(2020).Causalinference:What egories. Journal of Informetrics, 12(4), 1160–
if.Chapman Hall/CRC. 1177. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joi.2018.
Ioannidis, J. P. A., Boyack, K. W., Small, H., Sorensen, 09.002
A. A., & Klavans, R. (2014). Bibliometrics: Is Matiasz, N. J., Wood, J., Doshi, P., Speier, W., Beck-
your most cited work your best? Nature News, emeyer, B., Wang, W., & Silva, A. J. (2018).
514(7524), 561. https://doi.org/10.1038/ Researchmaps.orgforintegratingandplanning
514561a research. PloS One, 13(5), e0195271. https://
Isager,P.M.(2018).Whattoreplicate?justificationsof doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0195271
studychoicefrom85replicationstudies.https: Mayo,D.G.(2018).Statisticalinferenceasseveretesting.
//doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1286715 CambridgeUniversityPress.
Isager, P. M. (2020). Test validity defined as d- Meehl, P. E. (1997). The problem is epistemology, not
connection between target and measured at- statistics: Replace significance tests by confi-
tribute:Expandingthecausaldefinitionofbors- dence intervals and quantify accuracy of risky
boometal.(2004)[PsyArXiv].https://doi.org/ numericalpredictions.InL.L.Harlow,S.A.Mu-
10.31234/osf.io/btgsr laik,&J.H.Steiger(Eds.),Whatiftherewereno
Isager, P. M., van Aert, R. C. M., Bahník, Š., Brandt, significancetests?
M.J.,DeSoto,K.A.,Giner-Sorolla,R.,Krueger, Mueller-Langer, F., Fecher, B., Harhoff, D., & Wag-
J. I., Perugini, M., Ropovik, I., van ’t Veer, ner, G. G. (2019). Replication studies in eco-
===== PAGE 19/20 =====
19
nomics—howmanyandwhichpapersarecho- Practices in Psychological Science, 1(1), 19–26.
sen for replication, and why? Research Policy, https://doi.org/10.1177/2515245917745058
48(1), 62–83. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. Sale, C., & Mellor, D. (2018). A call for replication
respol.2018.07.019 studies in nutrition and health. Nutrition and
Murphy, J., Mesquida, C., Caldwell, A. R., Earp, B. D., Health, 24(4), 201–201. https://doi.org/10.
& Warne, J. (2021). Selection protocol for 1177/0260106018817675
replication in sports and exercise science [OSF Serra-Garcia, M., & Gneezy, U. (2021). Nonreplica-
Preprints]. https://doi.org/10.31219/osf.io/ ble publications are cited more than replicable
v3wz4 ones.ScienceAdvances,7(21),eabd1705.https:
Nicholson, J. M., Mordaunt, M., Lopez, P., Uppala, A., //doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.abd1705
Rosati,D.,Rodrigues,N.P.,&Rife,S.C.(2021). van Eck, N. J., Waltman, L., van Raan, A. F. J., Klautz,
Scite: A smart citation index that displays the R. J. M., & Peul, W. C. (2013). Citation anal-
context of citations and classifies their intent ysis may severely underestimate the impact of
using deep learning. bioRxiv. https://doi.org/ clinicalresearchascomparedtobasicresearch.
10.1101/2021.03.15.435418 PLOS ONE, 8(4), e62395. https://doi.org/10.
OpenScienceCollaboration.(2015).Estimatingthere- 1371/journal.pone.0062395
producibility of psychological science. Science, Vargha, A., & Delaney, H. D. (2000). A critique and
349(6251), aac4716–aac4716. https://doi. improvement of the cl common language ef-
org/10.1126/science.aac4716 fect size statistics of mcgraw and wong. Jour-
Parolo,P.D.B.,Pan,R.K.,Ghosh,R.,Huberman,B.A., nal of Educational and Behavioral Statistics,
Kaski,K.,&Fortunato,S.(2015).Attentionde- 25(2), 101–132. https://doi.org/10.3102/
cay in science. Journal of Informetrics, 9(4), 10769986025002101
734–745. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joi.2015. Wagenmakers, E.-J., Beek, T., Dijkhoff, L., Gronau,
07.006 Q. F., Acosta, A., Adams, R. B., & Zwaan, R. A.
Pittelkow, M.-M., Hoekstra, R., Karsten, J., & van (2016). Registered replication report: Strack,
Ravenzwaaij, D. (2020). Replication crisis in martin, stepper(1988).PerspectivesonPsycho-
clinical psychology: A bayesian and qualitative logical Science, 11(6), 917–928. https://doi.
re-evaluation [PsyArXiv]. https://doi.org/10. org/10.1177/1745691616674458
31234/osf.io/unezq Waltman,L.,&vanEck,N.J.(2013).Asystematicem-
Plucker, J. A., & Makel, M. C. (2021). Replication is pirical comparison of different approaches for
important for educational psychology: Recent normalizing citation impact indicators. Journal
developments and key issues. Educational Psy- ofInformetrics,7(4),833–849.https://doi.org/
chologist,0(0),1–11.https://doi.org/10.1080/ 10.1016/j.joi.2013.08.002
00461520.2021.1895796 Waltman, L., & van Eck, N. J. (2019). Field normaliza-
Radicchi, F., Weissman, A., & Bollen, J. (2017). Quan- tion of scientometric indicators. In W. Glänzel,
tifying perceived impact of scientific publica- H.F.Moed,U.Schmoch,&M.Thelwall(Eds.),
tions. Journal of Informetrics, 11(3), 704–712. Springer handbook of science and technology in-
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joi.2017.05.010 dicators (pp. 281–300). Springer International
Ranehill, E., Dreber, A., Johannesson, M., Leiberg, Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
S., Sul, S., & Weber, R. A. (2015). Assessing 030-02511-3_11
the robustness of power posing: No effect on Wang, D., Song, C., & Barabási, A.-L. (2013). Quan-
hormones and risk tolerance in a large sam- tifying long-term scientific impact. Science,
ple of men and women. Psychological Science, 342(6154), 127–132. https://doi.org/10.
26(5), 653–656. https://doi.org/10.1177/ 1126/science.1237825
0956797614553946 Wang, M., Ren, J., Li, S., & Chen, G. (2019). Quanti-
Ritchie, S. J., Wiseman, R., & French, C. C. (2012). fyingapaper’sacademicimpactbydistinguish-
Failing thefuture:Three unsuccessful attempts ingtheunequalintensitiesandcontributionsof
toreplicatebem’s"retroactivefacilitationofre- citations. IEEE Access, 7, 96198–96214. https:
call" effect. PLoS ONE, 7(3), e33423. https:// //doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2927016
doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0033423 Westfall,J.,Kenny,D.A.,&Judd,C.M.(2014).Statisti-
Rouder,J.N.,&Haaf,J.M.(2018).Power,dominance, calpowerandoptimaldesigninexperimentsin
and constraint: A note on the appeal of differ- which samples of participants respond to sam-
ent design traditions. Advances in Methods and plesofstimuli.JournalofExperimentalPsychol-
===== PAGE 20/20 =====
20
ogy: General, 143(5), 2020–2045. https://doi. via recurrent neural network with long short-
org/10.1037/xge0000014 term memory. https://arxiv.org/abs/1811.
Yang,Y.,Wu,Y.,&Uzzi,B.(2020).Estimatingthedeep 02129
replicability of scientific findings using human Zwaan, R. A., Etz, A., Lucas, R. E., & Donnellan, M. B.
andartificialintelligence.ProceedingsoftheNa- (2018).Makingreplicationmainstream.Behav-
tional Academy of Sciences, 117(20), 10762– ioralandBrainSciences,41.https://doi.org/10.
10768. 1017/S0140525X17001972
Yuan, S., Tang, J., Zhang, Y., Wang, Y., & Xiao, T.
(2018).Modelingandpredictingcitationcount