
===== PAGE 1/19 =====
Opendata:NotApplicable Editedby:AmandaKayMontoya
Meta-Psychology,2025,vol9,MP.2023.3688 Openmaterials:NotApplicable Reviewedby:WangY.,OlveraAstivia,O.L.
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2023.3688 Openandreproducibleanalysis:NotApplicable Analysisreproducedby:NotApplicable
Articletype:OriginalArticle Openreviewsandeditorialprocess:Yes AllsupplementaryfilescanbeaccessedatOSF:
PublishedundertheCC-BY4.0license Preregistration:No https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/HXM2V
Practicing Theory Building in a Many Modelers Hackathon: A Proof of Concept
NoahvanDongen1,AdamFinnemann1,JilldeRon1,LeoTiokhin2,ShirleyB.Wang3,JohannesAlgermissen4,
ElenaC.Altmann5,ŠtˇepánBahník6,Li-ChingChuang7,AndreiDumbrava˘8,6,JensH.Fünderich9,SandraJ.
Geiger10,DariaGerasimova11,AidaiGolan12,JudithHerbers13,MarcJekel14,AntonKunnari15,Yih-ShiuanLin16,
DavidMoreau17,YvonneOberholzer18,HannahK.Peetz19,JuliaM.Rohrer20,AdrianRothers7,FelixD.
Schönbrodt21,YashvinSeetahul22,AnnaSzabelska23,NatashaA.Tonge24,NicoleWalasek19,25,MarleneA.
Werner26,andDennyBorsboom1
1
DepartmentofPsychology,UniversityofAmsterdam
2HumanTechnologyInteraction,EindhovenUniversityofTechnology
3DepartmentofPsychology,HarvardUniversity
4DondersInstituteforBrain,Cognition,andBehaviour,RadboudUniversityNijmegen
5DepartmentofPsychology,LancasterUniversity
6DepartmentofScienceandResearch,PragueCollegeofPsychosocialStudies
7DepartmentofPsychology,Philipps-UniversityMarburg
8GeorgeI.M.GeorgescuInstituteofCardiovascularDiseases,Ias,iMedicalCenter
9DepartmentofPsychology,UniversityofErfurt
10DepartmentofCognition,Emotion,andMethodsinPsychology,UniversityofVienna
11KansasUniversityCenteronDevelopmentalDisabilities,UniversityofKansasCity
12TheSchoolofPsychologicalSciences,TelAvivUniversity
13DepartmentofPsychology,TechnischeUniversitätDresden
14DepartmentofPsychology,UniversityofCologne
15DepartmentofPsychologyandLogopedics,UniversityofHelsinki
16InstituteofExperimentalPsychology,UniversityofRegensburg
17CentreforBrainResearch,UniversityofAuckland
18CognitionandConsumerBehaviorLab,KarlsruheInstituteofTechnology
19BehavioralScienceInstitute,RadboudUniversityNijmegen
20WilhelmWundtInstituteforPsychology,LeipzigUniversity
21DepartmentofPsychology,Ludwig-Maximilians-UniversitätMünchen
22DepartmentofPsychology,InstituteforPsychology,UniversityofInnsbruck
23InstituteofCognitionandCulture,Queen’sUniversityBelfast
24DepartmentofPsychology,NotreDameofMaryland
25DepartmentofDevelopmentalPsychology,UtrechtUniversity
26DepartmentofSexologyandPsychosomaticGynaecology,AmsterdamUniversityMedicalCenter,UniversityofAmsterdam
Scientific theories reflect some of humanity’s greatest epistemic achievements. The
best theories motivate us to search for discoveries, guide us towards successful inter-
ventions,andhelpustoexplainandorganizeknowledge. Suchtheoriesrequireahigh
degreeofspecificity,whichinturnrequiresformalmodeling. Yet,inpsychologicalsci-
ence,manytheoriesarenotpreciseandpsychologicalscientistsoftenlackthetechnical
skillstoformallyspecifyexistingtheories. Thisproblemraisesthequestion: Howcan
wepromoteformaltheorydevelopmentinpsychology,wheretherearemanycontent
experts but few modelers? In this paper, we discuss one strategy for addressing this
issue: a Many Modelers approach. Many Modelers consists of mixed teams of mod-
elers and non-modelers that collaborate to create a formal theory of a phenomenon.
Here,wereportaproofofconceptofthisapproach,whichwepilotedasathree-hour
hackathonattheSocietyfortheImprovementof Psychological Scienceconferencein
2021. Aftersurveyingtheparticipants,resultssuggestthat(a)psychologistswhohave
never developed a formal model can become (more) excited about formal modeling
andtheorizing;(b)adivisionoflaborinformaltheorizingispossiblewhereonlyone
orafewteammemberspossesstheprerequisitemodelingexpertise;and(c)firstwork-
ingprototypesofatheoreticalmodelcanbecreatedinashortperiodoftime. These
resultsshowsomepromiseforthemanymodelersapproachasateamsciencetoolfor
theorydevelopment.
Keywords: modeling,formaltheory,theorydevelopment,hackathon,teamscience,
education
===== PAGE 2/19 =====
2
Introduction psychologists currently face substantial challenges in
developingmoreformaltheories. Onechallengeisthat
Scientific theories are our most important
developingformalmodelsoftheoriesrequiresconsider-
epistemicachievements. Ourknowledgeofin-
ableeffortandresources.
dividual pieces of information is little com-
In the development of psychological theories, there
pared to theories such as general relativity
is often a gap between verbal theories and formalized
and evolution by natural selection that shape
models. This gap may contribute to the lack of repro-
our understanding of many different kinds of
ducibilityinpsychologicalresearch(vanRooij&Baggio,
phenomena.
2021). Verbal theories describe phenomena in words
Thagard(1988,p. 33)
but often lack the precision and clarity of formal mod-
Thereisnothingaspracticalasagoodtheory. els, which can be tested and validated empirically. In
Lewin(1943,p. 118) contrast,formaltheoriesaremathematicallyexplicit,al-
lowing for predictions to be made, which can be com-
Theoriesareamongscience’scrowningachievements pared to data. However, formalizing theories requires
(Thagard,1988). Theoriesmotivateustosearchfordis- technical skills (e.g., programming, differential calcu-
coveries,guideustowardssuccessfulinterventions,and lus)2. This raises a key question: How can theories be-
helpustoexplainandorganizeknowledge(Borsboom, come more formalized in a field where there are many
2013). Mature theories are specific on what should contentexpertsbutfewmodelers?
or should not happen under various conditions. This In this paper, we provide one answer to this ques-
specificity makes it possible to link theoretical proposi- tion using a Many Modelers approach. In Many Mod-
tions (e.g., how mass curves space) to empirical con- elers, mixed teams of modelers and non-modelers are
sequences(e.g.,thebendingofstarlightthatpassesour tasked to create a formal theory from verbal theory to
sun). Resultsfromexperimentsthatareinlinewiththe- explain a phenomenon. Here we report a proof of con-
ories do not mean that these theories perfectly predict cept3. Weshowthattheparticipatingpsychologiststhat
all real-world consequences. Instead, success means have never developed a formal model before can (a)
that the links between inputs and consequences are become excited about formal modeling and theorizing
clearandobservable. Thus,itisnotsurprisingthatma- throughhacking;(b)adivisionoflaborinformaltheo-
ture, successful theories are expressible in mathemati- rizing could be possible where only one or a few team
calterms(e.g.,generalrelativity,populationdynamics). members possess the prerequisite modeling expertise;
Mathematics, and also computational rules, enable a andthat(c)firstworkingprototypesofaformalmodel
highdegreeofprecisionandhelptoovercometheambi- of a theory can be created in a short period of time. In
guityofnaturallanguage. Manysuccessfultheoriesare what follows, we describe the setup of the hackathon,
capturedinformalmodels1 thattakeenvironmentalcir- the modeling results and experiences, and a reflection
cumstancesasinputsandprovideoutputswhich,asem- on the outcomes of the hackathon. This paper is con-
pirical consequences, can be observed and tested (e.g., cluded with a discussion of the results, critical reflec-
the pressure P exerted by a gas given a certain volume tion,andsomespeculationsforfurtherinvestigation.
V,temperatureT,universalgasconstantR,andmassof
thegasnaccordingtotheidealgaslaw PV =nRT). TheManyModelersApproach
Currently, in psychological science, there is a dearth
In Many Modelers approach, several teams of sci-
of mature, precisely-specified theories (e.g., Borsboom
entists work to formalize the same theory. Teams are
etal.,2021;vanRooijandBaggio,2021). Typically,psy-
given a verbal theory to formalize and a phenomenon
chological theories are narrative natural-language de-
that the theory should explain. Teams are asked to de-
scriptions based on implicit assumptions about nature
velop a model that (a) incorporates the principles or
Fried,2020;Robinaughetal.,2021. Theirlackofspeci-
ficity allows one to derive a broad range of potentially
1Withaformalmodelwemeananabstractedand/orideal-
contradictory predictions. For instance, Harris (1976)
ized representation (e.g., of the solar system) that consists of
demonstrated that cognitive dissonance theory as de-
mathematical equations or computational rules. Please note
scribed by Brehm and Cohen (1963)could be formal- thatwedonotequateformalmodelswiththeories.
ized such that three conflicting consequences could be 2In which many psychologists lack training (e.g., Robin-
derived, two of which contradicted Brehm and Cohen’s aughetal.,2021)
expectedpredictions(seeAppendixA). 3The results and experiences of a three-hour hackathon
Given their scientific value, many scientists have ar- hostedatSIPS2021conference(SocietyfortheImprovement
gued for the need to formalize theories in psychology ofPsychologicalScience,2021).
(e.g., Fried, 2020; Robinaugh et al., 2021). However,
===== PAGE 3/19 =====
3
Figure1
The data pattern representing The Bystander Effect phenomenon and the three relevant components (targets) of this
pattern.
mechanisms expressed in the theory and (b) can pro- qualitativelyresemblethepatternsoftheprovidedphe-
ducedata(e.g.,throughsimulation)thatresemblesthe nomena. Ourprojectwasanempiricalattempttoeval-
phenomenon to be explained. We developed this ap- uate whether teams of scientists, most without rele-
proachbasedontheTheoryConstructionMethodology vant modeling experience, could formalize psycholog-
(TCM; Borsboom et al., 2021) and productive explana- icaltheories.
tion (van Dongen et al., 2022). In the TCM, empirical This approach used tools that utilize programming
phenomena(e.g.,theplaceboeffect)areinterpretedby and calculus skills, but offers its use for universal and
datapatterns(e.g.,adistribution),whichareexplained is flexible for various scientific analysis. Programming
byatheory(i.e.,asetofconjecturesaboutnature). That data generating models and modeling dynamical sys-
is,inaworldwherethetheoryistrue,thesephenomena tems was attempted to be embedded within empirical
wouldbeexpectedtoexist(forfurtherdetails,seeBors- sciences.
boometal.,2021). Productiveexplanationfurtherclar-
ifieswhetheratheoryexplainsagivenphenomenon. A Preparation
theoryexplainsaphenomenonwhenaformalmodel(an
The setup of the project consisted of the theory ma-
expressionofthetheory)producesthedatapatternthat
terial, a description of the phenomenon, and a user
representsthephenomenon(seevanvanDongenetal.,
manual. A week before the event, we published the
2022).
user manual (Appendix B) and verbal theory (Box 1)
Developing formal models that bridge theory and
on an OSF project dedicated to this hackathon (https:
data was the focus of the Many Modelers hackathon.
//osf.io/9pdbJ/). Thephenomenonwasmadeavailable
Teams were provided with a verbal theory and a phe-
totheparticipantsatthestartofthehackathon.
nomenon that was purported to be explained by the
Wechosethebystandereffectasthephenomenonto
theory. Teams then had to develop a model that incor-
be explained, as it is a well-known psychological phe-
poratedallconjecturesandmechanismsandthatcould
===== PAGE 4/19 =====
4
nomenonforwhichmanyverbaltheoriesexist(Fischer personwithmodelingexperience. Wetookaninventory
et al., 2011). We provided a short description of the oftheparticipantswithmodelingexperienceatthestart
phenomenon(seeBox1)andavisualizationofthedata ofthehackathonandallocatedapersonwithmodeling
pattern representing the phenomenon. The visualiza- experience to each team.4 All other participants were
tionindicatedthephenomenon’sthreerelevantcompo- randomly and evenly distributed. In total, we had six
nents(seeFigure1). Theparticipants’goalwastoqual- teams with six members. One team included two mod-
itativelyreproducetheprovidedgraphthatincludedall elers;alltheotherteamsincludedonemodeler.
three components (modeling targets). The only con-
straint was that their model must embody the compo- Output
nentsofthetheorythatwereprovided. Box2described
Themainintendedoutputofthehackathonwasone
theprovidedtheory,extractedfromTheunresponsiveby-
formal model per modeling team. Teams had 150 min-
stander: Why doesn’t he help? by Latané and Darley
utestocompletetheirmodel. Becauseweexpectedthis
(1970).
timetobeinsufficientforallteamstodevelopandcode
a model, we providedteams with adescription andex-
Box 1. The phenomenon and modeling targets
ample of pseudocode (Appendix C) and recommended
giventothemodelers.
teams to start programming their model after they cre-
Thebystandereffect ated sufficient pseudocode. We instructed participants
The bystander effect is the social-psychological tofocusondevelopingapseudocodeimplementationof
phenomenon wherein individuals are less likely theirmodelduetotimeconstraints.
tohelpavictimwhentherearealargernumber After150minutes,allteamscompletedapseudocode
ofotherpeoplepresent. Thisphenomenontobe version of their model. Furthermore, two teams com-
produced by your model can be separated into pleted the additional step of translating the model into
threecomponentsortargets: actual code so that it reproduced the bystander effect
data pattern. We also asked teams to keep a logbook
1. Without other people present, the ten- during the hackathon and report their modeling expe-
dency (probability or frequency) that a rience afterwards. Below, we provide a summary of
personhelpsavictimishigh. the methods and the descriptions of the teams’ model-
ing experience. The teams’ descriptions of their mod-
2. The tendency of helping decreases mono-
els can be found in Appendix D. Logbooks and code
tonically with the number of other people
can be found in the online supplementary materials at
(bystanders)present.
https://osf.io/9pdbJ/. 5
3. The tendency of helping a victim never
4Modeling expertise was defined as “having previously
dropsto0.
beentheleadonaprojectwheretheaimwastobuildacom-
putational or mathematical model of behavior, cognition, or
culture(i.e.,ifyouronlymodelingexpertiseiswithstatistical
SetupoftheHackathon
models,forthishackathon,thiswouldnotqualifyassufficient
At the start of the hackathon, we briefly introduced modelingexpertise).”
theManyModelershackathon,TCM,andproductiveex- 5Wedidnotverifymodelingexpertisebeyondasingleself-
planation. We then provided the participants with the assessmentquestionconcerningfitwiththedefinitionofmod-
phenomenon to be explained. We then assigned par- eling expertise. After the hackathon was concluded, partic-
ipants were asked to evaluate their modeling expertise on
ticipants to teams, and teams were given two and a
Dreyfus and Dreyfus (1986) expertise scale. All participants
half hours to complete their model. After the allowed
that signed up as modelers self-identified as competent, pro-
time, we reconvened and discussed the results and ex-
ficient,orexpert;allnon-modelersself-identifiedasnoviceor
periencesoftheteams.
advancedbeginner.
TheModelers
The hackathon took place online at the SIPS 2021
conference on Friday 25 June 2021. Participants were
given the option to register in advance if interested.
In total, 36 people participated. Because mathematical
andcomputationalmodelingrequiressubstantialexper-
tise, we ensured that each team contained at least one
===== PAGE 5/19 =====
5
Box 2. The verbal theory of group helping be- incorporate the psychological processes that comprised
havior the given theory (see Box 1). In addition to modeling
thepsychologicalprocesses,someteamsincludedextra
Groupinfluenceon(helping)behavior elements in their model. Team 1 added components
We, humans, are social beings and have a ten- to capture social norms, particularities of the situation,
dency to help others that appear to need assis- andpeople’sbeliefs. Team3addedaparametertoindi-
tance. Furthermore, we also perform tasks for catethegravityofthesituation,componentstoaccount
which we feel responsible without an immedi- for individual differences, and a variable for people’s
atepersonalpayoff. Forinstance,wemaythrow assessment of the seriousness of the situation. Team 5
trashinabinwhiletakingastrollorputanarti- added components to incorporate people’s predisposi-
cleofclothingbackonitsoriginalrackwhenwe tion towards helping others. Team 6 added an addi-
decidenottobuyit. tionalempiricalfindingasanextraconstraint.
Such helping behaviors are common but not Various approaches were used to formalize the ver-
without exceptions. Latané and Darley (1970) bal theory (Box 1). Teams 1 and 5 used acyclic causal
identifiedthreepsychologicalprocessesthatthey diagrams, where the verbal theory’s psychological pro-
hypothesizetoaffecthelpingbehavior: cesses act on each other to cause the bystander effect
(see Figures D1 and D5 in Appendix D). Team 2 envi-
1. Diffusion of responsibility. This refers to
sionedthepsychologicalprocessesaslinearfunctionsof
the reduction in felt responsibility when
the people present (which are supposed to combine to
otherpeoplearepresentand/oralsowork-
producethephenomenon). Team4optedagainstmod-
ing on the same task. The more people
elingthepsychologicalprocessesinawaythatisrepre-
around,thelesspersonalresponsibilityin-
sentative of mechanisms with people, opting to specify
dividualswillfeel.
the effect of bystanders on the psychological processes
2. Evaluation apprehension. This refers to asexponentialfunctions(e.g.,feltresponsibilitytohelp
the fear of being judged by others when = 1/nx, for x > 0) and the probability of helping as
acting publicly. In other words, individu- a quotient of these functions. Similarly, Team 6 mod-
als fear making mistakes or having others eled the psychological processes as logistic and expo-
judgetheiractionsasinadequate. Thisfear nentialfunctionsthatincombinationproducedthephe-
makespeoplemorereluctanttotakeaction nomenon. Team3modeledthetheoryasanexitcontrol
incriticalsituations. loopthatbeganwithavictim’sinitialneedforhelp,with
the need for help increasing with every run of the loop
3. Pluralistic ignorance. This occurs when and terminating when a person’s assessment of the sit-
a group of individuals remains trapped in uation reached a certain threshold. For further details,
supporting a norm, belief or behavior that see Appendix D or the online supplementary materials
no or only a few group-members privately athttps://osf.io/9pdbJ/.
support. This state is upheld because ev-
eryone acts in support of the norm, belief Modelingexperiences
or behavior due to the false belief that ev-
The workshop provided many unique experiences
eryoneelsesupportsthenorm,belieforbe-
and lessons learned. Each team was given a chance to
havior;wheninfact,(almost)noonedoes.
express their experience in their own words. The next
subsections were written by the members of the team
Modelssummary in question, and, apart from some minor edits, are ex-
pressedintheirownwords.
Of the six teams, four created pseudocode of their
model, while the remaining two (Teams 4 and 6) even Team1
programmed their model in R (R Core Team, 2021).
The modeling experience for our team allowed us to
ThemodelsprogrammedinRproducedpatternssimilar
experience the modeling process first-hand. The mixed
toFigure1whendatawassimulatedfromthem. Wecan
group(onepersonwithmoremodelingexperienceand
considerthesetwomodelsworkingprototypes,because
others with less or no experience) was useful to get a
data can be simulated from these models and the pat-
good balance of technical and conceptual work. We,
tern that these data show resembles, qualitatively, the
the members of Team 1, tried to come up with mecha-
data pattern that represents the bystander effect phe-
nisticexplanationsbasedontheverbaltheoryprovided.
nomenon. Apart from Team 4, all teams attempted to
===== PAGE 6/19 =====
6
AsnoneofushadmuchexperiencewiththeRprogram- ferentprogramminglanguages,wasinstructiveaswell.
minglanguageatthebeginningofthisprocess,wewere Itemphasizedattentiontodetail(suchasensuringthat
hesitanttoincludemoreandmorenodes,variables,and the program does not run infinitely) and strengths of
modelsinourmodel. However,wehadtokeepthede- each team member in organizing specific branches of
sire to include more and fewer nodes and variables in the model. Overall, the approach made it clear which
our model in check and instead limited ourselves to a concepts needed to be refined, but it also highlights
fewthatseemedespeciallyinformative. whichpiecesofinformationareneededtocreaterobust
models,whichcouldguidefutureempiricalstudies.
Team2
Team4
The majority of group members were modeling be-
ginners;thus,themodeleralsoposedasateachertoin- We, the members of Team 4, thought that this is an
troducesomeconsiderationsnecessarytostartthepro- instructive approach to learn about: (a) challenges in
cess. While we, the members of Team 2, were not able modelingbyexposinghowdifferentassumptionscanaf-
tofinalizeourmodel, thewholegroupexperiencedthe fect results, (b) identifying relevant variables and their
hackathonasavaluablelearningexperienceforhowto functional interplay, (c) how/if different models place
even approach a modeling project. At first, we consid- emphasis on different aspects of the phenomenon, and
ered a variety of model types including an agent-based (d)ifmodelerscanreproduceaneffectwithoutdeepfa-
model with binary outcome (yes/no to help), which miliarity with the phenomenon. We started with defin-
we rejected based on the hackathon’s aim. We pro- ing the input variables of the model function that are
ceeded from a more theoretical perspective, spending necessary to reproduce the effect. Next, we discussed
most of the time on operationalizing the psychological howtocombinethosevariablesinafunctiontoproduce
constructs of the theory and how they would relate to thetargetedrelationbetweennumberofbystandersand
the number of bystanders and the probability to help. probability of helping. During this, we faced several
Given the limited time, our model could not be final- challenges. First, the concept of pluralistic ignorance
izedduringthehackathon;thus,wecouldnotevaluate wasdifficulttodefineandmodel. Second,wediscussed
whetheritwouldproduceoutputmatchingthedescrip- other factors that seemed likely to have an influence
tion of the phenomenon. Yet, the experience was valu- on the effect, but we were not certain how and if we
able and enjoyable, taking away some of the fears of should include them. Finally, as we are not experts on
modeling we had. However, having some basic foun- the bystander effect, we did not know how the factors
dational knowledge of the modeling process (e.g., gen- of our model compare in strength. In general, we de-
eral steps and considerations), which most of us were cided to value simplicity without sacrificing functional-
onlyintroducedtohere,couldhaveallowedforamore ity; includingasfewfactorsaspossibleandleavingthe
productivesession. Finally,combiningthethoughtsand weightsequal,butpotentiallyflexibleasadditionalfree
effortsofthevariousgroupsseemstobeafantasticway parameters.
ofmakingscientificprogresscollectively.
Team5
Team3
We thought it was challenging to work on a prob-
We found that developing the pseudo-code and dis- lem without expert domain-knowledge and with peo-
cussingamongteammembersreallyhelpedsharpenour ple with different backgrounds and experience in mod-
mentalpictureofhowthebystandereffectunfolds. This eling. It took time to come to a shared understanding
was partially because writing pseudo-code actively en- ofthephenomenonandthecomponents,andtodecide
forced certain steps (i.e., first we had to think about whether to model an individual or a group. Nonethe-
the involved parameters, then think through how they less, we came up with pseudo-code for a potential re-
changeoneaftertheother)anduncoveredareaswhere alization of the bystander effect. Many details of the
theoretical precision was lacking. The collaboration model remain open. We have not specified the func-
throughoutourteamalsoallowedustoappreciatehow tional forms of individual traits or the equation for the
the different teams scaled the degrees of freedom that probability of helping that includes all individual vari-
the verbal theory left us with. As the familiarity with ables. Our next step would be to read more about the
effects from similar phenomena varied throughout our bystandereffectandtolookforsimilar,existingmodels
team, we think it would have been helpful if the pro- to specify our functions. We realize that our model is
cess had been accompanied with a set of parameters extremely simple. For example, it does not assume in-
that were a priori defined by an expert. The transi- teractions between bystanders and does not track how
tion from theoretical work to detailed code, using dif- behavior within one individual may change with other
===== PAGE 7/19 =====
7
bystanders joining, leaving, or helping. Despite these problem of vagueness in existing psychological theo-
limitations,itwouldbeinterestingtoseetowhatextent ries6. Manymodelers’projectsappeartoprovideause-
our simple model can reproduce empirically observed ful teaching tool for first experiences with modeling.
patterns of the bystander effect. Ultimately, we believe SeeTable1foranoverviewofthelessonslearned.
that modeling psychological phenomena, such as the The experiencereports also provideclues for howto
bystander effect, is a team science task. Ideally, em- ensure that first experiences are positive. (a) Reserve
piricistswithdomainknowledgeandtheoreticianswith timeandresourcesforteamstogettoknowoneanother
modeling experience would work side-by-side. Theo- and the material. When team members are unfamiliar
reticians can push empiricists to be specific about their with one another, a shared understanding seems lack-
variables and assumptions. Empiricists can push theo- ing. Considerabletimeisrequiredtointerpretconcepts
reticians to build a model that is ‘complex enough’ to andprocessesinawaythatallteammemberscanagree
learnsomethingvaluableaboutthephenomenon. Such on. Givinggroups’timetoprepare—viagroupdiscus-
synergies between empiricists and theoreticians could sion,readingmaterial,andinteractionwithcontentex-
accelerateprogressinpsychologicalresearch. perts — could smoothen the subsequent modeling pro-
cess. (b) Provide a minimum skeleton appears useful
Team6
to get teams started. Making pseudo code or a similar
product available gives structure and a place to start
Ourteam,Team6,differedinmodelingexpertiseand
from. Providingmorethanonephenomenontoexplain
familiaritywiththebystandereffectandaccompanying
(i.e.,produce)couldconstrainthenumberofmodeling
theories. No team member had expertise with the by-
choices and could provide additional guidance for the
stander effect specifically, and two team members had
modeling team. There may also be cases where certain
somemathematicalmodelingandprogrammingexperi-
components of the verbal theory have been previously
ence. Wefirstdiscussedthephenomenonandagreedon
specified (i.e., formalized) in other theories7. Having a
an interpretation. The bystander effect as a single phe-
smallnumberofpre-formalizedtheorycomponentscan
nomenoncanbemodeledwithavastrangeofdifferent
addtothemodelingskeletonthatteamscanstartwith.
models. Tolimittherangeofpossiblemodels,weiden-
(c)Providerudimentarymodelingknowledgetopartic-
tified additional relevant phenomena to model (i.e., in
ipants. If time and resources are available, modeling
addition to the data pattern provided in Fig. 1). How-
novices could be familiarized with modeling possibili-
ever, constructing the model based on a better knowl-
ties and the most customary jargon and concepts in a
edge of the literature and considering the strength of
shortpreparatorylectureorhand-out.
evidence that supports the existence of the phenomena
would have led to more confidence in the final model
ReflectionontheHackathon
as an accurate representation of the bystander effect.
Regarding the hackathon experience, some of us found Afterthehackathon,participantswereaskedtoeval-
it difficult to translate the verbal phenomenon into a uate the division of labor in the teams and assess their
testable model, and others found that modeling only personalchangeinenthusiasmforformalmodeling. Re-
one phenomenon (without further constraints) was in- garding the division of labor, non-modelers responded
effectual given the large degrees of freedom. Work- that, despite the difference in expertise (power imbal-
ing interactively in a Google doc and a shared screen ance), they experienced the work as collaborative and
in Zoom worked well. Parallel working phases during felt that they could contribute to the model develop-
which one member drafted R code, another worked on ment. Thiswascorroboratedbythemodelers. Itseems
the visualization of the model, and others worked on that in none of the teams the modeler dominated the
theGoogledocatthesametimealsoworkedwell. team or was considered to take undue credit. Further-
more, participants were asked to rate their change in
Summaryoftheexperiences
interestinorenthusiasmforformalmodelingonafive-
point Likert scale ranging from 1 “it greatly decreased”
The experience reports from our hackathon reveal
several messages. Participants with limited technical
6Weacknowledgethatthevaguenessinpsychologicalthe-
background enjoyed being part of a modeling group.
oriesisnotnecessarilycausedbyalackofskillsoreducation.
The hackathon helped these participants to see for-
It is plausible that publishing and career incentives make it
malmodelingaslessintimidatingandincreasedpartic- advantageousforresearcherstobestrategicallyambiguousin
ipants’ curiosity about rigorous theoretical work. Sev- theirformulationoftheories, hypotheses, andresearchgoals
eral teams reported that going through the process of (Frankenhuisetal.,2022).
formalizing a verbal theory opened their eyes to the 7Ofcourse, providedthatthesetheorieshavebeenexten-
sivelyandsuccessfullytested.
===== PAGE 8/19 =====
8
Table1
Lessonslearned
Lesson Descriptionofthelesson
Influenceofassumptions Our attempt at modeling exposed how easily different assump-
tionscaninfluencetheoutputofthemodel.
Identifyingvariablesandrelationships Itwasinstructivetopracticetheidentificationoftherelevantvari-
ables (e.g., number of bystanders) and their relationships (e.g.,
linear,u-form,exponential,etc.).
Dependenceonsubjectknowledge It was instructive to see whether we could reproduce the effect
withoutsubstantialsubjectknowledgeoftheeffect.
Teamscience Team science, the collaboration of individuals with different ex-
pertiseandskills,canacceleratescientificprogress.
Explanationandunderstanding We learned and started to think more about what it means for
a theory to explain a phenomenon. Getting hands-on experi-
ence with how the epistemological pieces (phenomena, empiri-
cal and simulated data, statistical patterns, formal theory, formal
model)canfittogetherimprovedourunderstandingofhowtheo-
riescouldexplainphenomena,madetransparentbyformalmod-
elinganddatasimulation.
Expandability Spelling out the involved variables highlighted areas in which
additional factors, such as interindividual differences, could be
addedtothemodel.
to 5 “it greatly increased.” Of the 22 participants that limit. Only three hours were available for the
responded,onlythreeremainedunmoved(scoreda3), hackathon. If the results and the modeling experiences
while everybody else’s enthusiasm increased (scored a areanyindication,thisisaninsufficientamountoftime
4or5). forgettingtoknowyourteammates,familiarizingyour-
Twoadditionalcommentsareworthmakinginterms self with the material, and adequately formalizing the
of the hackathon organization. The first comment con- theory (point (a) above). As a solution, we could em-
cerns how or where to incorporate domain expertise. ulate the setup of most many-analysts projects and let
As stated in Section 2.1, the “bystander effect” phe- teamsorganizeandmodelintheirowntime. Weexpect
nomenon was selected because we expected it to be thatsuchanapproachwouldbenefitthequalityofmod-
well known and an explanatory verbal theory existed. els that the teams will create. At the same time, if the
We expected this to reduce the requirement of explicit main goal is to make formal modeling more accessible
domain expertise for the modeling teams. In response and increase enthusiasm for it, rather than generating
to our query about possible causes of the reported lim- high-qualitymodels,thelimitedhackathonformatmay
ited specificity that could be reached with the models, suffice. These goals could be potentially served even
the modeling teams indicated that, though the instruc- better in an in-person rather than online format. Keep-
tions were clear enough, they had been hampered by ing this in mind could be of benefit when designing fu-
thevaguenessofthetheory. Thiscouldbemitigatedby turemanymodelersprojectsand/orconductingfurther
having at least one team member with additional do- investigationintothisapproach.
main knowledge to fill in any gaps. Alternatively, such
domain knowledge could also be incorporated into the Conclusion
materials provided to the participants (e.g., point (c)
In this paper, we reported our Many Modelers
above). Both are viable solutions, though we expect
hackathonhostedattheSIPS2021conference. Ifbetter
thatthelatterwillresultinlowerdiversitybetweenthe
scientific theories through formal modeling can help to
modelsthattheteamscreate. Additionally,lowlevelsof
improve psychological science then more psychologists
domain knowledge in the teams or the material could
needtohavetheskillstodevelopsuchformaltheories.
alsobeaboon: thecreativityoftheteamscouldinsuch
Our proof of concept suggests that (a) a Many Model-
a case be less hampered by conventions and other re-
ersapproachcanbeusefulforgettingpsychologistsen-
strictivewaysofthinkingaboutthetopic.
thusiastic about formalizing theories and interested in
The second addition concerns the hackathon’s time
===== PAGE 9/19 =====
9
acquiringmodelingskills;(b)firstattemptsatsuchthe- izations might even, in turn, inform further investiga-
oretical models can be developed in a relatively short tionandmeasurementdevelopment.
period of time; and (c) it is possible for teams of psy- Secondly, while dedicating attention to formal mod-
chologists to develop formal models of theories even if elinginpsychologycurriculamightbeadvisable,itsim-
notallteammemberspossessmodelingexpertise. plementationwilllikelybeimpeded. Manycontributors
Onelongstandingchallengeinbuildingformalmod- to this project have been involved with teaching psy-
els of psychological theories is that psychological sci- chologyinnumerousdepartmentsacrosstheworld. We
encedegreeprograms(fromundergraduatetograduate sharethegeneralexperiencethatasubstantialpercent-
school) do not typically include training in theoretical age of psychology students have difficulties with math
modeling. This stands in contrast to training in statis- and we can expect that many will dread the thought
ticalmodeling, whichiswell-integratedintomanypro- of having to acquire the additional skills required for
grams across all fields of psychology. Given burgeon- mathematical and computational modeling (Carpenter
ing interest in formal theoretical modeling (e.g., Fried, & Kirk, 2017; Mulhern & Wylie, 2004, 2006). In gen-
2020; Guest and Martin, 2021), we believe that a va- eral, psychology programs are perceived to be (much)
riety of creative approaches are needed to address this lessmathematicallydemandingthanphysics,chemistry,
gap. computer science or bioengineering programs8. Thus,
As a proof of concept, this report provides modest theremightbegoodargumentstoreserveroominpsy-
evidence for the utility of a team-based approach for chology curricula for formal modeling, but if a sizeable
developingformalmodels,whilealsoraisingimportant percentage of psychology students can be convinced to
questions. If more psychologists become enthusiastic take these courses remains to be seen. However, if the
about theoretical modeling and interested in acquir- many-modelersapproachprovesviable,thenonlyafew
ing modeling skills, how should this training unfold? mightbeenoughtofosterproductiveformaltheoryde-
What specific skills are needed for psychological scien- velopment.
tists to feel confident in formal modeling? Should ed- Thirdly, while proposals for reorganizing psychology
ucation in psychological science be adjusted to provide departments to include theory-formation training are
a more rigorous mathematical and programming back- appealing (e.g., Borsboom et al., 2021), implementing
ground to facilitate modeling work? How should this such training might ultimately prove difficult in coun-
be accomplished (e.g., additional undergraduate math- tries in which well-funded research industries simply
ematics course requirements, elective graduate school do not exist. In such countries, psychology is, due to
options, summer workshop programs)? Such shifts, economicconstraints,almostentirelylimitedtoeducat-
though potentially difficult to implement, could repre- ing applied psychologists. Furthermore, researchers in
sent a new direction for the field of psychological sci- many developing countries face additional difficulties
ence, and could help psychologists to produce strong, due to, for instance, recurring political involvement in
specific, testable theories for pressing problems, rang- science education (e.g., rejecting the theory of evolu-
ing from cognitive processes to social dynamics, psy- tion; Abbott, 2013; David & Bálint, 2018) and the in-
chopathology,andbeyond. centivestructuresthatfavorsquantityoverquality(e.g.,
Tomoderateouroptimism,wewanttoaddsomecrit- researchersgetpaidperpublication;Chawla,2020). Is-
ical reflection and speculation. Firstly, as one of our suessuchastheseareboundtosetconstraintsontran-
reviewers noted, an obstacle on the road toward for- sculturalgeneralizabilityoftheinitiativeformorerigor-
mal psychological theories could be our limited ability ous theory development. International many-modelers
for proper, precise, and/or direct measurement. For in- collaborations, as described in this proof-of-concept,
stance, the theory we used contained the components could allow researchers to skirt these economical and
“diffusionofresponsibility”,“evaluationapprehension”, politicalconstraints.
and “pluralistic ignorance.” None of these have a fixed Finally, we want to offer a last point of speculation.
definition, operationalization, or measurement proce- Though the assessment of the models was beyond the
dure. However, this does not have to be a barrier scopeofthisproofofconcept,wecanoffertwopromis-
that prevents fruitful theorizing. Precise measurement ingavenuesforfuturemany-modelersprojectstoincor-
would offer clear guidance on how to formalize and porate such assessment. First, the robustness or sen-
incorporate something like “pluralistic ignorance” in a sitivity of the models could be assessed by simulating
model. We expect that the absence of such measure- data from the model over a wide variety of parameter
mentdoesnotprecludeformalization,butwouldallow
forapluralityofformalizations,somethinghintedatby 8However unpleasant this thought may be for the
computationally-mindedteachersandresearchersinpsychol-
themodelscreatedduringthishackathon. Suchformal-
ogy.
===== PAGE 10/19 =====
10
settingsandevaluatinghowoftenthestatisticalpattern that there were no conflicts of interest with respect to
is produced that represents the phenomenon. Second, theauthorshiporthepublicationofthisarticle.
hold-out phenomena could be used. After the mod-
eling teams have succeeded in creating a model that AuthorContributions
producestherequireddatapatterns, oneormoreaddi-
The conceptualization was done by NvD and LT.
tional phenomena are provided that should also be ac-
Thepreparationandorganizationofthehackathonwas
commodated. Inthiscase,themeritsofthemodelscan
done by NvD, AF, JdR, LT, SW, and DB. The modeling
beassessedintermsofchangestothemodelnecessary
during the hackathon was done by AG, AR, JA, (Team
toaccommodatethesenewphenomena–thefewer,the
1); DG, EA, AK, YSL (Team 2); JF, JH, JMR, YS (Team
better.
3);AGK,YO,MJ,AS,AK,AD(Team4);NW,HKP,MAW
Inconclusion,wehopethatourpilotprojecthelpsto
(Team 5); and ŠB, NAT, FS, SJG (Team 6). The orig-
move psychology towards more formal modeling. We
inal draft, except Section 2.4.2 and Appendix D, was
lookforwardtoseeingothershosttheirownManyMod-
written by NvD. The original draft of Section 2.4.2 and
elers projects to both formalize theories and inspire re-
Appendix D were written by the respective modeling
searchers’interestintheoreticalmodeling.
teams. Review and editing of the manuscript was done
by all authors. We recognize Jonas Haslbeck for mak-
AuthorContact
ingconsiderablecontributionstotheorganizationofthe
Corresponding author: Noah van Dongen, nnnvan- hackathonandthecontentofthemanuscript.
dongen@gmail.com
ORCID-NoahvanDongen: 000-0003-0387-7388 OpenSciencePractices
ORCID-AdamFinnemann: 0000-0003-4969-240X
This article is theoretical and does not include any
ORCID-JilldeRon: 0000-0001-7226-3836
dataandwasnotpreregistered,thereforeisnoteligible
ORCID-LeoTiokhin: 0000-0001-7333-0383
for Open Science badges. The entire editorial process,
ORCID-ShirleyB.Wang: 0000-0002-8583-3014
including the open reviews, is published in the online
ORCID-JohannesAlgermissen: 0000-0002-1694-7069
supplement.
ORCID-ElenaAltmann: 0000-0002-8602-9845
ORCID-ŠtˇepánBahník: 0000-0002-0579-6808
References
ORCID-AndreiDumbrava˘: 0000-0002-7981-8707
ORCID-SandraJ.Geiger: 0000-0002-3262-5609 Abbott, A. (2013). Romanian science in free fall. Na-
ORCID-DariaGerasimova: 0000-0001-9770-196X ture,500(7463),388–389.https://doi.org/10.
ORCID-AidaiGolan: 0000-0003-4406-4770 1038/500388a
ORCID-JudithHerbers: 0000-0001-7907-7956 Borsboom, D. (2013). Theoretical amnesia [Retrieved
ORCID-MarcJekel: 0000-0002-9146-0306 November20,2013].
ORCID-AntonKunnari: 0000-0002-2951-6399 Borsboom, D., van der Maas, H. L., Dalege, J., Kievit,
ORCID-Yih-ShiuanLin: 0000-0003-0566-7106 R.A.,&Haig,B.D.(2021).Theoryconstruction
ORCID-DavidMoreau: 0000-0002-3193-571X methodology: A practical framework for build-
ORCID-YvonneOberholzer: 0000-0003-1269-7792 ing theories in psychology. Perspectives on Psy-
ORCID-HannahPeetz: 0000-0002-1486-5342 chologicalScience,16(4),756–766.https://doi.
ORCID-JuliaRohrer: 0000-0001-8564-4523 org/10.1177/1745691620969647
ORCID-AdrianRothers: 0000-0002-2141-0338 Brehm, J. W., & Cohen, A. R. (1963). Explorations in
ORCID-FelixSchönbrodt: 0000-0002-8282-3910 cognitivedissonance.AcademicPress.
ORCID-YashvinSeetahul: 0000-0001-7487-3398 Carpenter, T. P., & Kirk, R. E. (2017). Are psychol-
ORCID-AnnaSzabelska: 0000-0002-9690-1043 ogystudentsgettingworseatmath?:Trendsin
ORCID-NatashaTonge: 0000-0001-7670-7991 themathskillsofpsychologystatisticsstudents
ORCID-NicoleWalasek: 0000-0003-4411-319X across 21 years. Educational Studies, 43(3),
ORCID-MarleneWerner: 0009-0002-9015-3168 282–295.https://doi.org/10.1080/03055698.
ORCID-DennyBorsboom: 0000-0001-9720-4162 2016.1277132
Chawla, D. S. (2020). Russian journals retract more
than800papersafter‘bombshell’investigation.
ConflictofInterestandFunding Science, 367(6474), 132. https://doi.org/10.
1126/science.aba8099
TheworkbyNvD,AF,JH,JdR,andDBwassupported
by NWO Vici grant nr.181.029. The author(s) declare
===== PAGE 11/19 =====
11
David, D., & Bálint, M. (2018). Don’t decouple roma- Robinaugh,D.J.,Haslbeck,J.M.,Ryan,O.,Fried,E.I.,
nianuniversitiesfrominternationalexcellence. & Waldorp, L. J. (2021). Invisible hands and
Nature, 560(7717), 167–168. https://doi.org/ fine calipers: A call to use formal theory as a
10.1038/d41586-018-05876-6 toolkit for theory construction. Perspectives on
Dreyfus, H. L., & Dreyfus, S. E. (1986). Mind over ma- Psychological Science, 16(4), 725–743. https://
chine: The power of human intuition and exper- doi.org/10.1177/1745691620974697
tiseintheeraofthecomputer.TheFreePress. Society for the Improvement of Psychological Science.
Fischer, P., Krueger, J. I., Greitemeyer, T., Vogrin- (2021). Sips: June 23-25, remote [June 25].
cic, C., Kastenmüller, A., Frey, D., Heene, M., https://www.improvingpsych.org/SIPS2021/
Wicher, M., & Kainbacher, M. (2011). The Thagard,P.(1988).Computationalphilosophyofscience.
bystander-effect:Ameta-analyticreviewonby- MITPress.
stander intervention in dangerous and non- van Dongen, N., van Bork, R., Finnemann, A., van der
dangerous emergencies. Psychological Bulletin, Maas, H., Robinaugh, D., Haslbeck, J. M. B., &
137(4), 517–537. https://doi.org/10.1037/ Borsboom, D. (2022). Improving psychological
a0023304 explanations [April 13]. https://doi.org/10.
Frankenhuis, W., Panchanathan, K., & Smaldino, P. E. 31234/osf.io/qd69g
(2022). Strategic ambiguity in the social sci- van Rooij, I., & Baggio, G. (2021). Theory before the
ences [July 23]. https://doi.org/10.31222/ test: How to build high-verisimilitude explana-
osf.io/kep5b tory theories in psychological science. Perspec-
Fried, E. (2020). Lack of theory building and testing tives on Psychological Science, 16(4), 682–697.
impedesprogressinthefactorandnetworklit- https://doi.org/10.1177/1745691620970604
erature. Psychological Inquiry, 31(4), 271–288.
https://doi.org/10.1080/1047840X.2020.
1853461 AppendixA
Guest, O., & Martin, A. E. (2021). How computational Formalizationofthecognitivedissonancetheory
modeling can force theory building in psycho- Here we provide the formalization of the cognitive dis-
logicalscience.PerspectivesonPsychologicalSci- sonance example discussed in the introduction. Part of
ence, 16(4), 789–802. https://doi.org/10. theverbaltheoryofcognitivedissonancetheorywasde-
1177/1745691620970585 scribedbyBrehmandCohen(1963)asfollows:
Harris,R.J.(1976).Theuncertainconnectionbetween
verbal theories and research hypotheses in so- Theamountofdissonanceexperiencedbytheper-
cial psychology. Journal of Experimental Social son depends on the ratio of dissonant to consonant ele-
Psychology, 12(2), 210–219. https://doi.org/ ments, where each element is weighted according to its
10.1016/0022-1031(76)90071-8 importancetohim. ... Insum,themagnitudeofthedisso-
Latané, B., & Darley, J. M. (1970). The unrespon- nanceexperienceddependsdirectlyonthenumberand/or
sive bystander: Why doesn’t he help? Appleton- importanceofdissonantcognitionsrelativetothenumber
Century-Croft. and/or importance of consonant cognitions (Brehm and
Mulhern, G., & Wylie, J. (2004). Changing levels of Cohen,1963,p. 5).
numeracy and other core mathematical skills Fromwhichthey‘derive’:
among psychology undergraduates between
1992 and 2002. British Journal of Psychology, [W]iththerelativeattractivenessofthetwoalter-
95(3), 355–370. https://doi.org/10.1348/ natives held constant, the more attractive they both are,
0007126041528176 thegreateristhemagnitudeofthedissonance(p. 6).
Mulhern, G., & Wylie, J. (2006). Mathematical prereq- Theoriginalexpectedconsequenceofcognitive
uisites for learning statistics in psychology: As- dissonance theory was that when the relative attrac-
sessing core skills of numeracy and mathemat- tiveness of two options, one chosen and one rejected
ical reasoning among undergraduates. Psychol- (e.g., vanilla and chocolate ice cream), was held con-
ogy Learning Teaching, 5(2), 119–132. https: stant but both options were more attractive in abso-
//doi.org/10.2304/plat.2005.5.2.119 luteterms(e.g.,bothmadewithhigherqualitycream),
RCoreTeam.(2021).R:Alanguageandenvironmentfor then the magnitude of a person’s cognitive dissonance
statistical computing. R Foundation for Statisti- should increase (Brehm and Cohen, 1963, p. 6). Har-
cal Computing. Vienna, Austria. https://www. ris (1976) showed that, according to this theory, there
R-project.org/ are three ways that the absolute attractiveness of the
optionscouldbeincreasedwhiletherelativeattractive-
===== PAGE 12/19 =====
12
nessremainsunchanged: AppendixB
UserManual
1. Increase the positive attributes of both options in
Dearmodelers,
equalamounts(e.g.,higherqualityingredients).
Thank you for participating in the Many Mod-
elers hackathon at SIPS 2021! This document presents
2. Decreasethenegativeattributesofbothoptionsin
abriefoverviewofwhattoexpectduringthesession.
equalamounts(e.g.,lowerqualityingredients).
Why?
3. Increase the positive attributes of the chosen op- Many psychological theories exist, but their
tion and reduce the negative attributes of the re- scope, assumptions, and explanatory power are often
jectedoptionbythesameamount. unclear. One way to evaluate a theory is to build a for-
mal model and observe if the model can produce rele-
According to the theory, these manipulations result in
vantphenomena. However,verbaltheoriescanoftenbe
increasing dissonance (A), decreasing dissonance (B),
formalizedinmanyways. Byworkinginteamsofmany
andleavingcognitivedissonanceunchanged(C),while
modelers we can illuminate the many possible formal-
only the first option is consistent with the expectation
izationstoseewhichproducetheexpectedphenomena
madefromtheverbaltheory.
andhowtheydoso(andhavesomefunaswell)!
Harris (1976) demonstrated this through for-
When?
malizing the given cognitive dissonance theory. Con-
The hackathon takes place via Zoom on the
cretely,heshowedthatonecanformalizethefirstquote,
25th of June from 8:00 till 11:00 CEST.The Zoom link
forthespecialcaseofequallyimportantcognitionsas
forthehackathoncanbefoundonourLandingPage
What?
d = f(n +n )/(n +n ),
c u c u During this hackathon, you and other teams of
scientists will formalize the same theory. Every team
where d is the magnitude of the distance; n ,n repre-
c u
gets the same theory (which is available at our OSF
sentthenumberofpositiveandnegativefeaturesofthe
folder) and phenomenon that the theory purports to
chosen (c) and rejected (u) alternatives, and f repre-
explain (which will be presented at the beginning of
sents any monotonically increasing function of n (Har-
thehackathon). Youwillhaveapproximately2hoursto
ris, 1976, p. 213). Brehm and Cohen (1963) provided
work towards a computational or mathematical model
no definition of “relative attractiveness” and “the more
of the theory. In the last half hour of the hackathon,
attractive they both are” (total attractiveness). Thus,
wewillreconvenetogiveteamstheopportunitytodis-
Harris (1969) employed Greenwald’s (1969) different
cuss their work and evaluate whether their formaliza-
ratingofrelativeattractiveness,whichheformalizedas
tion produces the phenomenon (i.e., shows behavior
a ×(n +n ), a ×n , or (n +n )/(n +n ). that is qualitatively similar to the specifics of the phe-
c c u u u c u c u
nomenon).
If this formalization is incorporated in the definition of Weknowtwohoursisaveryshorttimeforde-
d,thisyields velopingafullfledgedandworkingmodel! Ourrecom-
mendation is therefore to focus on writing some pseu-
d = f[n c+n u,a c]/(n c+n u). docode describing what you want the model to look
like before programming the actual model (see exam-
Inthiscase,Harris(1976)considereda =(n +n ),(n +
c c u c pleofpseudocode). Thiswillhelpensurethatallteams
n )asplausibleformalizationofthetotalattractiveness
u willhavesomethingtoshowfortheirwork. Eachteam
ofthechosenandrejectedalternatives. However,inthis
will be assigned a Google Doc (accessible via the OSF
formalizationofthecognitivedissonancetheory,a can
c folder) in which this pseudo-code / model description
beincreasedwhilen remainsconstantby:
c canbeadded. Fortheactualmodel,youarefreetouse
any programming language and software. We kindly
(A) increasingn andn bythesameamount,increas-
c u
request to share a copy of your model (finished or un-
ingd;
finished)ormakeitaccessibletousifstoredonline.
(B) decreasingn andn bythesameamount,decreas- Howdoesitend?
c u
ingd; We leave half an hour at the end of the
hackathon for a brief evaluation. The (first few) teams
(C) increasing n and decreasing n by the same
c u areaskedtobrieflypresent(max5minutes,0-3slides):
amount,leavingd unchanged.
1. whattheydid;
===== PAGE 13/19 =====
13
2. what the challenges/problems were they faced; # If more actions have a maximum
and value, select at random
if length(selected_action) > 1:
3. their model or what their model (should) look(s)
random selected_action
like.
# Observe outcome by drawing from
These presentations might spark questions and discus-
the probability distribution
sions, which we will go into as long as there is time.
# of the selected action
We would like to plan a longer debriefing and evalua-
outcome = sample from
tionsessionafterSIPS.Ifyouwanttobepresentatthis
P(selected_action)
post-SIPS session, make sure that we have your email
address(byfillingouttheregistrationform).
# Update expected outcome
Deliverable(s)?
prediction_error = old expected
Wedon’tknowhowthishackathonwillgoand
outcome - outcome
ifthismanymodelersapproachisviablefordeveloping
new expected outcome = old expected
formal theories. It could be that this hackathon proves
outcome + prediction error
interesting enough to write a paper about. If this is
the case, all contributing teams will be invited as co-
save selected action
authorsiftheyallowtheirmodelanddocumentationto
contributetothepaperandbemadepubliclyavailable.
return(selected actions)
DetailsaboutthiswillbeprovidedafterSIPS.
Ifyouhaveanyquestions:
If preferred, you could also use a flowchart
1. Before the Hackathon starts: please contact as a graphical alternative to the pseudocode described
nnnvandongen@gmail.com. Also, please join our above.
SIPS 2021 Slack channel (#7a_many-modelers)
foreasycommunicationbetweenparticipants.
2. During the hackathon: use the chat in the Zoom
session.
Wearelookingforwardtomeetingyouall!
Best,
TheManyModelersteam
AppendixC
Pseudocode
Pseudocode is used to describe an algorithm or func-
tionstepbystepwithouttakingintoaccountthesyntax
of any specific programming language. The example
underneath shows a pseudocode of a model in which
a person tries to maximize positive outcomes (in any
given time frame) by always choosing the action with
thehighestexpectedreward.
Input: Thesetofactionsapersoncantake
Output: Actionstakenoverthespecifiedtimeframe
# Initialize expectations
expected_outcome = 0 * length(actions)
While time > 0:
selected_action = which action
max(expected_outcome)
===== PAGE 14/19 =====
14
AppendixD
Modelsdescriptions
Team 1
We started from the inputs (number of people present), outputs (probability of helping),
and the three underlying psychological processes proposed by Latané and Darley (1970):
1. Diffusion of responsibility (a person feels less responsible if more people are around);
2. Evaluation apprehension (a person does not worry about incorrect behavior per se, but
whether it is discovered and judged negatively);
3. Pluralistic ignorance (a societal norm might hardly be endorsed and thus not visible in
people’s actual behavior).
FigureD1
GraphicalrepresentationofthemodeldevelopedbyTeam1.
Prior belief that
p(other people have a
behavior X is
global disposition for
correct
negative evaluation)
p(showing
p(belief NOT showing
p(evaluated behavior X)
X is mistake)
negatively)
p(I am
N people present who responsible)
p(evaluated
show behavior X + (intercept)
by others)
positive/
Societal norm is p(other people have a negative/
that behavior X is N people being global disposition to U-shaped
present
correct attend to others)
Pluralistic ignorance Diffusion of responsibility Evaluation apprehension
We then identified additional variables that should play a role in bringing about these
processes — some of them describing society at large (i.e., is behavior X a societal norm?), some
describing the particular situation (i.e., How many people present show behavior X?), and some
describing stable, “trait-like” beliefs held by the person in question (i.e., Do people pay attention
to what others do, in general? Do people evaluate others negatively, in general?). Finally, we
postulated “state”-like beliefs that the person holds in the particular situation. These beliefs cor-
respondtothethreepsychologicalprocessesproposedbyLatanéandDarley; theyareinfluenced
both by the circumstances and the person’s trait-like beliefs.
Our model represents psychological variables with nodes. Nodes are connected via edges
representing causal influences. Each node has a certain “intercept” as its starting value before
considering the influences by other variables — e.g., a high general belief that one will be nega-
tively evaluated by others. Beyond this intercept, incoming edges determine the degree (slope)
===== PAGE 15/19 =====
15
by which a node’s overall value will be affected by the values of other nodes, similar to a regres-
sion. All belief variables can have values between 0 and 1, meaning that the sum of all inputs
needs to be transformed, e.g., via a beta distribution or softmax.
In conclusion, we believe that our model produces the bystander effect and features the
three psychological processes provided in the instructions. We started implementing the model
in computer code in R, but did not finish.
Team 2
Our model considers a situation where one person suddenly requires help in a public
location with N other people present. The effect that an increasing number of people decreases
one’s probability to help is called Diffusion of Responsibility (direct effect of N).
Next, we identified the main aspect of Evaluation Apprehension to be the “Fear of Making
Mistakes” (FoMM), which we defined as an individual trait parameter (FoMM). It describes a
particular individual’s tendency to be afraid of interpreting the situation incorrectly and acting
needlessly or even making it worse. We would expect this fear to intensify with increasing
numbers of people around (e.g., FoMM*N).
Lastly, we discussed Pluralistic Ignorance to be the experience of group pressure. How-
ever, we considered that an individual’s susceptibility to conform to other people’s actions, i.e.,
theNeedtoConform(NtC)tonothelping, maybethemoresuitableterm. Thisparameterwould
also increase with the number of other people not helping (e.g., NtC*N).
Each of these parameters would contribute negatively to one’s own probability to help.
Although we operationalized the hypothesized effects, we did not succeed in combining them
into a model within the given time frame.
Team 3
To develop our model, we first considered which parameters would be necessary to cap-
ture the relevant features of a bystander situation. Discussing our assumptions about what it
would take for this situation to take place made us consider parameters beyond those directly
specified in the bystander effect theory. As we were specifically interested in how the dynamics
unfold over time, we decided on a model that allows us to assess these changes over time. Once
we had settled on a set of parameters, we wrote simple pseudo-code that conceptualizes the
model and would help us to implement it.
As input parameters, the program needs to know the number of potential helpers
(N_in_situation, see also Figure X) as well as the initial gravity of the situation (Ini-
tial_need_for_help). For each helper, we also added some input parameters to allow for in-
terindividual differences – these should not matter for producing the general pattern, but we
thought adding them would be fun. The program first initializes some variables to get going.
Then, it enters a process that may be repeated multiple rounds. Every potential helper updates
their assessment of the situation (Perceived_need_for_help) in a manner that ensures some sta-
bility over time, and sensitivity to changes in the objective situation, but also some continuous
decrease over time (“nobody has helped so far, so there’s probably no need for help”). Every
helper also has a certain Felt_responsibility, which importantly is a function of N_in_situation
(ensuringdiffusionofresponsibility). Perceived_need_for_helpandFelt_responsibilityaretrans-
lated into a dichotomous decision (Help). If nobody helps, the gravity of the situation (Objec-
tive_need_for_help) increases and every helper re-assesses the Perceived_need_for_help.
To actually produce the bystander effect, we would need to additionally specify the func-
tions linking the variables–for example, Felt_responsibility needs to be at maximum if only one
person is around (N_in_situation == 1) and then asymptotically drop towards some minimum
===== PAGE 16/19 =====
16
FigureD2
GraphicalrepresentationofthemodeldevelopedbyTeam3.
Input variables: Optional interindividual differences:
N_in_situation For every person in situation
# Objective_helpfulness: a child may be less capable of helping
Objective_helpfulness than an adult
Initial_need_for_help
Fear_to_make_fool_of_themselves # Initial_need_for_help: situations may vary in their gravity
Initialization:
Objective_need_for_help := Initial_need_for_help
For every person in situation
Perceived_need_for_help :=f( Initial_need_for_help )
Updating the assessment of the situation:
For every person in situation
Perceived_need_for_help :=g( Objective_need_for_h e l p Perceived_need_for_help ) - 1 # -1 because “if nobody helped so far, no help is needed”
Felt_responsibility :=h( Objective_helpfulnes s N_in_situation ) # More people lead to fewer feelings of responsibility
Tendency_to_help :=i( Perceived_need_for_ h e l p Felt_responsibility )
Help :=j( Tendency_to_help Fear_to _ m a ke_fool_of_themselves ) # Tendency to help does not always translate into behavior
If anybody helps: If nobody helps:
Objective_need_for_help := Objective_need_for_hel p + 1
# This implies an escalation of the situation (e.g., somebody has been stabbed)
End of situation # Here, we may specify additional conditions in which the situation ends (e.g., timeout)
as N_in_situation approaches infinity. Two team members started to program the model (one in
R, the other in Matlab) although we ran out of time at that point.
Team 4
We used an as-if model whose transformations from input to output variables do not
relate to psychologically meaningful processes. We predicted that the subjective norm and the
felt responsibility of helping others would contribute to helping. We further predicted that felt
responsibility decreases exponentially with the number of bystanders n. Finally, we predicted
that both factors would add up to the value of helping:
Value of Helping:
value of helping = subjective norm to help others +felt responsibility to help (n) (D1)
1
felt responsibility to help (n) = (D2)
nf
===== PAGE 17/19 =====
17
FigureD3
GraphicalrepresentationofthemodeldevelopedbyTeam4.
Felt Fear of being Pluralistic
Subjective norm
responsibility judged ignorance
to help others
(equation 1.2) (equation 2.2) (equation 2.3)
Value of not
Value of helping
helping
(equation 1.1)
(equation 2.1)
facilitation inhibition
p(helping)
(equations 3 and 4)
where f > 0 is a free parameter that determines the slope of the exponential function.
We further predicted that the sum of the fear of being judged and pluralistic ignorance would
determine the value of not helping, and that both factors would increase exponentially with n:
value of not helping = fear of being judged (n) +pluralistic ignorance (n) (D3)
Fear of being judged and pluralistic ignorance:
fear of being judged (n) = nj (D4)
pluralistic ignorance (n) = ni (D5)
where j > 0 and i > 0 are free parameters that determine the slope of the exponential function.
The probability of helping is the value of the action of helping divided by the sum of the values
of helping and not helping:
value of not helping = fear of being judged(n)+pluralistic ignorance(n)
===== PAGE 18/19 =====
18
To deal with potentially negative numbers for values, we extend this formula to:
value of helping
p(helping) = (D6)
value of helping+value of not helping
The model has been implemented in R (R Core Team, 2021). The arbitrary values of 2 for the
subjective norm and 0.3 for f, j, and i yielded a bystander effect as desired.
Team 5
Each individual has an initial inclination to help (i.e., a prior probability of helping) and
three traits which alter their probability of helping: the feeling of personal responsibility, the
fear of being judged by others, and the belief about whether others are likely to help or not.
The probability of helping is positively associated with the feeling of personal responsibility and
negatively associated with their fear of being judged (Figure 1). We assume that the feeling of
personal responsibility decreases with the number of bystanders and that the strength of this
association is moderated by the individual’s belief about whether anyone else is likely to help.
The higher this belief, the more steeply the feeling of responsibility declines with the number
of bystanders. Finally, we assume that the fear of being judged increases with the number of
bystanders.
Based on this setup, we can study how an individual’s probability of helping changes as
a function of the number of bystanders and different trait levels. Specifically, we could explore
different levels of the feeling of responsibility (e.g., low, high, or moderate) in combination
with different functional forms of the decline (e.g., linear or nonlinear). For example, we could
comparetwoindividualsthatbothexperiencethattheirfeelingsofresponsibilitylinearlydecline
with the number of bystanders. However, one individual may show a higher average feeling of
responsibility than the other. We could also explore different levels of the belief about whether
othersarelikelytohelpandtheaveragefearofbeingjudged. Aswiththefeelingofresponsibility,
we can explore different ways in which fear increases as a function of the number of bystanders.
Based on our pseudo-code, we expect that our model would reproduce the bystander effect and
yield insights into the extent to which this effect depends on an individual’s trait levels. We
would implement our model in R or Python.
Team 6
To build the initial model, we used the programming language R (Version 4.1.1; R Core
Team, 2021) and a simple mathematical function that would result in the mathematical prop-
erties corresponding to our interpretation of the bystander effect. Based on a finding from the
literatureonthebystandereffect(Grofman,1974),wefurtherspecifiedthattheoverallprobabil-
ity of at least one person helping should remain approximately constant when keeping all other
characteristics of the situation unchanged (an additional effect). The initial model thus specified
theprobabilityofabystanderhelpingas,wherenisthenumberofbystandersandPanyoneisthe
(cid:16) (cid:17)1
probability that at 1− 1−P n , one person would help in the situation, which is determined
anyone
by the features of the situation, characteristics of the involved individuals, etc. The proposed
modelsuccessfullyreproducesthebystandereffectaswellastheadditionaleffectweintroduced
to limit the range of possible models. We next incorporated two variables into the model which
represent psychological processes assumed to influence P : the felt responsibility and the
anyone
fear of negative evaluation. We chose plausible functional relationships of these variables with
other variables. For example, we used an exponential function for the felt responsibility and a
===== PAGE 19/19 =====
19
logistic function for the fear of negative evaluation (for details, see Figure 1). When we fully
programmed the model, we were able to verify that it produced the desired bystander effect,
and plausible values for the assumed internal psychological variables.
FigureD4
GraphicalrepresentationofthemodeldevelopedbyTeam5.
helping
+ + - -
Fear of
responsibility
judgement
?
Belief about - - + +
helping norm
N
FigureD5
GraphicalrepresentationofthemodeldevelopedbyTeam6.
Scope of current model:
Explain helping behavior when nobody else is helping (i.e., only passive bystanders).
Arrows are variables, boxes are computations.
Environment Person + logistic(x=n, d=5, a=1, c=0, z=fear.max)
n_bystanders_passive perceived_n_by_passive felt_responsibility =
= henceforward simply: n - 1-(1-p_anyone)^
(1/n)
fear_neg_eval
felt_responsibility
+
helping_behavior felt_responsibility *
= beh_impuls (1-fear_neg_eval) -
Constant parameters / assumptions:
* fear.max = 0.2: maximum probability that somebody is not helping because of fear
* p_anyone = 0.75: maximum of responsibility (probability to help if you are alone if fear were 0)
* d = 5: fear is average when 5 bystanders are around