
===== PAGE 1/11 =====
Opendata:Yes
Meta-Psychology,2025,vol9,MP.2023.4008 Openmaterials:Yes Editedby:MattN.Williams
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2023.4008 Opencode:Yes Reviewedby:Gjalt-JornPeters,TobiasDienlin,LisaSpitzer
Articletype:OriginalArticle Openandreproducibleanalysis:Yes Analysisreproducedby:LucijaBatinovi´c
PublishedundertheCC-BY4.0license Openreviewsandeditorialprocess:Yes AllsupplementaryfilescanbeaccessedatOSF:
Preregistration:No https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/QN7XM
Data is not available upon request
Ian Hussey1
1UniversityofBern,Switzerland
Many journals now require data sharing and require articles to include a Data Avail-
abilityStatement. However,severalstudiesoverthepasttwodecadeshaveshownthat
promissory notes about data sharing are rarely abided by and that data is generally
not available upon request. This has negative consequences for many essential as-
pectsofscientificknowledgeproduction,includingindependentverificationofresults,
efficient secondary use of data, and knowledge synthesis. I assessed the prevalence
ofdatasharinguponrequestinarticlesemployingtheImplicitRelationalAssessment
Procedure published within the last 5 years. Of 52 articles, 42% contained a Data
Availability Statement, most of which stated that data was available upon request.
Thisrosefrom0%in2018to100%in2022,indicatingachangeinjournals’policies.
However,only27%ofarticles’authorsactuallyshareddata.Amongarticlesstatingthat
datawasavailableuponrequest,only17%shareddatauponrequest. Thepresenceof
Data Availability Statements was not associated with higher rates of data sharing (p
= .55), indicating a lack of adherence to journals’ policies. Results replicate those
found elsewhere: data is generally not available upon request, and promissory Data
Availability Statements are typically not adhered to. Issues, causes, and implications
areconsidered.
Keywords: datasharing,dataavailabilitystatement,implicitrelationalassessment
procedure,implicitsocialcognition
Verifiabilityisacornerstoneofthescientificmethod. ing are to be applauded (e.g., Evans, 2022), as data
Sharingresearchdataiscrucialfortheadvancementof sharing is essential to independent verification of re-
scientific knowledge through verification. Data sharing sults, efficient secondary use of data, and knowledge
promotes transparency, reproducibility, and credibility synthesis. Journals are also joined by both profes-
in scientific research, which are essential for maintain- sional societies (e.g., APA, APS, and ACBS) and the
ingtheintegrityofthescientificprocess(Munafòetal., world’slargestresearchfundingagencies(e.g.,NIHand
2017). One way in which journals have sought to pro- EU) in encouraging or requiring data sharing (Nunes,
mote data sharing is through the use of Data Availabil- 2021). The motivation for this study, and the choice
ityStatements,whichprovideinformationontheavail- of the specific literature that I examined, came from
ability and accessibility of research data. In this arti- my own experience of the difficulty of obtaining data
cle, I examine the prevalence of both Data Availability upon request. Recently, I received peer reviews for a
Statements and actual data sharing upon request and manuscriptIwrotethatmeta-analysedthereliabilityof
therelationshipbetweenthem. theImplicitRelationalAssessmentProcedure(IRAP;for
ItisincreasinglycommonforjournalstorequireData reliability generalisation meta-analysis see Hussey and
Availability Statements to be reported in submissions. Drake, 2020). Reviewers raised the concern that the
Typically, these journal policies require that a URL to data,whichcamefromtworesearchgroups,maynotbe
thepubliclyavailabledataisreportedinthemanuscript representative of IRAP data collected in other labs. To
or, failingthat, theauthorsstatethatthedatais1 avail- try to address this point, I contacted other researchers
ableuponrequest. Naturally, policiesalsoallowforsit- whohadpublishedresearchusingtheIRAPtoaskthem
uations where it is not possible to share the data for tocontributetheirdatatothemeta-analysis. Often,au-
stated reasons. These policies therefore build on the thors could not be contacted, didn’t reply, or declined,
same principle that many funding organisations have even when their published articles contained explicit
built their data-sharing policies around, namely that
data should be "as open as possible, and as closed as
1Iusedataassingularthroughout,followingbothitsmodal
usage (Google Trends, 2023) and the recommendations of
necessary"(EuropeanCommission,2023).
leadingstyleguidesforthelastdecade(Rogers,2012).
Journal policies requiring and explicating data shar-
===== PAGE 2/11 =====
2
statementsthattheywouldsharedatauponrequest. author’s requirements, cannot be publicly shared but
Examination of the literature showed that this anec- can be shared privately are available upon request
dotal experience was the norm rather than the excep- (yes, really!) from the author through my personal
tion. Oversixdecadesago,Wolins(1962)observedthat email address (ian.hussey@icloud.com). This address
only24%of37articlespublishedinAPAjournals,which should remain active over time even if I move between
had policies requiring data sharing upon request, actu- institutions. Otherdatasetswereprovidedtomeonthe
allyshareddatauponrequest. Nearlytwodecadesago, agreement that I would not share them with others,
Wicherts et al. (2006) replicated this effect, observing evenprivately. Thesedatasetsmaybeavailablefromthe
that only 25.7% of 249 articles published in APA jour- originalauthorsuponrequest. Theexistenceandavail-
nals shared data upon request. More recently, Teder- abilityofeachdataset,aswellascontactdetailsforthe
soo et al. (2021) examined data sharing upon request responsiblepersons,aredocumentedinaseparateOSF
across many fields. Inspection of their openly available project(https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/NUGZB).
dataset revealed that 40.4% of 57 psychology articles
shared data upon request. A sufficient number of such Preregistration
studiesexaminingtherateofdatasharinguponrequest
This study was not preregistered and its results
acrossmany areasof sciencehave beenconductedthat
shouldthereforebeconsideredtobeexploratory.
thereis,asofveryrecently,asystematicreviewofthem.
Hamiltonetal.(2023)concludedthatacross13studies EthicalApproval
the observed rate of data sharing upon request ranges
from 0% to 37% (no meta-analysis was conducted due Whether or not this study required ethical approval
tomethodologicaldifferencesbetweenstudies). Finally, was discussed extensively with peers and with consul-
rather than treating the rate of data sharing upon re- tation of ethical guidelines (i.e., those by the Ameri-
quest as a static property, Vines et al. (2014) demon- canAPA:AmericanPsychologicalAssociation,2016;the
strated that it decays over time: for every one-year in- German DPGs: Deutschen Gesellschaft für Psychologie,
crease in article age, the odds of the data set still be- 2022; and the British BPS: Oates et al., 2021) prior to
ing reported as extant (either shared upon request or its conduction. The consensus among these guidelines
declined to shared but reported to exist) decreased by was that this work did not constitute “human subjects
17%. research”andthereforedidnotrequireapproval. Previ-
Only one study to date has examined the preva- ous studies assessing data sharing upon request have
lenceandefficacyofDataAvailabilityStatementswithin adopted a similar position (e.g., Vines et al., 2014).
the behavioral research community, finding a very low Meta-scienceresearchsuchasthisisverysimilartothe
prevalence (6.2%: Lear et al., 2023). However, this conductionofameta-analysis. Inmostjurisdictions,in-
study was limited to the inspection of a single jour- cluding that in which this work was conducted, meta-
nal, theJournalofContextualBehavioralScience. This analyses do not require ethical approval because they
studyseekstoprovideconvergentevidenceviadifferent have no human subjects. To draw a closer compari-
means,bystudyingdatasharinginpublicationsusinga son that provides an intuition pump: individual par-
task generated by and mostly used by the behavioral ticipant data meta-analyses (IPD-MA) involve contact-
researchcommunity,agnostictowhichjournalitispub- ing authors of original studies for access to the par-
lished in. This study goes beyond Lear et al. (2023) ticipant level data, but also do not require ethical ap-
bystudyingwhetherDataAvailabilityStatementstrans- proval. The human subjects in an IPD-MA are the par-
lateintoactualdatasharinguponrequest. Additionally, ticipants in the original studies, not the researchers be-
whereasLearetal.(2023)examinedarticlespublished ing asked to share that data. The act of contacting re-
in a single year, the current work examines a five-year searchers to ask them to share data, and reporting the
periodtoexaminetrendsacrossthem. rateofdataavailability,involvesnohumansubjectsand
therefore does not require ethical approval for human
Method&Results subjects research. Furthermore, requiring ethical ap-
provaltorequestdatafromauthors,orquantifytherate
DataAvailabilityStatement
of availability, is not in line with any common set of
All data and code to reproduce the ethical guidelines (e.g., American Psychological Asso-
results reported here are available at ciation, 2016; Deutschen Gesellschaft für Psychologie,
https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/8SP7E. All IRAP 2022; Oates et al., 2021). This manuscript does lightly
datasetsthatcouldbepubliclysharedarealsoavailable summarise some of the types of reasons that people
at that link. Some datasets that, due to the original gavefornotbeingabletoshare,butthisisbrief,anony-
mous, and descriptive, and is in line with the norms
===== PAGE 3/11 =====
3
of our field: we would not typically require ethical ap- Table1
provaltoquoteorparaphrasefromanotherresearcher’s
correspondencewithus(e.g.,atweet,email,orletter). NumberofIRAParticlesbyjournal.
c
Separately, it is useful to recognise that all but one
Journal Narticles
of the journals represented in the dataset have explicit
data-sharing policies that the authors agreed to prior ThePsychologicalRecord 24
to publication. That is, by publishing in these journals, International Journal of Psychology & 8
theauthorsagreetothepolicythattheywillsharedata PsychologicalTherapy
upon request. This encouragement or requirement to JournalofContextualBehavioralScience 5
share data wherever possible is echoed by professional FrontiersinPsychology 4
bodies(e.g.,APA,BPS,DGPs)andfundingbodies(USA BehaviorandSocialIssues 2
NIH, EU Horizon). Lastly, it is also reflected in the Re- BehaviouralProcesses 2
search Data Management policies of many universities, Dementia: The International Journal of 1
includingthosewithwhichmanyresearcherscontacted SocialResearchandPractice
aspartofthisstudywereaffiliated. Emotional&BehaviouralDifficulties 1
International Journal of Environmental 1
ArticleSearch ResearchandPublicHealth
Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experi- 1
I aimed to contact the authors of every IRAP publi-
mentalPsychiatry
cation published in the previous 5 years with a data-
JournalofEatingDisorders 1
sharing request. In order to choose the articles that I
MotivationandEmotion 1
would attempt to obtain the data for, I reused an exist-
SocialPsychologyofEducation: AnInter- 1
ing published systematic search of the published IRAP
nationalJournal
literature (2006 to 2022, in English, listed in the Web
of Science or PsycINFO databases). Full details of that
systematic search, including Boolean search strings, all
materials necessary to reproduce, reuse, or update the haveadata-sharingpolicy(InternationalJournalofPsy-
search, all data, and R code to reproduce the analyses chologyandPsychologicalTherapy,2023). TheJournal
areavailableinthatpublication(Hussey, 2023). Given of Contextual Behavioral Science requires data sharing
that data has a half-life, insofar as it becomes increas- except in circumstances that must be justified at the
inglyhardtoobtainovertime,Iconsideredonlyarticles timeofsubmission: “Itisexpectedthatallauthorswho
publishedwithinthelast5years(i.e.,thosewithapub- publishintheJournalofContextualBehavioralScience
lication date of 2018 to 2022). I excluded articles that willsharedatauponreasonablerequest. Therefore,we
either I or Chad Drake was a co-author of, as I already ask authors who do not already have their data openly
hadthedataforthesestudies(i.e.,theyareincludedin availabletothepublictoincludeanauthornoteindicat-
Hussey and Drake, 2020. I found 52 such articles. The ing‘Dataisavailableuponreasonablerequest’. Authors
references for these publications can be found in the canrequesttoleavethisnoteoutiftheycanprovidean
Supplementary Materials (osf.io/ympv6). The number adequately strong justification for not doing so in the
ofIRAParticlesperjournalcanbefoundinTable1. coverletter.”(JournalofContextualBehavioralScience,
2023). Finally, Frontiers requires data sharing except
JournalPolicies in circumstances that must be justified at the time of
submission: “Frontiers requires that authors make the
Interestingly,threeofthetopfourjournalshavedata-
‘minimaldataset’underlyingthefindingsdescribedand
sharing policies that require data sharing. The Psycho-
used to reach the conclusions of the manuscript, avail-
logical Record requires data sharing except in circum-
abletoanyqualifiedresearchers.”(Frontiers,2023).
stancesthatmustbejustifiedatthetimeofsubmission:
“A submission to the journal implies that materials de-
PrevalenceofDataAvailabilityStatements
scribed in the manuscript, including all relevant raw
data, will be freely available to any researcher wish- Ofthe52articles,22(42.3%)containedadata-shar-
ing to use them for non-commercial purposes, with- ingstatement. Encouragingly,theproportionofarticles
out breaching participant confidentiality... All original increasedfrom0%in2018to100%in2022(seeFigure
research must include a Data Availability Statement.” 1). Itisworthnotingthatitisdifficulttodefineaprecise
(The Psychological Record, 2023). The International date when these policies came into effect. For exam-
Journal of Psychology & Psychological Therapy does not ple, from speaking to the editor of JCBS, these policies
were progressively rolled out through the different lev-
===== PAGE 4/11 =====
4
Figure1
PercentofarticlesreportingaDataAvailabilityStatement
byyear.
100%
100%
75%
66.7%
50%
40%
26.7%
25%
0%
0%
2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
Year
tnemetats
ytilibaliava
atad
htiw
selcitrA
at the time of writing, conform to the norm present in
somefieldsthatthefinalauthorisconsideredtobethe
“senior”author,sosenioritydidnoteasilymapontoau-
thorshiporder. Inmanycases,agivenauthorinstructed
metospeaktootherco-authorstoobtainthedata. This
wasthereforeahighlyiterativeprocessofsendingemail
requests. At least two co-authors of every article were
contacted. Intotal,56researcherswerecontacted.
In order to define a study endpoint, results were fi-
nalised 60 days after sending the first email to each
author. This number was based on previous work by
Tedersoo et al. (2021) who demonstrated that authors
who shared data upon request tend to do so relatively
quickly,andtheprobabilityofdatabeingsharedperday
of waiting falls rapidly over time (50% within 15 days,
75% within 28 days, 90% within 34 days, 95% within
48days,97%within59days,and99%within90days).
Aggregating results across all co-authors of each ar-
ticle, I received a reply to my email(s) in 82.7%, 95%
CI [69.7, 91.8] of cases (43 articles). Authors reported
beingableandwillingtosharetheirdatain42.3%,95%
elsofthejournal’sarticle-handlingprocessesovertime.
CI [28.7, 56.8] of cases (22 articles). Authors actually
Regardless,resultsdemonstratethatdata-sharingstate-
sharedtheirdatain26.9%,95%CI[15.6,41.0]ofcases
mentshavemovedfromabsenttoubiquitousoverthese
(14 articles). When authors initially reported that they
years.
wouldsharethedatabutdidnotactuallydoso,thena-
ture of these interactions and the reasons given took a
PrevalenceofSharingUponRequest
varietyofdifferentforms: someauthorssimplystopped
I sent a data-sharing request to the authors of every replying to emails, some raised ethical or legal issues,
articleviaemail. Acopyoftheemailcanbefoundinthe and others reported that the data could only be shared
supplementary materials (osf.io/aetpq). In summary, it viaauniversityplatformthatdidnotyetexist. Impedi-
statedthatIwishedtoobtainthedatafrompublications mentstodatasharingarediscussedinmoredetaillater.
using the IRAP published in the last 5 years; that data Unliketheprevalenceofdataavailabilitystatements,
would be screened for any personally identifying infor- no linear trend in data sharing upon request was ob-
mationandthenpostedtoaprojectontheOpenScience servedbetweenarticlespublishedin2018to2022(see
Framework; and that I hoped that authors could reply Figure2). Thiswassomewhatsurprising,giventhat(a)
withintwoweekstoindicatewhethertheyareableand more recent years had greater coverage of Data Avail-
willingtosharethedata. ability Statements, and (b) previous work has found
In some cases, authors replied that they could not that data availability decreases over time, with a half-
allow data to be made public, in which cases I replied lifeofbetween6and9years(Minocheretal.,2021).
that I was also willing to obtain the data and not make
it public. I also noted that I was willing to sign any Relationship Between Promissory Data Availability
data-sharing agreements that authors felt were neces- StatementsandActualDataSharing
sary. Thestrategywasthereforetorequestdatatomake
It is useful to consider data sharing in the subsets of
it openly available in the first instance, and to request
differenttypesofDataAvailabilityStatements. Imakea
it be shared with me but not made public as a fallback
distinction between statements of actual sharing at the
option.
time of publication (e.g., a URL included in the arti-
Inthefirstinstance,Iattemptedtocontactthecorre-
cle that links to a data repository containing the data
spondingauthorusingtheemaillistedinthepublished
for the study, or reference to supplementary materials
article. If I did not receive a response offering to share
published alongside the article) and promissory data
the data, I then contacted the first author, if they were
sharing (e.g., a statement that data is available upon
alsolistedasthecorrespondingauthor. IfIagaindidnot
request,orupon‘reasonable’request).
receive a response, I contacted other authors in order
Three articles’ data-sharing statements represented
ofapparentseniority(e.g.,contactingprofessorsbefore
claimsofactualdatasharingatthetimeofpublication.
PhD students). Note that the IRAP literature does not,
===== PAGE 5/11 =====
5
Figure2
Percent of articles sharing data upon request by year of
publication.
100%
75%
50% 46.7%
25% 20% 22.2%
16.7%
14.3%
0%
2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
Year
tseuqer
nopu
atad
derahs
taht
selcitrA
because (a) some researchers were co-authors of many
articles and conversely (b) sometimes more than one
author replied to my emails regarding a given publica-
tion, and sometimes authors even contradicted one an-
otherregardingtheexistenceofdataoritsshareability.
As such, these cases should be interpreted as examples
of situations that can arise and what can be learned
from those situations, rather than any attempt to esti-
matetheprevalenceofsuchsituations.
Itisoftennotpossibletocorrespondwithcorrespond-
ingauthors.
Somecorrespondingauthorsweresimplyimpossible
tofindworkingcontactdetailsfor: theemailaddresses
listedinthearticledidnotwork,andnoup-to-datede-
tails could be found online, from contacting their col-
laboratorsorscouringsocialmedia. Worryingly,thisin-
cluded authors of articles published within the last cal-
endar year (2022). This finding is in line with previ-
ous work that has demonstrated that the rate at which
Of those, only two (66.7%) actually provided the data workingcontactdetailscanbefounddecaysovertime:
as described, in both cases via links to the Open Sci- Vines et al. (2014) found that the odds of being able
ence Framework and ResearchGate (note however that tofindworkingcontactdetailstorequestdatafromau-
I would recommend researchers to use services offered thorsdecreasebyaround4%peryear.
by not-for-profit entities with longer-term data preser- In their replies to the data-sharing request, multiple
vation structures in place, such the OSF, over for-profit authorsstatedthattheywereonmaternityleave(2au-
entities such as ResearchGate). One article stated that thors), were retired (1 author), or had left academia
“All data generated or analysed during this study are (3 authors). Three other first or last authors were not
included in this article and its supplementary informa- contacted in the first place because I knew they had
tion files”. However, no such supplementary materials left academia. All are reasonable and common circum-
were available on the journal’s website. In this case, stances,however,allsituationshighlightwaysinwhich
an author was able to provide the data upon request, promissory data sharing is ineffective due to extremely
howevertheinaccuracyofthedatasharingstatementis foreseeable circumstances. Similarly foreseeable cir-
stillnotable. cumstances that can disrupt data sharing include re-
Of the 31 articles without a Data Availability State- searchers moving between institutions. Whereas aca-
ment, 8 shared data upon request (25.8%, 95% CI demics typically put plans in place to cover their re-
[11.9, 44.6]). Of the 18 articles with a promissory search and teaching duties while on leave, less atten-
DataAvailabilityStatement,3shareddatauponrequest tionmaybepaidtohandingoverresponsibilityfordata
(16.7%, 95% CI [3.6, 41.4]). That is, data sharing availability.
was descriptively lower in articles with a promissory Sixteenauthorswereinitiallyresponsivetomyemail
datasharingstatementthannostatementatall. AChi- and stated that I should instead contact a different au-
squaredtestsuggestedthatthepresenceofaDataAvail- thor for access to the data. Almost universally, these
ability Statement was not associated with a higher rate authors could not provide working contact details for
of actual data sharing upon request, χ(1) = 0.35, p = theauthorstheysuggestedcontacting(i.e. whenIcould
.55. notfindworkingcontactdetailsmyself). Data‘available
uponrequest’policiesthereforeleaveusnotonlyatthe
ImpedimentstoDataSharing whimofauthors’willingnesstosharedatabutalsotheir
willingnessandabilitytokeepandshareevenmoreba-
This section contains some slightly more qualitative
sic details such as who has the data and how they can
reflectionsontherepliesthatIreceivedandtheinsights
becontacted.
they provide into impediments to data sharing. In the
Reasonablestepsshouldbemadetobeabletoensure
below, I sometimes refer to the number of authors or
thatwecaninfactcorrespondwithacorrespondingau-
cases of a given situation. It is important to note that
thor. For example, the use of email addresses that are
thesedonotperfectlymapontothenumberofarticles,
===== PAGE 6/11 =====
6
not tied to employment at a specific institution, and a universitypolicyto(a)retaindataand(b)shareitupon
deeperunderstandingofandcommitmenttothelasting request, the university has little power to enforce its
responsibilitiesthatcomewithbeingthecorresponding own policies once researchers are no longer employed
author. bythatinstitution.
Theethicsofdatasharingshouldbeconsideredholis-
Unfortunate and sometimes untimely data losses oc-
tically. Data sharing has ethical implications, but not
cur.
sharing also has ethical and research integrity implica-
tions. Four authors stated that the data could not be
Oneresearchernotedthattheydidhavethedatafor
sharedonethicalgroundsdespitehavingincludeddata
multiplestudiesuntilveryrecentlybuttheymistakenly
sharing upon request statements in their publications.
wiped the hard drive of the laptop on which they were
In each case, I followed up with a request that it be
stored. Given the high concentration of authorships of
shared with me privately without subsequently being
IRAP papers by a small number of authors (Hussey,
madepublicandthatIwashappytosignanynecessary
2022) – a concentration of authorship that is likely to
data-sharingagreement. However,inthreeofthesefour
also be found in many small subfields – even a single
cases, theseinitialethicalconcernswerethenmadere-
data loss can involve the loss of data associated with
dundant when the authors either replied that data was
largeproportionsoftheliterature,aswasthecasehere.
in fact lost or stopped replying. This may represent a
selective deployment of caution: much caution placed Non-adherencetojournaldata-sharingpolicies,insti-
on the ethical requirement not to share data in cer- tutional data-sharing policies, and public statements
tain ways, and not enough on research integrity, such aboutdatasharing.
as ensuring that results can be independently verified
In addition to journals having data-sharing policies,
andupholdpriorcommitmentstodatasharing(e.g.,to
institutions, and funding bodies often assert their own
journals,funders,andprofessionalbodies).
Research Data Management policies regarding the re-
Infourothercases,IwasabletoappealtoaResearch
tention, storage, andaccesstodatabythoseseekingto
DataManagerattheauthors’institutionsandaskthem
verifyresults. Sevenresearcherswereobservedtobein
to apply the university’s data-sharing policy. In one of
violation of not only journal policy and their own Data
these cases, the author had been non-responsive to my
Availability Statements, but also their institutions’ Re-
emails. In a second, the author replied to my emails
search Data Management policy. This is likely a lower
but was ambiguous about sharing the data, and then
bound estimate of the actual occurrence of this: no ex-
stoppedreplying. Inthetwoothers,theauthorsreplied
haustivesearchofinstitutions’dataretentionandshar-
tomyemailsbutdirectedmetotheResearchDataMan-
ing policies was conducted, and only the policies of in-
ager to work out the legalities and ethics of how data
stitutes with a larger number of authors or IRAP publi-
sharing could be accomplished. It is worth noting that,
cations were inspected. One author was also observed
in all four of these cases, the authors had stated that
tocontradicttheirownrecentpublicpositionaboutthe
data was available upon request, and both the journal
importance of data sharing: a co-author of the Associ-
and university policy required sharing, but apparently
ation for Contextual Behavioral Science’s recent Open
noactualmechanismsfordatasharinghadbeenputin
Sciencerecommendationsreport,whichstates“werec-
place to accomplish this until my request. At the time
ommend open data and transparency whenever possi-
ofwriting,eightmonthsafterthefirstemailsweresent,
ble.” (Task Force on the Strategies and Tactics of Con-
negotiations with the Research Data Manager regard-
textualBehavioralScienceResearch,2021),declinedto
ingthespecificsofthedata-sharingagreementsarestill
shareanydata.
ongoing for three of these cases. The terms of these
Finally,therewereinstancesofapparentinclusionof
data-sharing agreements being debated set a remark-
tokenistic or misleading Data Availability Statements.
ablyhighbar,suchastherequirementthedata-sharing
One author of several publications – who was listed as
agreementwouldneedtobesignedbythepresidentof
the contact person in the Data Availability Statement
bothofourrespectiveuniversities(arguablynotascal-
in one of them – when contacted stated that, not only
ablesolutionifdatasharingwastobeascommonplace
did they not currently have access to the data, but that
as funders and journals wish it to be), and the use of
they had never been in possession of it. Data that we
the data would be limited to reproducing exactly the
haveneverbeeninpossessionofcannotbeshared,and
sameanalysesreportedintheoriginalpublicationsand
shouldnotbepromisedtoreadersuponrequest.
noothers(thereforenorobustnesstestscouldbeexam-
ined, nor could the data be reused for other purposes).
The fourth case is apparently unresolvable as, despite
===== PAGE 7/11 =====
7
Discussion thiscouldhavemadesomeresearchersmorereticentto
share. Ontheotherhand,thefactthatIwasacquainted
Results demonstrated that the prevalence of Data
with many of the authors prior to contacting them for
AvailabilityStatementsinarticlesusingtheImplicitRe-
their data may have lent a degree of ecological valid-
lational Assessment Procedure has risen from 0% in
itytotherequest: withinmanysmall-tomedium-sized
2018 to 100% in 2022. This is encouraging and the
fields data requests are likely to come from another re-
journalsshouldbeapplaudedforembracingthesepoli-
searcher who is already known to you. To the best of
cies.
my knowledge, only one previous study has examined
However,resultsalsodemonstratedthatveryfewau-
this question: Tedersoo et al. (2021) examined data
thorsofrecentIRAPpublicationssharedataonrequest
sharinguponrequestandquantifiedwhethertheywere
(25.0% of 52 articles). Results were therefore very
acquainted with the authors prior to the data requests
similar to those observed over 60 years ago by Wolins
they sent (i.e., ‘no contact’, ‘have met’, ‘have collabo-
(1962: 24% of 37 articles). Hamilton et al.’s (2023)
ratedwith’). Ananalysisoftheiropendatasuggeststhat
systematic review of studies of the rate of data shar-
data sharing upon request in their sample was slightly
ing upon request observed rates between 0 and 37%
higheramongresearchersalreadyknowntotheauthors
(no meta-analysis was possible due to methodological
(50% of 12 articles) than those who were not (40% of
heterogeneity). Worryingly,datasharingwasnohigher
272studies).
in articles that stated that data was available upon re-
quest(16.7%,3of18articles)thanthosethatincluded The impact of the phrasing of a data sharing request
no Data Availability Statement at all (25.8%, 8 of 31 onsharing.
articles). Disappointingly, results did not suggest that
It is of course possible that the rate of data shar-
DataAvailabilityStatementsareassociatedwithhigher
ing upon request may be moderated by the nature of
actualdatasharing.
that request, e.g., the phrasing used in the email. Au-
Limitations thors may perceive data sharing as a matter of inter-
personal trust, and if they perceive the request to be
Generalisability
overreaching, impudent, or otherwise distasteful they
may be more likely to refuse, ignore or disengage from
The top-line conclusions of all previous studies cov-
the request. To the best of my knowledge, no work
eredinHamiltonetal.’s(2023)review, andindeedthe
todatehasexperimentallymanipulatedthephrasingof
results of this study, are in close agreement: data shar-
datasharingrequestsinordertoassessitsimpactonthe
ing upon request occurs in the minority of cases. How-
efficacy of such requests. Future research may wish to
ever,preciseestimatesoftherateofdatasharingareas
dothis. However,atthesametime,weshouldbewary
yet unknown. The generalisability of the current esti-
of making compliance with data sharing requests the
mateofdatasharinguponrequesttootherareasofpsy-
responsibility of the requester rather than the authors,
chology, or indeed other areas of science, is unknown
where those requests are a matter of compliance with
at this time. The recent systematic review of the rate
professional standards, journal policy, institutional pol-
ofdatasharinguponrequestbyHamiltonetal.(2023)
icy,fundingbodypolicy,and/ortheauthorsownwritten
notedthatnometa-analysisoftherateofsharingacross
prior commitment to do so. Given that some authors
studies was possible due to methodological differences
are simply disinclined to share their data despite the
between the component studies, such as differences in
requirements to do so, it may be more effective for the
journal policies between fields and differences in how
field to attempt to enforce these existing requirements
old the publications were. The estimate provided by
ratherthanattempttosolvetheissuebyfindingtheop-
thisstudyisperhapsmorelikelytocorrespondwith(a)
timalwayofphrasingtherequest.
fieldsofsimilarlysmallsize,(b)fieldswithcomparable
journal policies (e.g., requiring Data Availability State-
Datausabilityandcomputationalreproducibility.
mentsbutnotmandatorysharingatthetimeofpublica-
tion), and (c) studies considering a similar time frame Ofcourse,notallshareddataisuseful,anddatashar-
(e.g.,publicationswithinthelast5years). ing is not an end in itself. Data sharing merely (a) en-
ablesverifiabilityofpublishedanalyses,and(b)enables
Theimpactofpersonalacquaintanceonsharing.
reusefornovelpurposes. Evenwhendataistechnically
completeandshared,poordocumentation(e.g.,theab-
ThefactthatIwaspersonallyacquaintedwithmany
senceofhigh-qualitycodebooks)canlimitthedegreeto
of the researchers contacted may have influenced the
which it can be used for verification or novel purposes
rate of data sharing in some way. I have written cri-
(Horstmann et al., 2020). Separately, recent research
tiques of IRAP research in the past, and it is possible
===== PAGE 8/11 =====
8
has demonstrated that even when data and code are Psychology). No journal as yet has established any
openly shared at the time of publication, the results of punishment mechanisms for breaches of data-sharing
relatively few publications can be precisely reproduced agreements, such as a policy of rejecting future sub-
(e.g., only1of12articles: Crüwelletal., 2023). Addi- missions to the journal if they receive and verify a re-
tional research would be required to estimate the com- portofarefusaltoabidebythedata-sharingagreement
putational reproducibility of results reported in IRAP in a previous publication. These policies and others
publicationsbasedonshareddata. wouldalllikelybeextremelyeffectiveinincreasingdata
sharing, however, they also require yet more invest-
Implications ment from already under-resourced journal staff, most
ofwhomarevolunteers. Nosolutiontotheseproblems
While the overall rate of data sharing is disappoint-
istrivial,butinmyopinion,thecurrentstateofaffairsis
ing, the non-adherence to journals’ data sharing poli-
untenable. As stated in previous similar articles, I con-
cies – which authors explicitly agree upon submission
cludethat“statementsofdataavailabilityupon(reason-
– is obviously unacceptable. If authors are shown to
able) request are inefficient and should not be allowed
routinely disregard this specific journal policy (and in
by journals” (Tedersoo et al., 2021). The presence of
some cases also their institutional Research Data Man-
Data Availability Statements that are not adhered to or
agementPoliciesandtheirownpublicpositionsondata
enforcedinanywayrisksgivingrisetowhatisreferred
sharing), this raises the question: has the research in-
to as ‘Open Washing’: the appearance of transparency
tegrity of other as-yet unexamined elements of the re-
withoutadequatefollow-through(Villum,2014).
searchprocessalsobeenundermined?
Hardwicke et al. (2018) studied the impact of a
Unfortunately, perhaps these results are less surpris-
changeinpolicyatthejournalCognitionfromencourag-
ingwhenviewedthroughthelensoftheincentivestruc-
ingdatasharingtomandatingopendatasharingatthe
tures in science. The contingencies that govern scien-
time of publication on the actual rate of data sharing.
tificresearchgenerallystopatthepublicationofagiven
Inonesense,resultswereencouraging: sharingofopen
article. Publications typically function as reinforcers.
data alongside the publication rose from 22% (of 104
Curating data and code to make it openly available,
articles)to62%(of136articles). Inanothersense,itis
or even genuinely sharable upon request, has few re-
somewhatdismayingthatevenajournalrequirementto
inforcers: it is more work for little reward. Nonethe-
make data available prior to publication – a policy that
less,therearenowmanyresourceswhichprovideprac-
is in principle enforceable by the journal, which could
ticalguidancetoresearchersonhowtosharedatamore
withholdpublicationuntiltherequirementismet–did
easily (Gilmore et al., 2018; Meyer, 2018). Research
notproduceuniversaldatasharing.
elsewherehasconsideredotherspecificelementsofthe
Of course, data sharing is not a panacea or an end
research process that make data sharing easier, such as
itself, but merely one step towards increasing the re-
the content of consent forms in light of the EU’s GDPR
producibility of findings and unlocking data reuse po-
data legislation (Hallinan et al., 2023), how-to guides
tential. Recent research has demonstrated that even
on using data sharing platforms such as the Open Sci-
when articles share their data, the results reported in
enceFramework(Soderberg,2018),andtoolstoeasily
the articles can only be precisely reproduced in a small
createdatacodebooksthatallowotherstointerpretand
minority of cases. If future research is to become in-
useshareddata(Horstmannetal.,2020).
creasinglyreproducible,itwillhavetobecomenotonly
Equally, there are currently few punishers for fail-
increasinglyverifiablethroughtransparencybutalsoin-
ing to adhere to Data Availability Statements. As em-
creasingly verified through actual checks, at least in a
ployers, institutions have more scope to enforce Re-
proportion of cases. It may also be the case that even
search Data Management policies among their employ-
a small but non-zero expectation that others may actu-
ees as a matter of research integrity. Having spoken to
ally ask for our data or check our reported results for
themabouttheunfulfilleddatarequestsdescribedhere,
their accuracy may increase their reproducibility. If so,
many institutions’ Research Data Management and Re-
although studies such as the current one do not show
searchIntegrityofficesseemtohaveagrowinginterest
supportfortheefficacyoflow-intensitydata-sharingin-
in defining and enforcing such policies. However, as
terventions such as Data Availability Statements, it is
yet,journalshaveassertedrelativelyfewerdemandson
possiblethattheactofconductingresearchsuchasthis
authors. Some journals go further than requiring Data
alsoactsasanintervention. Historically,theprobability
Availability Statements and actually require data and
of being asked to share one’s data is quite low. Stud-
codetobesharedasaconditionofpublication. Asmall
ies such as the current one, or indeed the potential for
number of journals even check the computational re-
futurejournal-wideauditsofdatasharingheldonareg-
producibility of results prior to publication (e.g., Meta-
===== PAGE 9/11 =====
9
ularbasis(e.g.,Learetal.,2023),mayservenotonlyto European Commission. (2023). The EU’s open science
testbutalsotoestablishnormativeexpectationsofdata policy. Retrieved March 23, 2023, from https:
sharing. //research-and-innovation.ec.europa.eu/
strategy/strategy-2020-2024/our-digital-
AuthorContact future/open-science_en
Evans,T.R.(2022).DevelopmentsinOpenDataNorms
Correspondence: Ian Hussey, University of Bern,
[Number: 1 Publisher: Ubiquity Press], 10(1),
Switzerland (ian.hussey@icloud.com). ORCID 0000-
3.https://doi.org/10.5334/jopd.60
0001-8906-7559.
Frontiers. (2023). Policies and publication ethics. Re-
trieved March 23, 2023, from https://www.
ConflictofInterestandFunding
frontiersin . org / guidelines / policies - and -
This research was supported by the META-REP Pri- publication-ethics
ority Program of the German Research Foundation Gilmore, R. O., Kennedy, J. L., & Adolph, K. E. (2018).
(#464488178). Practical Solutions for Sharing Data and Mate-
rials From Psychological Research. Advances in
AuthorContributions Methods and Practices in Psychological Science,
1(1), 121–130. https://doi.org/10.1177/
IHwasresponsibleforallaspectsofthisproject.
2515245917746500
OpenSciencePractices Google Trends. (2023). Comparison of the relative fre-
quency of usage of "data is" vs. "data are". Re-
trieved March 23, 2023, from https://trends.
google.com/trends/explore?date=today%205-
y&q=data%20is,data%20are&hl=en-GB
Hallinan, D., Boehm, F., Külpmann, A., & Elson,
This article earned the Open Data, Open Materials,
M. (2023). Information Provision for In-
and Open Code badge for making the data, materials,
formed Consent Procedures in Psychological
andcodeopenlyavailable. Ithasbeenverifiedthatthe
Research Under the General Data Protec-
analysisreproducedtheresultspresentedinthearticle.
tion Regulation: A Practical Guide [Publisher:
Theentireeditorialprocess,includingtheopenreviews,
SAGE Publications Inc]. Advances in Methods
ispublishedintheonlinesupplement.
and Practices in Psychological Science, 6(1),
References 25152459231151944. https://doi.org/10.
1177/25152459231151944
American Psychological Association. (2016). Ethical
Hamilton, D. G., Hong, K., Fraser, H., Rowhani-Farid,
principles of psychologists and code of conduct
A., Fidler, F., & Page, M. J. (2023). Preva-
[Publisher:APA].https://www.apa.org/ethics/
lence and predictors of data and code sharing
code
in the medical and health sciences: Systematic
Crüwell, S., Apthorp, D., Baker, B. J., Colling, L., El-
review with meta-analysis of individual par-
son,M.,Geiger,S.J.,Lobentanzer,S.,Monéger,
ticipant data [Publisher: British Medical Jour-
J., Patterson, A., Schwarzkopf, D. S., Zaneva,
nal Publishing Group Section: Research]. BMJ,
M., & Brown, N. J. L. (2023). What’s in a
382, e075767. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj-
Badge? A Computational Reproducibility In-
2023-075767
vestigation of the Open Data Badge Policy in
Hardwicke, T. E., Mathur, M. B., MacDonald, K., Nil-
One Issue of Psychological Science [Publisher:
sonne,G.,Banks,G.C.,Kidwell,M.C.,Hofelich
SAGE Publications Inc]. Psychological Science,
Mohr,A.,Clayton,E.,Yoon,E.J.,HenryTessler,
34(4), 512–522. https://doi.org/10.1177/
M.,Lenne,R.L.,Altman,S.,Long,B.,&Frank,
09567976221140828
M. C. (2018). Data availability, reusability, and
Deutschen Gesellschaft für Psychologie. (2022). Beruf-
analytic reproducibility: Evaluating the impact
sethische Richtlinien. https://www.dgps.de/
of a mandatory open data policy at the journal
die-dgps/aufgaben-und-ziele/berufsethische-
Cognition[Publisher:RoyalSociety].RoyalSo-
richtlinien/
ciety Open Science, 5(8), 180448. https://doi.
org/10.1098/rsos.180448
Horstmann, K. T., Arslan, R. C., & Greiff, S. (2020).
Generating Codebooks to Ensure the Indepen-
===== PAGE 10/11 =====
10
dent Use of Research Data [Publisher: Hogrefe Oates, J., Carpenter, D., Fisher, M., Goodson, S.,
Publishing]. European Journal of Psychological Hannah, B., Kwiatkowski, R., Prutton, K.,
Assessment, 36(5), 721–729. https://doi.org/ Reeves, D., & Wainwright, T. (2021). BPS
10/ghmt9r Code of Human Research Ethics [Pages: bp-
Hussey, I. (2022). Reply to Barnes-Holmes & Harte srep.2021.inf180]. British Psychological Soci-
(2022) “The IRAP as a Measure of Implicit ety. https://doi.org/10.53841/bpsrep.2021.
Cognition: A Case of Frankenstein’s Monster”. inf180
https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/qmg6s Rogers, S. (2012). Data are or data is? The Guardian.
Hussey, I. (2023). A systematic review of null hypoth- Retrieved March 23, 2023, from https://www.
esis significance testing, sample sizes, and sta- theguardian.com/news/datablog/2010/jul/
tisticalpowerinresearchusingtheImplicitRe- 16/data-plural-singular
lational Assessment Procedure. Journal of Con- Soderberg, C. K. (2018). Using OSF to share data: A
textual Behavioral Science, 29, 86–97. https:// step-by-step guide [Place: US Publisher: Sage
doi.org/10.1016/j.jcbs.2023.06.008 Publications]. Advances in Methods and Prac-
Hussey, I., & Drake, C. E. (2020). The Implicit Re- ticesinPsychologicalScience,1,115–120.https:
lational Assessment Procedure demonstrates //doi.org/10.1177/2515245918757689
poor internal consistency and test-retest reli- Task Force on the Strategies and Tactics of Contextual
ability: A meta-analysis [Publisher: PsyArXiv]. Behavioral Science Research. (2021). Adop-
PsyArXiv. https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/ tion of Open Science Recommendations | As-
ge3k7 sociation for Contextual Behavioral Science.
International Journal of Psychology and Psychological Retrieved January 10, 2023, from https://
Therapy.(2023).AuthorsGuidelines.Retrieved contextualscience.org/news/adoption_of_
March 23, 2023, from https://www.ijpsy.com/ open_science_recommendations
normas.html Tedersoo, L., Küngas, R., Oras, E., Köster, K., Eenmaa,
Lear, M. K., Spata, A., Tittler, M., Fishbein, J. N., Arch, H., Leijen, Ä., Pedaste, M., Raju, M., Astapova,
J. J., & Luoma, J. B. (2023). Transparency A., Lukner, H., Kogermann, K., & Sepp, T.
and reproducibility in the journal of contex- (2021). Data sharing practices and data avail-
tualbehavioralscience:Anauditstudy.Journal ability upon request differ across scientific dis-
of Contextual Behavioral Science, 28, 207–214. ciplines [Number: 1 Publisher: Nature Publish-
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcbs.2023.03.017 ing Group]. Scientific Data, 8(1), 192. https://
Meyer, M. N. (2018). Practical Tips for Ethical Data doi.org/10.1038/s41597-021-00981-0
Sharing[Publisher:SAGEPublicationsInc].Ad- The Psychological Record. (2023). Instructions for Au-
vancesinMethodsandPracticesinPsychological thors. Retrieved March 23, 2023, from https:
Science, 1(1), 131–144. https://doi.org/10. / / www. springer. com / journal / 40732 /
1177/2515245917747656 submission-guidelines
Minocher, R., Atmaca, S., Bavero, C., McElreath, R., & Villum,C.(2014).“Open-washing”–Thedifferencebe-
Beheim,B.(2021).Estimatingthereproducibil- tween opening your data and simply making
ity of social learning research published be- them available – Open Knowledge Foundation
tween 1955 and 2018 [Publisher: Royal Soci- blog. Retrieved April 4, 2023, from https://
ety]. Royal Society Open Science, 8(9), 210450. blog.okfn.org/2014/03/10/open-washing-
https://doi.org/10.1098/rsos.210450 the-difference-between-opening-your-data-
Munafò, M. R., Nosek, B. A., Bishop, D. V. M., Button, and-simply-making-them-available/
K. S., Chambers, C. D., Percie du Sert, N., Si- Vines, T. H., Albert, A. Y., Andrew, R. L., Débarre,
monsohn, U., Wagenmakers, E.-J., Ware, J. J., F., Bock, D. G., Franklin, M. T., Gilbert, K. J.,
& Ioannidis, J. P. A. (2017). A manifesto for Moore, J.-S., Renaut, S., & Rennison, D. J.
reproduciblescience.NatureHumanBehaviour, (2014). The Availability of Research Data De-
1(1), 0021. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562- clinesRapidlywithArticleAge.CurrentBiology,
016-0021 24(1), 94–97. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.
Nunes, L. (2021). Data Sharing for Greater Sci- 2013.11.014
entific Transparency. APS Observer, 34. Re- Wicherts, J. M., Borsboom, D., Kats, J., & Molenaar, D.
trieved March 23, 2023, from https://www. (2006). The poor availability of psychological
psychologicalscience . org / observer / data - researchdataforreanalysis.AmericanPsycholo-
sharing-methods
===== PAGE 11/11 =====
11
gist,61(7),726–728.https://doi.org/10.1037/ ation]. American Psychologist, 17(9), 657–658.
0003-066X.61.7.726 https://doi.org/10.1037/h0038819
Wolins, L. (1962). Responsibility for Raw Data [Place:
US Publisher: American Psychological Associ-