
===== PAGE 1/3 =====
Opendata:NotApplicable Editedby:FelixD.Schönbrodt
Meta-Psychology,2025,vol9,MP.2024.4194 Openmaterials:NotApplicable Reviewedby:GiladFeldman,StevenVerheyen
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2024.4194 Openandreproducibleanalysis:NotApplicable Analysisreproducedby:NotApplicable
Articletype:Commentary Openreviewsandeditorialprocess:Yes AllsupplementaryfilescanbeaccessedatOSF:
PublishedundertheCC-BY4.0license Preregistration:No https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/UFQHM
Replication Value Increases With Transparency, Test Severity, and
Societal Impact
René Bekkers1
1VUAmsterdam
Thiscommentarguesthatreplicationsshouldnotbeprioritizedasafunctionofcitation
count and sample size, but instead as a function of societal impact, test severity, and
theinformationvalueofareplication.
Keywords: replication;transparency;testseverity;impact;citationcount;samplesize
policiesdonotachievedesiredoutcomes.
Which claims in science should receive more thor-
Criticism2: Citationcountsandsamplesizearebad
ough scrutiny in replication attempts? Isager et al.
indicatorsofreplicationvalue
(2025) approach replication value from a utilitarian
perspective,andproposeaformulatoquantifyit. Inthe The replication value formula proposed by Isager et
formula,thevalueofareplicationforaclaimincreases al. (2025) multiplies citation counts with sample size,
with the scientific impact of the initial study reporting implying that more highly cited studies are more valu-
the claim measured by the average number of citations able targets for replication attempts, and even more so
peryearsincethestudyappeared,andreduceswiththe when they rely on small samples. However, both cita-
certaintyofthefinding,measuredbythenumberofob- tioncountsandsamplesizeareinvalidindicatorsofthe
servationssupportingtheinitialclaim. Inthiscomment, scientificutilityofreplicationattempts.
Ioffertwocriticismsontheproposalforthereplication A large body of scholarship has documented a
value formula, and I propose an alternative: that the plethora of problems with the number of citations as
empiricalcontentofaclaimandtheopportunitytoim- an indicator of scholarly impact (Bornmann & Daniel,
provetheseverityofthetestofatransparentlyreported, 2008). Citation counts are not only biased by time
reasonably large effect size that is societally relevant and field effects, but also by journals, editors, authors,
makesclaimsmoreimportanttargetsforreplications. readers, article factors, and technical problems. Cita-
tion counts are susceptible to gaming. They are in-
Criticism1: Societalimpactdeservesmoreweight flatedbyguestauthorships(MeursingeReyndersetal.,
inthevalueofreplicationattempts 2024) and by coercive citation practices (Wilhite &
Fong,2012).
Claims are more valuable as targets for replication
Citation counts also convey information about the
attempts if they have larger consequences for science
likelihood of replication success: studies that do not
and society. The more we can learn from a replication,
replicatearecitedmorefrequentlythanstudiesthatdo
viewed from both a scientific knowledge and societal
replicate(Serra-Garcia&Gneezy,2021).
application and practical utility perspective, the more
Usingcitationcountsasaningredientforreplication
valuable is its replication. The utility of replicating a
valuewouldmakestudiesthatarelesslikelytoreplicate
claim depends on its information value, how strongly
inthefirstplacemorelikelytobecometargetsofrepli-
it is believed to be true before the replication, and the
cation attempts. In that case we can be sure of replica-
outcomeofthereplication.
tion failures for years to come. Sample size is also in-
Thepotentialconsequencesofareplicationaremore
validasanindicatorofreplicationvalue. Ononehand,
seriousifpeopleinpracticemakemoreimportantdeci-
significantfindingsinsmallsamplescanreflectstronger
sionsonclaimsthatturnouttobefalsepositivesorfalse
effect sizes. Once a researcher has an inkling that the
negatives. Thesocietalconsequencesoffalseclaimsare
effect is large, the sample size can justifiably be kept
moregraveifthehealthandwealthofalargerpropor-
small. Ontheotherhand,atagiveneffectsize,findings
tion of humanity is affected, for instance if more lives
insmallsamplesaremorelikelytobeflukes,andresult
are at stake, if the economic value of phenomena that
in less precise estimates. In the presence of incentives
the claim is about are larger, and especially if current
for publishing significant findings, false positive small
===== PAGE 2/3 =====
2
n studies are more likely to be selected for publication Alackofstatisticalpowerisoneofkeycharacteristics
when they achieve statistical significance, resulting in ofuncertainty. Asclaimsbasedonlargeroriginaleffect
publication bias. We do not learn much from failures sizesaremorelikelytoreplicate(OpenScienceCollab-
to replicate candidate gene findings in underpowered oration,2015),studiesreportingstrongeffectsatmod-
studies. Billions of dollars wasted in the hunt for ef- erate statistical power are more valuable as targets for
fectsofspecificgenesinsmallsamplescouldhavebeen replication attempts than similarly powered studies re-
prevented(Harden,2021). portingweakeffects. Largereffectsizesaremorelikely
tohavemeaningfulimplicationsinpractice.
Analternative
Informationvalue
I propose that studies are more useful to replicate
when they report a practically meaningful effect size In addition to opportunities for methodological im-
with transparently reported and available data and provements, the scientific value of replication attempts
code, and when a replication can provide a more strin- should also be based on the Popperian criterion of the
gent test of a regularity with higher information value. amount of empirical information conveyed by a theory
Practically meaningful. The value of a replication (Popper, 1972). Scientific consequences of claims are
shouldnotonlybedeterminedbyscientificcriteria. The moregraveiftheclaimisstatedinmoregeneralterms,
societal implications of actionable knowledge should andiftheclaimisamorefundamentalpartoftheories.
also be taken into account when targets for replication Ifanempiricaldiscoverynecessitatesthereformulation
are identified. Before policies are put into clinical or of established theories, it should check out in indepen-
medical practice, the claims on which they are based dent replication attempts. The scientific and practical
should be replicated successfully. Especially when the valueofreplicationsshouldbeevaluatedjointly. Reduc-
falsehood of a claim could do more harm in practice ing the uncertainty about a claim with more stringent
if it is used to inform a wide-ranging policy, and espe- tests is more important when the societal implications
cially when the evidence from the initial study is not offalsebeliefsabouttheclaimaremoregrave. Instead
particularly strong, it should be replicated. Transpar- of citation counts and sample size, I suggest that the
ently reported. Candidates for replication should be degree of uncertainty resulting from a lack of severity
of sufficient quality such that the reported findings ac- ofthetestshouldguidedecisionstoattemptreplication
tually have a chance of replication. Claims based on of claims that have larger practical and theoretical im-
poorly documented interventions, measurements, data plications.
collections and models of analysis are less worthy of
replicationattempts. Claimsbasedonmaterialsthatare AuthorContact
documentedtransparentlyenoughtoenablereplication
RenéBekkers,r.bekkers@vu.nl
canbeevaluatedwithrespecttothestrengthoftheevi-
dence. Areplicationismoreinformativeifthemethods
ConflictofInterestandFunding
oftheoriginalstudyleavemoreroomfordoubt. Given
the ubiquity of questionable research practices, the de- The author declares no conflicts of interest. The
fault attitude to a claim of general regularity based on author received funding from the Netherlands Or-
asinglestudyshouldbeaskepticaloneuntilitisrepli- ganization for Scientific Research (NWO), grant
catedindependently(Feynman,1974). 406.23.SW.042.
Testseverity AuthorContributions
Observation of guidelines for high quality research Conceptualizationandwriting: RB
including preregistration, collecting large samples for
sufficient statistical power, and transparent and com- OpenSciencePractices
plete documentation of research materials and analy-
This article is purely conceptual and as such is not
sisprocedures,arelikelytoenhancethelikelihoodthat
eligible for Open Science badges. The entire editorial
claims can be reproduced successfully. Claims based
process,includingtheopenreviews,ispublishedinthe
on studies observing these guidelines are less uncer-
onlinesupplement.
tain and hence less important to replicate. Claims in
registered reports are particularly less likely to be false
positives based on questionable research practices, and
should therefore be viewed as presenting stronger evi-
dence(Scheeletal.,2021).
===== PAGE 3/3 =====
3
References search.ScientificReports,14,5883.https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41598-024-55966-x
Bornmann, L., & Daniel, H. D. (2008). What do ci-
OpenScienceCollaboration.(2015).Estimatingthere-
tation counts measure? a review of studies
producibility of psychological science. Science,
on citing behavior. Journal of Documentation,
349, aac4716. https://doi.org/10.1126/
64(1), 45–80. https://doi.org/10.1108/
science.aac4716
00220410810844150
Popper,K.R.(1972).Objectiveknowledge:Anevolution-
Feynman, R. P. (1974). Cargo cult science: Some re-
aryapproach.OxfordUniversityPress.
marks on science, pseudoscience, and learning
Scheel, A. M., Schijen, M. R., & Lakens, D. (2021). An
hownottofoolyourself.
excess of positive results: Comparing the stan-
Harden,K.P.(2021).“reportsofmydeathweregreatly
dard psychology literature with registered re-
exaggerated”: Behavior genetics in the postge-
ports.AdvancesinMethodsandPracticesinPsy-
nomicera.AnnualReviewofPsychology,72,37–
chological Science, 4(2). https://doi.org/10.
60. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-psych-
1177/25152459211007467
052220-103822
Serra-Garcia, M., & Gneezy, U. (2021). Nonreplica-
Isager,P.,van’tVeer, A.,&Lakens,D.(2025).Replica-
ble publications are cited more than replicable
tion value as a function of citation impact and
ones.ScienceAdvances,7(21),eabd1705.https:
sample size. Meta-Psychology, 9. https://doi.
//doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.abd1705
org/10.15626/MP.2022.3300
Wilhite,A.W.,&Fong,E.A.(2012).Coercivecitationin
Meursinge Reynders, R. A., Cavagnetto, D., ter Riet,
academicpublishing.Science,335(6068),542–
G., Di Girolamo, N., & Malicki, M. (2024).
543. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.
Automatically listing senior members of de-
1212540
partments as co-authors is highly prevalent in
health sciences: Meta-analysis of survey re-