
===== PAGE 1/3 =====
Opendata:Yes Editedby:FelixD.Schönbrodt
Meta-Psychology,2025,vol9,MP.2024.4210 Openmaterials:NotApplicable Reviewedby:ReneBekkers,StevenVerheyen
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2024.4210 Openandreproducibleanalysis:Notapplicable Analysisreproducedby:NotApplicable
Articletype:Commentary Openreviewsandeditorialprocess:Yes AllsupplementaryfilescanbeaccessedatOSF:
PublishedundertheCC-BY4.0license Preregistration:No https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/VA28K
Valuing replication value
Kaito Takashima and Yuki Yamada
KyushuUniversity
ThisisacommentarypieceontheproposalbyIsageretal. (2025)foranewmetric,
RV , designed to evaluate the replication value of psychological studies. We discuss
Cn
thehopeofutilizingtheRV metricinundergraduateeducationandpossibleimprove-
Cn
mentsonusingsomeelementsotherthanoriginalsamplesizetoderivethismetric.
Keywords: replicationvalue,uncertainty,mentoring,samplesize
Thereproducibilityprobleminpsychologyhasrendered replication, such as in experimental exercises or for
uncertain which of the daily explosion of psychological theirtheses. Basedonourobservation,severalprincipal
findingscanbetrustworthy,affectingallresearchers,es- investigators(PIs)withmanystudentscannotalwaysbe
pecially early career researchers (ECRs). In the past, intimatelyfamiliarwitheverystudent’sresearchplanor
countlessECRshaveleftacademiaonlytofindthatthe itsacademiccontext(thisisamajorprobleminitself...).
previous studies on which they relied were completely Some PIs find great satisfaction in writing papers with
unreproducible. Replicationisthenecessaryprocessfor undergraduates, yet they also experience a shortage of
verifying the reproducibility of studies. Yet, until now, time to dedicate to the process (Howell et al., 2024).
whichofthemyriadofpreviousstudiesshouldberepli- Whenadvisingonreplicationproposals(includingcon-
catedhasbeendeterminedbasedongutfeelingsrather ceptual replications) brought by students and making
thansystematiccriteria,butthishasobviouslimits. the"GO"decision,PIsoftenfinditchallengingtojudge.
Thus, P. Isager et al. (2025) proposed employing In such cases, quantifying the worthiness of replication
RV , a metric of replication value derived from the could aid decision-making without requiring in-depth
Cn
valueofastudyasafunctionofcitationcountandfrom expertiseinallthosetopics.
theuncertaintyofthestudyasafunctionofitsoriginal Our observation is that it is relatively common, es-
sample size. Based on P. M. Isager (2020) and P. M. pecially at private universities in Japan, for a single PI
Isager et al. (2023), this metric aims to maximize util- to in fact mentor a number of undergraduate research
ity from replication efforts and offers a straightforward projects beyond coverage within the capacity of a sin-
way to prioritize studies. However, as the original au- gle PI to handle. We conducted a brief survey within
thors note, this metric is not intended to function as a the Psychological Science Accelerator, a community of
definitive or sole criterion. Instead, here we will dis- psychologists worldwide, at their Slack and within a
cuss that it is good to consider other factors—such as Japanese community at X (N = 97 in total) (https:
study quality, effect size, and the existence of previous //osf.io/ch397). As a result, we found that 27.29% of
replications as well—when determining the priority of PIsmentormorethan10studentsperyear,andsurpris-
replicationtargets. ingly, nearly 10% of PIs mentor more than 15 students
Thisisachallengeforanyresearcherinterestedinthe per year. While the specific characteristics that lead
reproducibility problem in psychology, as they should to high-capacity labs remain unclear, it is evident that
choosewhattoreplicateamidstlimitedtime,labor,and thereisindeedanon-trivialproportionofPIswhoannu-
financial resources. With such a metric, replication ally manage and handle more than 10 theses. Imagine
studies could become a lower hurdle, more efficient, thatoneday,15students,whoareallstudyingdifferent
andmoreeffectivefortheself-correctionofpsychology1 topics, come to you and each consult with you about
Here, we discuss both the potential benefits and prob- selecting one study for replication out of 10 previous
lems of this metric toward its more effective practical studies. Wouldyoubeabletoimmediatelygivethemall
applicationinthefuture. an appropriate answer? In such a situation, it is likely
thatbusyPIscanreceivethebenefitoftheRV andfo-
Cn
Mayaidinmentoringmanystudents
1This example represents only one context in which the
RV Cn could be helpful as a criterion for undergrad- metric may be applied, and there are likely many other sce-
uate and graduate students when selecting studies for nariosinwhichitcouldbesimilarlybeneficial.
===== PAGE 2/3 =====
2
cus their mentoring on the more specific aspects of the include the total sample size of existing replications in
study. Following this initial screening, PIs can devote theselectionstrategyforreplicationstudies. Asatenta-
theirlimitedtimetoevaluatingotherimportantfactors. tiveapproach,wesuggesttakingthesquarerootofeach
For example, they may assess whether the chosen ex- study’ssamplesizefirstandthensummingthem,rather
periment is feasible given the laboratory’s available re- thansummingnsandtakingthesquarerootafterward.
sources,determinehowbesttoallocatethoseresources, Thisapproachmayhelpavoidapotentialunderestima-
andpreparetheresearchenvironment. tion of the standard deviation (SD) when dealing with
large sample sizes. This arises from the nonlinear rela-
Originalsamplesizeastheindicatorofuncertainty tionshipbetweensamplesizeandSD.Theseapproaches
could lower the priority of extensively replicated stud-
Samplesizeisareasonablemetricforreplicationde-
ies, allowing resources to be concentrated on studies
cisions, but larger samples do not necessarily ensure
replicated only a few or zero times. This suggestion
higherquality. Thisisespeciallytrueinfieldslikevisual
aligns with the original authors’ vision of integrating
science, where strong effects can be observed with a
thesamplesizesofpreviouslyconductedreplicationsto
minimalsample. Insuchcases,thesamplesizemaynot
collectivelyassessreplicationvalue.
serve as a reliable indicator of uncertainty. For exam-
Moreover, the characteristics of the original study’s
ple,considervisualillusions,acommonphenomenonor
sample are crucial points in selecting replication stud-
subjectinvisualscience. Researchonvisualillusionsof-
ies. To enhance the generalizability of research find-
tenreportsstrongeffectswithafewparticipants(some-
ings,replicationstargetingdifferentdemographicorge-
times only the authors themselves serve) (e.g., Anstis,
ographical groups may be particularly valuable if the
2022; Balas, 2021; Sugihara, 2023). In these situa-
originalresearchisbiasedtowardaspecificpopulation.
tions, there is little to no uncertainty, and the sample
For example, using the cultural distance between the
sizedoesnotalsoreflectthestrengthorreliabilityofthe
sample of the planned replication and the sample of
effect. However, thecalculationmethodforRV could
Cn the original study as part of the value metric might
leadtosignificantlydifferentevaluationsofthereplica-
be beneficial. Effectively quantifying cultural distance
tionvalueofstudieswithanequalcitationcountsolely
(e.g.,CorreadaCunhaetal.,2022)wouldbeideal,but
based on the difference in sample size. As a result, a
even a simple constant to indicate whether the sample
larger-sample study with a smaller but more reliable
is the same as the original study or not could be still
effect may appear less valuable than a smaller-sample
meaningful(e.g.,samesample: 1,differentsample: 2).
study with an anticipated larger effect. This bias, in
An interesting aspect of this idea is that the replication
turn, could affect how limited research resources are
value could also depend on the relationship with the
allocated. While we acknowledge that comparing such
replication plan. Of course, cultural distance is only
cases can be challenging, it is nonetheless important to
one dimension. Others might include historical con-
consider these factors to ensure that limited research
texts, languages, or technological factors. Integrating
resources are allocated effectively. Such considerations
these considerations could provide a more holistic pic-
highlight the need to consider factors other than sam-
tureofgeneralizability. Nevertheless,werecognizethat
ple size, such as effect size and research quality when
this approach adds complexity and may go beyond the
determiningthereplicationvalue. Aswewillnotelater,
original authors’ primary focus. Therefore, we present
theoriginalauthorsalsoseemtosharesimilarconcerns
thisideaasatentative,illustrativeextensionratherthan
anddonotintendtorelysolelyonsamplesize.
adefinitiveadditiontothereplicationvaluemetric.
Additionally, large-scale surveys, common in social
Even if it is for the initial quick screening, relying
sciences and psychology, often exceed 1,000 partici-
solely on sample size in selecting replication studies
pants. However, a large sample does not necessar-
may risk overlooking the true value and impact of the
ily indicate high quality. Online crowdsourcing allows
research. We understand that the original authors rec-
rapiddatacollection,butdataqualitydependsonwell-
ognize sample size as one important, yet not exclusive,
definedexclusioncriteriaandsatisficingdetection.
criterion (see Figure 3 in P. Isager et al. (2025) for de-
Another important consideration in selecting studies
tail). Building on this foundation, more accurately as-
for replication is adjusting for the presence of already
sessingreplicationvaluebenefitsfromincorporatingad-
conductedreplications. Iftherearealreadymanyrepli-
ditional measurable variables, where available. For ex-
cationeffortsforanoriginalstudy,thereplicationvalue
ample, weighted variables that consider the effect size
of the research would naturally decrease due to the
of the original research, whether the study was pre-
diminishing new insights or value and reduced uncer-
registered, the openness of the analysis code and data,
tainty that additional replications would provide. As
andthenumberofhypothesestestedcouldplayacriti-
also noted by the original authors, it is reasonable to
===== PAGE 3/3 =====
3
cal role in enhancing the evaluation process. Reaffirm- OpenSciencePractices
ing the importance of these factors in the replication
studyselectionprocessanddevelopingamorecompre- This article earned the Open Data badge for making
hensiveevaluationframeworkisnecessary. Thedifficult the data openly available. The entire editorial process,
thing is probably to reconcile that with the brevity and including the open reviews, is published in the online
computabilityofthecalculation. supplement.
References
FuturewithRV
Cn
Finally, consider an academic world where RV is Anstis, S. (2022). A pink illusion. Journal of Illusion, 3.
Cn
widely implemented. Imagine an undergraduate stu- https://doi.org/10.47691/joi.v3.8786
dent, X, who plans to replicate an experiment from Balas, B. (2021). Faces behind bars: Illusory eye move-
similar studies A, B, and C. After calculating RV for ments induced by gratings. Journal of Illusion,
Cn
each,theyfindA>B>C,indicatingAhasthehighest 2.https://doi.org/10.47691/joi.v2.8005
value. However, ifXismostinterestedinC,howcould Correa da Cunha, H., Farrell, C., Andersson, S., Amal,
theyjustifyitsreplication? Prioritizingstudiesthisway M.,&Floriani,D.E.(2022).Towardamorein-
may make it harder to defend lower-ranked replica- depth measurement of cultural distance: A re-
tions,raisingconcernsaboutpublicationbias. Whilethe evaluation of the underlying assumptions. In-
metric can help researchers decide how to allocate re- ternational Journal of Cross Cultural Manage-
sourcesamongpossiblereplications,relyingtooheavily ment, 22(1), 157–188. https://doi.org/10.
onthismetricforevaluatingreplicationstudiesisunde- 1177/14705958221089192
sirable. Hopefully, guidelines for the use of this metric Howell,J.L.,Giuliano,T.A.,&Hebl,W.I.(2024).Suc-
willbedevelopedinthefuture. cessfully publishing with undergraduate coau-
thors in psychology: Insights from faculty with
AuthorContact top track records. Collabra: Psychology, 10(1).
https://doi.org/10.1525/collabra.94261
Correspondence concerning this article should Isager, P. M. (2020). Test validity defined as d-
be addressed to Yuki Yamada. Email: yama- connection between target and measured at-
dayuk@gmail.com tribute:Expandingthecausaldefinitionofbors-
ORCID-Yukiyamada: 0000-0003-1431-568X boometal.(2004).https://doi.org/10.31234/
ORCID-KaitoTakashima: 0000-0002-7489-5682 osf.io/btgsr
Isager, P. M., van Aert, R. C. M., Bahník, S., Brandt,
ConflictofInterestandFunding M.J.,DeSoto,K.A.,Giner-Sorolla,R.,Krueger,
J. I., Perugini, M., Ropovik, I., van ’t Veer,
The authors declare no conflict of interest. K.T. was
A. E., Vranka, M., & Lakens, D. (2023). De-
funded by Support for Pioneering Research Initiated
ciding what to replicate: A decision model for
by the Next Generation: SPRING (grant number: JP-
replication study selection under resource and
MJSP2136). However, views and opinions expressed
knowledge constraints. Psychological Methods,
arethoseoftheauthorsonlyanddonotnecessarilyre-
28(2), 438–451. https://doi.org/10.1037/
flect those of the SPRING. The granting authority can
met0000438
notbeheldresponsibleforthem.
Isager,P.,van’tVeer, A.,&Lakens,D.(2025).Replica-
tion value as a function of citation impact and
AuthorContributions
sample size. Meta-Psychology, 9. https://doi.
K.T.: Conceptualization, Funding acquisition, Writing - org/10.15626/MP.2022.3300
originaldraft,andWriting-review&editing. Sugihara, K. (2023). Five types of anomalous percep-
Y.Y.: Conceptualization, Project administration, Super- tionscreatedbythesamemirror-reflectionpro-
vision, Writing - original draft, and Writing - review & cess. Journal of Illusion, 4. https://doi.org/10.
editing. 47691/joi.v4.8993