
===== PAGE 1/20 =====
Opendata:NotApplicable Editedby:RickardCarlsson
Meta-Psychology,2025,vol9,MP.2024.4224 Openmaterials:NotApplicable Reviewedby:EricHochstein,BrianHaig
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2024.4224 Openandreproducibleanalysis:NotApplicable Analysisreproducedby:NotApplicable
Articletype:Commentary Openreviewsandeditorialprocess:Yes AllsupplementaryfilescanbeaccessedatOSF:
PublishedundertheCC-BY4.0license Preregistration:No https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/2YNGV
Psychology’s Theory Crisis, and why formal modelling cannot
solve it
Freek J.W. Oude Maatman
DepartmentofPhilosophyofBehaviouralScience,FacultyofSocialScience,RadboudUniversityNijmegen,the
Netherlands
DepartmentofTheoreticalPhilosophy,FacultyofPhilosophy,UniversityofGroningen,theNetherlands
Inlightofpsychology’s‘theorycrisis’,multipleauthorshavearguedthatadoptingfor-
malizationand/orformalmodellingwouldconstituteausefulorevennecessarystep
towardsstrongerpsychologicaltheory. Inthisarticle,Iinsteadarguethatformalmod-
elling cannot solve the core problem the psychological ‘theory crisis’ refers to, which
are the currently high degrees of contrastive and holistic underdetermination of our
theoriesbyourdata. Idosobyfirstintroducingunderdeterminationasanexplanatory
frameworkfordeterminingtheevidentialimportofresearchfindingsfortheories,and
showing how both broader theoretical considerations and informal assumptions are
keytothisprocess. Then,Iderivetheaforementionedcoreproblemfromthecurrent
‘theorycrisis’literatureandtentativelyexploreitspossiblesolutions.Lastly,Ishowthat
formalmodellingisneitheranecessarynorsufficientsolutionforeithercontrastiveor
holisticunderdetermination,andthatitsuncriticaladoptionmightinsteadworsenthe
crisis.
Keywords: theory,theorycrisis,formalmodelling,underdetermination,evidence
Introduction bility: this lack of connection between theory and hy-
pothesis entails that a failure to find predicted effects
Until2018,discussionofpsychology’sreplicationcri-
does not necessarily provide evidence against the the-
sis appeared to mostly concern issues of incentives,
ory, but is instead often taken to be a violation of aux-
statistics and methodology, such as publication bias,
iliary assumptions (Oberauer & Lewandowsky, 2019,
pressure to publish, QRP’s, p-hacking and HARKing
p.1598). Psychological theories and hypotheses cur-
(e.g., Nelson et al., 2018; Shrout and Rodgers, 2018).
rentlythussufferfrompoortestability,andinturn,this
Since then the spotlight appears to have turned: the
allowsalmostallpsychologicaltheoriestopersistwhilst
locus of attention now is on ‘new’ and unresolved is-
alsoprovidingnoincentivetoimproveuponthem. Yet,
sueswithourmeasurementpractices(e.g.,Chesterand
such ‘weak’ theories also hinder our field’s theoretical
Lasko,2021;FlakeandFried,2020,butalsoseeBring-
progress – for example by hindering our ability to cre-
mannandEronen,2016)andtheories(e.g.,Proulxand
ate robust interventions due to our inability to identify
Morey, 2021), which are argued to also contribute to
theconditionsinwhichtheyought(not)towork(Bors-
ourfield’sreplicabilityproblems.
boometal.,2021).
Especially this former discussion of psychology’s
Though some authors writing about psychology’s
theories has attracted a lot of attention after the
problems with theory generally appear to agree with
coinage of psychology’s theory crisis (see Oberauer
Oberauer and Lewandowsky’s (2019) framing (e.g.,
and Lewandowsky, 2019, but also e.g. Borsboom et
Fried, 2020a; Robinaugh et al., 2021), others diverge
al., 2021; Robinaugh et al., 2021). Oberauer and
significantly. VanRooijandBaggio(2020,2021)forex-
Lewandowsky (2019) argued that our theories are too
ample explicitly reject both (the priority of) the afore-
‘weak’: theydonotstronglyimplyhypotheses,bywhich
mentioned testing problem and its framing as a ‘cri-
is meant that a hypothesis (e.g., a statistical hypoth-
sis’. Instead,theyidentifyanobsessionwitheffectsover
esis, an experimental hypothesis) can only be deduc-
understanding as a problem in psychology, and focus
tively derived from our theories when adding a large
more on the need for theory to lead to a priori plausi-
amount of (often unevaluated) auxiliary assumptions
ble explanations than on theory’s relevance for testing.
about research design, statistics or measurement tech-
Other authors largely forego specifying problems with
niques (see e.g., Earp and Trafimow, 2015; Meehl,
psychological theory, and primarily posit methods for
1990b). Such theories hereby inhibit their own testa-
===== PAGE 2/20 =====
2
improvement(e.g.,GuestandMartin,2021; Smaldino, Generally, I agree with the aforementioned authors
2017, 2020), calling into question what they take to that formal and/or computational modelling in princi-
be the problem. Despite this lack of agreement and ple would be a valuable addition to any psychologist’s
other dissimilarities, most authors in this new litera- methodological toolbox; both as an aid for thinking
tureneverthelessconvergeonthesamesolutionforthe and as a non-experimental method for theory evalua-
discipline’s theoretical problems: psychologists need to tion (e.g., Farrell and Lewandowsky, 2010; Smaldino,
adopt formal and/or computational modelling, be it as 2017). Yet,theargumentforformalmodellingissome-
ausefulmethodingeneral(Fried,2020a,2020b;Guest timesaccompaniedbymoreorlessexplicitrejectionsof
&Martin, 2021; Muthukrishna&Henrich, 2019; Ober- verbaltheoriesandtheorizing(i.e.,theoryconstruction
auer & Lewandowsky, 2019; Robinaugh et al., 2021; andevaluationonthebasisofnaturallanguageproper-
Scheeletal.,2021;Smaldino,2019,2020)orasanec- ties)asiftheseareincompetitionwith‘formaltheoriz-
essary step in a proposed theory construction method ing’, such as by labeling the former as ‘proto-theories’
(e.g.,Borsboometal.,2021;Haslbecketal.,2022). (Borsboom et al., 2021) or arguing that natural lan-
Importantly,computationalandformalmodellingare guage is inherently ambiguous and thus best replaced
not identical. By formal modelling, proponents gener- with formal accounts (Fried, 2020a, 2020b; Haslbeck
allyrefertothetranslationofverbal,narrativetheories et al., 2022; Robinaugh et al., 2021). Some even go
into formal models (sometimes also called ‘formal the- so far as to suggest that adoption of formal modelling
ories’; e.g. Haslbeck et al., 2022) – be they mathemat- is the only way to advance our field (Smaldino, 2017,
ical, computational or logical in form. A good example 2020).
of this is the formalization of existing theory on panic Incontrasttosuchclaims,Idonotbelievethatformal
disorder by Robinaugh et al. (2024). In turn, compu- modelling or formalization are the – and perhaps not
tational modelling refers either strictly to the formal- evena–wayforwardformanypsychologicalsub-fields
ization of a theory through a programming language in their current state, nor that (informal) verbal theo-
(Guest & Martin, 2021; Smaldino, 2017, 2020), or to rizing and theories are inherently problematic. Eronen
combining the former with a paradigmatic computa- and colleagues for example have already pointed out
tionalistapproachtocognitioninwhichthelocusofpsy- that formalization may be premature for many fields
chological investigation is the decomposition of human in psychology due to a lack of well-defined constructs,
capacities (i.e., abilities) into algorithms and their im- robust phenomena and valid measurement techniques,
plementations in the brain (Marr, 1982; Van Rooij and which according to them leads to the necessity to first
Baggio,2021;alsoseePiccinini,2009foranoverview). engage in good (verbal) conceptualization in order to
Notably,thelatterinterpretationofcomputationalmod- kickstart a process of epistemic iteration of good co-
elling thus not only consists of a method or process ordinative definitions and functions (e.g., Eronen and
butalsorequirestakinghighlyspecificparadigmaticas- Bringmann, 2021; Eronen and Romeijn, 2020; see also
sumptions on board, and thus is better defined as an Chang, 2004; Kellen et al., 2021). Similarly, some pro-
approach. ponents of formal modelling tentatively argue that it
This divergence calls for some preliminary defini- is not applicable to all psychological sub-fields (Bors-
tions. By ‘formal modelling’ I strictly refer to the for- boom et al., 2021), especially since formal modelling
malization of verbal theories into formal models (and isprimarilyapplicabletoisolated‘toyworlds’(Navarro,
the iterative development of such models) as a method 2021). Critical evaluation of both the readiness of psy-
orprocessinitself–broaderapproachestoorinterpre- chological fields for formalization and the general ap-
tations of modelling thus are not to be included. Here, plicability of formalization to these fields thus is war-
‘theory’referstoalogicallycoherentsetofpropositions ranted.
aimedattheexplanationofoneorseveralphenomena. My point however goes further than these claims: I
Inturn,‘formalmodel’referstoanymathematical,log- believethatformalmodellingisneitheranecessary,nor
ical or other formalization of a theory’s structure and asufficientsolutiontothe‘theorycrisis’(i.e.,theprevi-
‘phenomenon’referstoafeatureoftheworldthatscien- ouslyoutlinedproblemswithtestability). Furthermore,
tistsseektoexplain,beitanability,process,eventtype, Iarguethatadoptingformalmodellingcanworsenthis
datapatternorother‘explanandum’. Theformertypeof crisis if (and only if) not accompanied or preceded
computational modelling – recasting theory into a pro- by strong verbal theorizing, as this is necessary to de-
gramming language – then is a sub-category of formal sign informative experimental tests. Formal modelling
modelling, for which reason I will use the latter as an should thus not be uncritically adopted or applied by
umbrellatermcoveringbothinstancesintheremainder psychologistsasareplacementoreven‘remedy’forver-
ofthispaper. bal theorizing, if their goal is to improve the testability
===== PAGE 3/20 =====
3
of their theories and the evidential value they derive their arguments one by one, I will describe their views
fromthesetests. afterintroducingtheproblemofunderdeterminationof
In the remainder of this paper I will support these theorybydata(seeStanford,2017foranoverview)and
claims. I will do so by first identifying what problem myanalysisofthetheorycrisisinitsterms,sincemany
with theory the currently discussed ‘theory crisis’ ex- oftheirargumentsareeitherdirectlyrelatedtooreven
actly refers to, which I will do by introducing underde- derivablefromit.
termination of theory by data as an explanatory frame- Notably, several authors have discussed underdeter-
work for the evidential import of findings for theories, mination in relation to the replication crisis and psy-
and deriving the concept of degrees of underdetermi- chology before (e.g., Earp and Trafimow, 2015; Meehl,
nation from its application. Using this framework, I 1978, 1990a, 1990b; Trafimow and Earp, 2016; Tunç
show that the current interpretation of the ‘theory cri- andTunç, 2023). Myaccounthereisnotanattemptto
sis’ is grounded in the observation of high degrees of improve on their specific analyses, but it does expand
contrastive and holistic underdetermination of psycho- upon them to draw attention to aspects of underdeter-
logical theories by our data, after which I tentatively minationthatarerelevantforthis‘crisisoftheory’. Fur-
identifythecauseofthiscrisisaswellasapossiblepath thermore, my goal is not to argue in favor of any par-
for its resolution. Then, I argue that given this analysis ticularinterpretationorframingofunderdetermination,
theadoptionofformalmodellingcannotsolvethispar- butsimplytouseitasanorganizingframeworktothink
ticular crisis in isolation of complementary advances in abouttheevidentialimportofresearchfindingsforthe-
‘informal’verbaltheory. oriesandhypotheses.
Underdeterminationandthetheorycrisis Underdeterminationoftheorybydata
Even though I stated above that the ‘theory crisis’ When we speak of ‘underdetermination of theory by
refers to the often weak inferential link between psy- data’, we refer to the fact that our research results
chological theories and hypotheses (see Fried, 2020a; do not completely constrain what we should believe:
Oberauer and Lewandowsky, 2019; Robinaugh et al., upon being confronted with a particular research find-
2021), there is no single agreed upon formulation of ing, there is never a straight-forward answer to what
this so-called ‘crisis’. Furthermore, it remains unclear (theoretical) beliefs we should hold in response to it
whatparticular(missing)propertyofpsychologicalthe- (Stanford, 2017). This underdetermination stems from
ories causes such weak inferential links. Proponents twosources. Thefirstisthata(setof)successfullypre-
of formal modelling as a solution to this ‘theory crisis’ dicted finding(s) does not simply entail that a theory
(i.e.,Fried,2020a,2020b;OberauerandLewandowsky, is true. After all, it is always possible to formulate an
2019; Robinaugh et al., 2021) so far only specify the alternative theory that predicts the same (set of) find-
effectsofweaktheory(e.g.,insufficientlyinforminghy- ing(s) – be it a wholly different theory, a mere variant,
potheses,noderivableboundaryconditions),butdonot orsimplyamorepreciseorboundedformofthetheory
clearly converge on a cause for such problems in terms under test. Due to the persistent presence and poten-
of theoretical issues. The perceived lack of formaliza- tially large size of this set of theoretical alternatives, a
tion cannot be a theoretical problem in itself either, successfully predicted result cannot directly justify our
sinceaformalizationofaweaktheoryisnotinherently choiceforthetheoryitwasderivedfrom. Thisiscalled
stronger(althoughwemaystrengthenthetheoryinthe contrastive underdetermination (e.g., Stanford, 2017):
formalization process). We are thus faced with a crisis any successful experiment is insufficient to justify our
declaration of psychological theories failing to do what choice for one specific theory, as there always will be
theyoughttoaswellasaproposalforresolvingthissit- (unidentified) others that predict the same outcome.
uation, without clarity on what the exact failure is and Whilst this type of underdetermination in principle al-
whichpropertiesoftheoriescauseit. Subsequently,the ways applies, the relative size of the set of potential
proposed remedy – formal or computational modelling viable alternatives differs between hypotheses. For ex-
–mightnotbeacureatall. ample,compareonlypredictinganypositivecorrelation
Yet, the authors that explicitly frame formal mod- between two variables, which only excludes all possi-
elling as a solution to psychology’s weak inferential blealternativetheoriesthatpredictnooranegativere-
links between hypotheses and theories (i.e., Fried, lation from the set of alternatives upon success, to a
2020a, 2020b; Oberauer and Lewandowsky, 2019; successful highly precise prediction, which can only be
Robinaugh et al., 2021) do offer several supporting ar- matched by a comparatively much smaller subset of all
gumentsfortheirviewfromwhichthecoreproblemof possibletheories.
this ‘theory crisis’ can be derived. Instead of discussing Thesecondsourceofunderdeterminationstemsfrom
===== PAGE 4/20 =====
4
the fact that we never test a theory-derived hypothesis example, our measurement technique is in fact invalid,
H in isolation: to relate the theory-derived hypothesis our findings should not have any bearing on our eval-
H (i.e., ‘X should be the case’) to the empirical context uation of H or T. After all, if I attempt to measure the
in which we do research, we always need a set of fur- brightness of stars in the sky by looking at the Christ-
therassumptions–alsoknownasauxiliaryassumptions mas lights hanging from my ceiling, this finding simply
– that guarantee that the experiment and subsequent shouldnotbetakenintoaccountbyastronomersdueto
analyses constitutea valid test ofH. These include, but the blatant violation of measurement validity assump-
arenotlimitedto, assumptionsaboutthevalidityofall tions(i.e.,myvisualinspectionofChristmaslightsisnot
usedmeasurementtechniques,thesuccessfulexecution a valid measurement of star brightness) and design as-
ofallelementsoftheexperimentaldesignanditsappro- sumptions (i.e., my Christmas lights are not part of the
priateness as a test of the theory (see also Kellen et al., populationIwanttoinvestigate)evenifIsomehowend
2021), the absence of influence from any unexpected up with the correct answer (see also Trafimow, 2017).
and/orunknownbutneverthelesscausallyeffectivefac- Combining the latter with the fact that there are often
torsthatcanchangetheexperimentaloutcomeinatest- many such assumptions involved in an experiment, it
relevantway(alsoknownasthe‘ceterisparibusclause’; means that upon a failed prediction it is generally pos-
C ), the non-violation of assumptions of used (statisti- sible to blame this on the violation of an auxiliary as-
p
cal) analyses, and the representativeness and sufficient sumption instead of falsifying the hypothesis or theory
size of our sample (see e.g., Meehl, 1990a, 1990b). In itself (a.k.a. a ‘Lakatosian defense’; Meehl, 1990a; but
turn, any experiment is not a direct test of the theory- alsoseeEarpandTrafimow,2015).
derivedhypothesisortheoryitself,butatestofthecon- An important consequence of this is that while it is
junction of the hypothesis with all these assumptions: notalwayspossibletodirectblametowardstheknown
thetesttestsnotjustwhetherthehypothesisistruebut auxiliary assumptions (e.g., measurement techniques
whether the hypothesis and all auxiliary assumptions arevalidated, manipulationchecksweresuccessful, we
aretrue. Onlythetruthofallauxiliaryassumptionsand controlledforknownconfounds),itisalwayspossibleto
the hypothesis logically entails the prediction. This is- reject the ceteris paribus clause (C ). After all, we can
p
sueisalsoknownastheproblemofholisticunderdeter- always posit that a (previously) unknown confound or
mination(Stanford,2017). ‘hiddenmoderator’hasconfoundedtheresults(seee.g.,
Why these auxiliary assumptions are necessary be- Van Bavel et al., 2016), such as an unknown contex-
comes explicit when confronted with a failed predic- tualfactororadifferenceinexperimenterskills. Holis-
tion or a non-replication. Instead of showing that the ticunderdeterminationcanthusseriously,thoughlegit-
hypothesis H (and by extension the theory T) is false, imately, complicate the interpretation of both original
such a failure to find the expected results shows that findingsand(non-)replications1.
the conjunction of H with all auxiliary assumptions is I cannot stress enough here that the aforementioned
false. This means that this failure might be caused by methodologicalandstatisticalauxiliaryassumptionsare
thefalsityofoneormoreauxiliaryassumptionsevenif not all assumptions that are relevant to holistic under-
the hypothesis and/or theory are true, and it is there- determination, even though they receive the most at-
fore logically possible to blame such failure on any or tentioninpsychologicalpractice. Inprinciple,allofour
multiple of the auxiliaries instead of on the hypothesis background knowledge and tacit assumptions can play
or theory. Such cases are also not hard to imagine: a a role in the evaluation and construction of our theo-
researchassistantinstructingtheparticipantsmightfor ries and experiments due to either being indirectly in-
example have deviated heavily from the study protocol
and biased the participants in the wrong (or ‘right’) di-
1Thisalsoidentifiesanissueinthecurrentreplicationcri-
sisliterature,wheresomeauthorsproposetestingsuchalter-
rection, one of the measurement techniques might be
native explanations (e.g., Nelson et al., 2018; Stroebe and
invalid, ortheusedanalysismightbeinappropriatefor
Strack, 2014; Tunç and Tunç, 2023). Since in psychology
the data type and therefore lead to false results, or the
replication attempts can never be completely identical, any
new research context may have contained a new, un-
possible difference might be identified as ‘relevant’ post-hoc.
known confound, and so on (see also Earp and Trafi- Yet, notably this also goes for comparisons between replica-
mow,2015;Iso-Ahola,2017;Meehl,1990a;Robinaugh tions themselves. Any testing strategy for combatting holis-
etal.,2021;StroebeandStrack,2014). tic underdetermination can thus easily spiral out of control
If any of these auxiliary assumptions is violated, the intoaso-calledexperimenter’sregress(Collins,1985;alsosee
findings simply are uninformative for our evaluation of Morawski, 2019): a possibly never-ending spiral of replica-
H or T – regardless of whether our prediction is con- tionsandauxiliaryassumption-validatingexperimentsaimed
firmedornot. Thisisalsonotamatterofdegree: if,for atverifyingtheadequacyofpreviousexperiments,andrepli-
cationsoftheseassumption-testingexperimentsthemselves.
===== PAGE 5/20 =====
5
corporated in them, or possibly being contradicted by base ontological assumptions about the nature of hu-
them (Quine, 1951). Theory itself and possibly athe- man cognition can also deeply influence our experi-
oretical methodological choices (e.g., using chocolate ments. A most basic, common example is that we take
as a reward, assuming that everyone likes chocolate) thebraintobe‘theseat’ofthemindinsomeway,shape
also can introduce further auxiliary assumptions into or form – but that without this commitment, neuro-
our experiments. For example, our choices of theory science as a whole would cease to make sense, as well
and disciplinary matrix (Kuhn, 1962) – or our ‘theoret- as reference to neuroscientific findings. Furthermore,
ical framework’ (Guest & Martin, 2021; Muthukrishna allegiance to a paradigmatic position such as (radical)
& Henrich, 2019) – as well as our conceptualization of embodied cognition, radical behaviorism or computa-
key variables will impose far more (tacit) assumptions tionalismcandirectlyconstrainthetypeofentitiesand
on experiments than the general methodology of psy- mental processes we could use in psychological the-
chology can. Meanwhile, whether we pay attention to ory to begin with, by for example prohibiting talk of
it or not, the aforementioned ‘background theory’ also ‘representations’(embodiedcognition; seee.g. Shapiro
limitsthepossibleauxiliarieswecanassumeforreasons and Spaulding, 2021), or requiring all processes to be
ofcoherence. specifiable as input-output algorithms (computational-
The most important example of the latter claim ism; see e.g. Piccinini, 2009) or as forms of behavior
of limitations on auxiliaries stemming from ‘paradig- (radical behaviorism; see e.g., Skinner, 1953). Simi-
matic’ influence are our (implicit) metaphysical posi- larly, the complex systems approach’s assumptions that
tions (Hochstein, 2019), which I prefer to call our on- thecausalstructureofcognitionisinteraction-dominant
tological commitments (i.e., commitments about the insteadofcomponent-dominant(VanGeert,2019;Wal-
structure of the world). Ontological commitments rel- lot & Kelty-Stephen, 2018) directly problematizes most
evant to psychology range from our fundamental ideas existing psychological theories by effectively excluding
about the nature of human cognition to what we take thepossibilityofsimplecausalstructuresandisolatable
tobethereal-worldreferentsorrealizersofourtheory’s entities or mechanisms. Such fundamental ontological
concepts,constructsorimpliedprocesses. Whilstnotdi- commitments in turn also constrain how we conceive
rectly testable themselves, such commitments form the of psychological phenomena such as thought; e.g., as
basis for any of our investigations – be it explicitly or capacities that can be described as input-output algo-
implicitly – by informing not only what we might con- rithms (computationalist; Van Rooij and Baggio, 2020,
sider the things we investigate to be, but also how we 2021)orasprocessesinstantiatedinbehaviorthatisin-
oughttostudythem(Hochstein,2019). herently intertwined with its context (complex systems
A simple example can be found in the definition of approach;VanGeert,2019).
‘stress’. Whether we define ‘stress’ as a particular bio- From here, these commitments also ‘trickle down’
logical state (i.e., parasympathic nervous system acti- intothemechanismsweproposeduetoforexampleas-
vation), a particular mental state (i.e., subjective expe- suming more or less context-dependence for processes,
rience of stress), or a combination of these has direct or requiring a particular type of mechanism. In turn,
bearingontheto-beassumedreliabilityandvalidityof, these too influence which confounds we would identify
say, cortisol levels as a measurement of stress. After whilstremainingcoherentwithourbackgroundideas–
all,itisadirectmeasurementonthebiologicalaccount, and resultantly could. Notably, they can also directly
but an indirect measurement at best under the mental influence which (statistical) analysis methods are ap-
definition (if even a proper measurement at all). This plicable; whether we assume that the phenomenon we
definition also indirectly suggests mechanisms for in- study can be taken to be homogeneous across individ-
tervention, and for confounding: direct cortisol injec- ualsornot–whichvariesbetweenontologies–greatly
tions could be an unconfounded intervention on stress influencestheusabilityofcommonresearchtechniques,
on a biological account, but might be confounded by such as population aggregate statistics (see e.g., Mole-
strongalternativecompetingmentalstatesonamental naar, 2004; Richters, 2021). Ontological commitments
account of stress. In turn, this also partially sets how thusprovideconstraintsonnearlyallotherauxiliaryas-
we should design our experiments such that they are sumptions, even basic methodological ones, by specify-
freefromanyconfoundinginfluences,andthushowwe ingthepropertiesandboundariesofthephenomenawe
would interpret experimental results: those supporting study,andtheresultantrequirementsforstudyingthem
amentalaccountofstressmightfindcortisolinjections intelligibly.
an unsatisfactory induction of stress, as they require Another relevant source of auxiliary assumptions in
eliminationofalternativementalstatestoo. psychology was recently identified by Brenninkmeijer
Though often distal to our research questions, our et al. (2019), who showed that experimental psychol-
===== PAGE 6/20 =====
6
ogistscansignificantlydivergeinhowtheydesigntheir A definitional segue therefore must be made here
experimental materials, conduct themselves with their in order to distinguish the theory under test from the
research subjects and try to motivate them. The psy- larger background of ‘theory’ in which it and any ex-
chologists in question concluded this might also affect periment testing its derived hypotheses are embedded,
their research results, which in fact has been observed and from which its evaluation partially occurs. From
byLandyetal.(2020). Thedifferingapproachesofex- this point on, I will use ‘theory ’ when talking about
1
perimental psychologists thus may form a key type of theory in the former, narrow sense, as I have been do-
tacitknowledgeinvolvedinpsychologicalexperimental ingsofar: specifictheoriesaimedattheexplanationof
design. This can indirectly bring an individual’s own oneormorephenomena,suchas‘attachmenttheory’or
‘tacit assumptions’ into the mix of relevant auxiliaries: ‘ego depletion theory’, which can be more-or-less eas-
assumptionsaboutthemannerinwhichanexperiment ilydistinguishedfromauxiliaryassumptionsabout,say,
has been (or should be) conducted which are not di- measurement validity. I will instead use ‘theory ’ when
2
rectly methodologically or otherwise describable. An- talkingabouttheoryinthelatter,broadsenseoftheory
other example of such ‘tacit assumptions’ can be found implied by holistic underdetermination: the entire set
infacevalidity-informedconstruction/evaluationofex- oftheoriesand(tacit)assumptionsdirectlyorindirectly
perimental setups and measurement instruments, for involvedintheformulationandderivationofahypoth-
which researchers often simulate their own participa- esis from a theory , and the design of an experiment
1
tion and interpretations of stimuli/questions. In turn, capable of testing it2. Notably, this means theory can
2
fit with ‘personal simulations’ or ‘techniques’ can also include other theories that are not under test. I will
1
enter as a tacit auxiliary assumption about experimen- reserve ‘theory’ for cases in which either interpretation
tal design, and thus in principle can be used to dismiss fits.
certainresearchdesignsandfindingsbyindividuals. Theory encompasses a large variety of possibly rel-
2
evant ‘background beliefs’, which might vary per ex-
Twotypesof‘theory’ periment and experimenter. This makes it hard to pin
down. Formostpsychologicalexperiments,itwillrange
Two implications of the above analysis need to be
frommorebasicstatisticalandmethodologicalassump-
madeexplicithere. First,theaboveexamplesshowthat
tions to the aforementioned ontological commitments
given different ontological commitments, tacit knowl-
we hold. It also will likely cover our (personal or disci-
edge or other elements of our background theory, we
plinary) interpretations of key scientific concepts such
might draw different conclusions about the evidential
as causality, correlation and validity. It also covers
relevanceofthesameresultsforthesametheories. No-
anyindirectlyordirectlyrelevantknowledgeandtheo-
tably, changing any of these elements also can force
ries from other fields (e.g., about the nature of space-
changes in our evaluation of all results we previously
time), and most likely several ‘tacit’ assumptions de-
believedtoconstituteevidencefororagainstourviews.
rived from previous experimental experience and our
Second, this analysis shows that the generally used
assumptions about a participant’s engagement with ex-
definitionoftheoryinthisliterature–thatis,‘alogically
perimentaltasks.
coherentsetofpropositionsaimedattheexplanationof
oneorseveralphenomena’–doesnotcovermanyrele-
Degreesofunderdeterminationandhowtodecrease
vantandevenhighly‘theoretical’assumptionsinvolved
them
in our experimental practice (e.g., ontological commit-
ments, statistical assumptions, measurement theory). Let us now return to the relevance of our discussion
Instead, the analysis so far shows us that any such the- ofunderdeterminationforthepsychological‘theorycri-
ory aimed at the explanation of a single phenomenon sis’. Howisunderdeterminationrelatedtotheweaklink
can only be tested given a set of auxiliary assumptions between psychological theories and experimental hy-
drawn from many other theories (see also Teo, 2020 potheses? Inordertoshowthis,Ifirstneedtointroduce
for a different angle leading to the same conclusion) anewconcept: degreesofunderdetermination. Onthe
as well as paradigmatic, personal and non-theoretical basisoftheprevioustwosections, Iarguethatfindings
background knowledge or beliefs (Kuhn, 1962; Quine, can underdetermine theories more or less. The higher
1951). This latter set is not exactly the same as the set the absolute number of theories – including unknown
oftheoryandallauxiliaryassumptionsdirectlyrelevant
to a single phenomenon and its measurement, as cer- 2Notably,theory 2isclosertoQuine’sconceptionoftherole
ofknowledgeinscience(Quine,1951),aswellasencompass-
tain auxiliary assumptions themselves may be derived
ingthebackgroundknowledgeonwhichwedrawinorderto
from further background theory or theories, or yet fur-
abducetheories (e.g. Haslbecketal.,2022).
thersources(e.g.,theoriesaboutspace-time). 1
===== PAGE 7/20 =====
7
ones – that is able to account for the same (successful) 2018).
finding to the same degree of accuracy, the higher the Theabilityofatestproceduretoinfactidentifyflaws
degree of contrastive underdetermination. The more in H depends not just on whether we (un)intendedly
auxiliary assumptions we could legitimately falsify in- skewthedataandstatisticalanalysesinourtheory’sfa-
stead of falsifying a hypothesis after an unsuccessful vor (e.g., through forgery or QRPs; see Mayo, 2018, p.
finding,thehigherthedegreeofholisticunderdetermi- 40-41),butalsoonthevalidityofourauxiliaryassump-
nation. These two definitions can be more concretely tions. If we are uncertain about some of our auxiliary
translated as the absolute amount of viable alternative assumptions, the test procedure might not be able to
explanations we could respectively formulate for suc- uncover whether H is false, after all: if any auxiliary
cessful and unsuccessful results given complete aware- assumptionisviolated, thefindingmaysimplybeirrel-
ness of all alternatives: the more possibilities we have evant for H. We can thus reduce the degree of holis-
in either case, the more underdetermined our theory tic underdetermination by for example validating our
will be by any eventual finding (see also Fiedler et al., measurement instruments in advance, using manipula-
2012). Inpractice,thedegreeofholisticunderdetermi- tionchecks,ensuringthatourdesigniscarriedoutcor-
nationalsocanbeconsideredtheinverseofthedegree rectlyanddoesnotviolateourtheoreticalassumptions,
towhichalltypesofstudy-elementrelatedvalidity(e.g., and ensuring that we use appropriate statistical tech-
construct,internal)havebeenestablished(seealsoFab- niquesandhaveanadequatesamplesize(Mayo,2018,
rigaretal., 2020), thoughitmustbestressedherethat p. 75-115). To further enhance severity in this par-
the degree to which we can in fact establish such va- ticularformwecanspecifyourtheorytosuchadegree
lidityisdependentonthespecificityofourtheory and thatitidentifieswhichfactorscanpossiblyinfluencethe
1
(background) theory – more on which will follow be- phenomenon we study and, more importantly, which
2
low. cannot. This not only allows us to design studies that
From these definitions, we can also directly derive control for the known confounds, but also to treat any
methods to decrease underdetermination. To decrease remainingviolationoftheC -clauseasaviolationofour
p
the degree of contrastive underdetermination we run theory – because if there was another ‘unknown’ con-
into, we can try to make predictions that only would found or ‘hidden moderator’, our theory is apparently
follow from a smaller subset of possible theories3. The incomplete. Although this level of specification is diffi-
most common, and perhaps easiest way to do this is to cult to achieve, it in effect allows us to a priori specify
formulatepredictionsthatareverypreciseorotherwise the boundary conditions implied by our theory, whilst
very unlikely without the theory, which is also known simultaneouslydecreasingthedegreeofcontrastiveun-
as a risky testing approach (see Meehl, 1978; Popper, derdeterminationbyexcludingalternativetheoriesthat
1959). Upon (a series of) predictive success(es), such implydifferentboundaryconditionsforthesimilarpre-
a theory would only have to compete with a much dictions. Through this method, we can also indirectly
smaller set of possible alternative explanations of the test our ontological commitments, given that different
samefinding(s)duetothefactthatfewalternativethe- ontologicalcommitmentswouldimplydifferentbound-
ories can predict the same exact outcome(s) (see also aryconditionsdowntheline.
Meehl,1990a). Inturn,thismeansthatsuchasuccess-
ful unlikely or risky prediction is both more informa-
3Areviewerremarkedthatcontrastiveunderdetermination
in principle could be reduced by examining the explanatory
tivethanageneralprediction(i.e.,welearnmore)and
coherence of a theory (cf. Maier et al., 2024). This is true
providesmorecorroborationfortheinvestigatedtheory
ifweassesshowwellasetofknowntheoriesexplainsorpre-
relativetothesetofallalternativetheoriesthana‘safe’
dictsaparticularsetofdata,asthisallowsustoidentifywhich
predictionthatiscompatiblewithmanytheorieswould.
theoriesareincompatiblewiththefullrangeofgathereddata
Similarly, we can decrease the degree of holistic un- andthuscanbediscountedfromconsideration. Yet,knowing
derdetermination by ensuring the validity of all of our that any current theory has good or even the best possible
auxiliaryassumptions,andtherebyreducingthechance explanatorycoherencewiththedatadoesnotreducethepos-
wediscoverpost-hocthattheyareviolated. Inthephilo- sibilitythatthereareunconceivedalternativeswiththesame
sophical literature, the approach closest to this tech- orbettercoherence.Afterall,notethatexplanatorycoherence
nique is best formulated in Deborah Mayo’s severity is bounded by the set of known (to be) relevant data. Since
principle: aresearchfindingonlyprovidesevidencefor novel theories can help identify novel measuring techniques,
relevantphenomenaanddatapoints,ourcurrentbesttheory
ahypothesisHif–andonlyif–thisfindingresultsfrom
mightturnoutlessandlesscoherentovertimeduetofailing
atestprocedurewhichtakenasawholewouldhaveun-
toexplainthenovelevidence. Explanatorycoherencethusat
coveredthefalsityofordiscrepanciesfromH ifH were
theverybestisanunreliableguidetocontrastiveunderdeter-
false (Mayo and Spanos, 2009, p. 32; see also Mayo,
mination,ifnotpotentiallyirrelevanttoit.
===== PAGE 8/20 =====
8
Furthermore, we can develop our theory -based also indirectly mention the problem of contrastive un-
2
background assumptions and make these explicit, en- derdeterminationwhentheystatethatanempiricalhy-
suring that there is no incoherence of these with our pothesis derived from a theory needs to be specific to
theory and/or experiment, as well as use these to fur- this theory in order to be diagnostic for it (i.e., the
therinformthestrengthofauxiliaries. Suchseveretest- probability of the finding given that the theory is false,
ingthenminimizestheamountofauxiliaryassumptions P(X|¬T), must be low), which echoes the risky testing
that can function as possible ‘scapegoats’ when a pre- approach described above. This claim is not an explicit
dictionfails,andtherebyallowsustomoreeasilydirect partoftheircritique,butformsakeycomponentofthe
theblametowardsthehypothesis,andbyextensionthe amountofevidenceforthetheorywecandrawfromthe
theory it was derived from. Taken together, underde- experiment upon a successful finding in their analysis.
termination of theory by data as a whole then can be Notably, P(X|¬T) can also be lowered by formal mod-
relatively deflated through engaging in both risky and ellingduetothepossibilitytodrawprecisepointpredic-
severetesting. tionsfromformalmathematicalmodels,asforexample
pointed out by Borsboom et al. (2021), Fried (2020a),
Whatisthetheorycrisis,andwhatisitscause? andRobinaughetal.(2021).
Fried(2020a)andRobinaughetal.(2021)inturnex-
It is now time to return our attention to the theory
plicitlyderiveboththeircritiqueofourcurrenttheories
crisis: how does underdetermination relate to this? As
and their suggestion to adopt formalization from the
mentionedintheprevioussection,underdetermination
workofPaulMeehl(1978;butalsosee1990a,1990b).
covers many of the problems that are argued to be at
Meehlinfactdiscussedunderdeterminationinhiswork,
stakethere,whichbecomesclearwhenwetakeacloser
thereby intending to show that the failure of our the-
look at the relevant literature. In this section I will
ories and research practice is multiple. He for exam-
thereforefirstanalyzetheargumentsinthetheorycrisis
plearguedthatourcurrenttestingstrategy(i.e.,testing
literature in relation to underdetermination, and argue
against null effects and/or an opposite directional ef-
that these indicate that the theory crisis refers to the
fect)isinadequatetoactuallyprovideevidencefortheo-
currentlyhighdegreeofunderdeterminationofourthe-
riesduetothehighP(X|¬T)associatedwithpredictions
oriesbyourdata. Then, Iswitchattentiontothecause
that ‘there is a (directional) effect’: a successful find-
of this high degree of underdetermination in psychol-
ing corroborates the entire set of theories that predict
ogy.
sucha(directional)effect(Meehl,1990a,p.123),which
OberauerandLewandowsky’s(2019)viewofthethe-
we have already identified as a case of high degrees of
orycrisisisexplicitthroughouttheopeningoftheirpa-
contrastive underdetermination. Besides this, he also
per (p. 1596-98): in order to deductively derive a hy-
argued that our auxiliary assumptions are often com-
pothesis (defined by them as ‘the assumption that an
pletelyuncorroboratedorevenmissing,andthatweof-
empirical generalization holds’, p. 1597) from our the-
ten mistake statistical hypotheses for substantive theo-
ories,wecurrentlyoftenneedto(tacitly)assumemany
ries (Meehl, 1990a, p. 110-2). In other words: Meehl
different propositions that are not implied by our theo-
arguedthat,respectively,thedegreesofcontrastiveand
ries. Furthermore,ifourhypothesisisnotconfirmedby
holisticunderdeterminationareveryhighinpsychology,
our data, in the case of ‘weak theory’ there are many
heavilylimitingwhatwecanlearnfromourstudies.
possible explanations for this failure that protect our
Robinaugh et al. (2021) primarily discuss Meehl’s
theory from being affected. This occurs either because
formerargumentaboutcontrastiveunderdetermination
thetheorydoesnotstrictlyrequirethehypothesistoob-
as well as our mistaken usage of statistical hypotheses
tain,orbyfalsifyingoneoftheseauxiliaryassumptions
as theories (also covered by Fried, 2020a), as well as
insteadofourtheory(p. 1598). Thisproblemisechoed
Meehl’s preferred solution to it: risky testing through
by Fried (2020a) when he states that the weaker the
point predictions derived from formal models and con-
theory, “the more auxiliary scape goats can be blamed
sistency testing (see Meehl, 1978, 1990a, 1990b). This
if the theory does not explain or predict well” (Fried,
method relies on the low odds of a highly precise pre-
2020a, p. 4). In other words, Fried (2020a) and Ober-
diction actually obtaining given any failure of an auxil-
auer and Lewandowsky (2019) are worried about the
iaryassumption,causingasuccessfulfindingtoprovide
high degree of holistic underdetermination that occurs
support to the entire conjunction of H and all auxiliary
in the testing of our current theories: we have many
assumptions whilst also eliminating contrastive under-
auxiliary ‘scapegoats’ due to their lacking specification
determination by being highly precise. Yet, they also
and validation, and therefore many alternative expla-
indirectly touch upon the issues with holistic underde-
nationscanbegivenforfailedpredictions.
terminationbypointingoutthenecessityofstrongaux-
Interestingly, Oberauer and Lewandowsky (2019)
===== PAGE 9/20 =====
9
iliary assumptions, especially for measurement. They tocreateconditionsforeitherriskyorseveretesting,or
later however delimit this to formal auxiliary assump- tootherwisereducethedegreesofunderdetermination.
tions about the hypothesized statistical and mathemat- Yet, this seems a restatement of the problem. Why can
ical properties of the phenomenon under study and as currentpsychologicaltheorynotdoso?
well as interpretation of its measurements, thereby im- In my view, the above can be best explained by our
plicitly leaving out a large swathe of auxiliary assump- theories not being specific (see also Hagger et al.,
1
tions. Nevertheless, Robinaugh et al.’s (2021) critique 2017;Klein,2014;OberauerandLewandowsky,2019),
ofpsychologicaltheoriescanbearguedtoboildownto which I mean to use here in all its senses: precision,
the high degree of contrastive and holistic underdeter- completeness,explicitnessandclarity. Aspecifictheory
1
minationweencounterintheirtesting. isexplicitabout‘what’itexplainsbyprovidingcleardef-
Fried (2020a) is the most specific about what he be- initions of the explanandum and the constructs, com-
lieves to be wrong with psychological theories. In his ponents and concepts it invokes in both defining and
critique he largely follows Meehl’s lead, due to which explaining it. This requires ontological commitments
he also (in)directly defines ‘weak’ theories as theories concerning the realization of the explanandum within
sufferingfromalargedegreeofbothvariantsofunder- thatreality(i.e.,whatitismaterially,whatcountsasan
determinationwhentested. Besideshisaforementioned instantiation of the explanandum and what does not)
critiquegroundedinholisticunderdetermination,Fried andothertheoreticalelementsthatareassumedtorefer
for example states that weak theories “predict observa- to something in the world. It is also explicit about the
tions also predicted by other theories”, which he ex- ‘how’ of its explanation by giving a complete account
plicitly identifies as a problem with a high degree of of not just the mechanism(s) or other relationships un-
contrastive underdetermination (Fried, 2020a, p. 24). derlying the explanandum (see also Smaldino, 2017;
He also adds further elements that point in the direc- Van Rooij and Baggio, 2021), but also the possible ex-
tion of underdetermination, such as the suggestion to traneous influences on these (e.g., confounds). This
write ‘falsification paragraphs’ describing under which requires not only verbal specificity (e.g., precise refer-
(boundary) conditions the hypothesis is supposed to ence, clear definition), but also can be supplemented
hold and under which it ought not. Such falsification withschematicrepresentations(e.g., mechanisticmod-
paragraphs would amount to an explicit expansion of els such as schematic images of a synaptic cleft; Bech-
our known auxiliary assumptions about experimental tel and Abrahamsen, 2005) and, indeed, formal mod-
design, as well as a relative reduction in the amount elling. In other words, a specific theory implies and
1
of circumstances that could lead to falsification of the informsmanyoftheauxiliaryassumptionsrequiredfor
C -clause. Whilst doing so, Fried (2020a) importantly its testing, and thereby also the conditions required for
p
also points out the double standard inherent in refer- it to be tested (Fried, 2020a; Klein, 2014). A specific
ring to contextual sensitivity of effects in the case of theory thereby also can inform what Van Rooij and
1
failed predictions (i.e., violations of the C -clause or Baggio(2020)labelstrongtestsofqualitativestructure:
p
design-related auxiliary assumptions), whilst being un- “tests that directly tap into the workings of a system as
able to properly formulate the conditions under which itexercisesthecapacityofinterest”or,asIwouldprefer
a ‘real’ non-replication would take in advance of any todefinethis,exhibitsthephenomenonofinterest.
testing. Thisshowsthatsuchtheorieseitherareincom- Suchspecifictheory alwaysdepends,bothbydefini-
1
plete or not entirely explicitly formulated or specified. tion and in practice, on explicit theory for its develop-
2
Fried thus also appears to be referring to high degrees mentand,asshownpreviously,testing. Aswesawpre-
ofunderdeterminationresultingfrompsychology’scur- viously,ourontologicalcommitments–partoftheory –
2
rentresearchpractices. donotonlyinformourmeasurementpractices,butalso
Toconclude,itappearsthetheorycrisis–asitiscur- constrain what type of entities we can invoke and how
rently discussed – can be interpreted as the often high we even conceive of psychological phenomena. More
degrees of both contrastive and holistic underdetermi- basictypesofauxiliaryassumptionscanalsobededuced
nation of our theories by our data. In order to offer from or implied by the theory under test in combina-
1
solutionstothis‘theorycrisis’,wehoweveralsorequire tionwithourtheory ,suchasauxiliariesaboutpossible
2
aclearspecificationofthecauseofthissituation. What confounds as long as a mechanism is specified by our
causes the currently high degrees of underdetermina- theory . Given sufficient background knowledge of the
1
tion in psychological science? The analysis so far can systeminwhichthismechanismisembedded(theory ),
2
offerusapreliminaryanswer,whichisthatcurrentpsy- wecanafteralldirectlyabducemechanism-externalin-
chologicaltheorydoesnotinformourresearchdesigns, fluences on the mechanism’s functioning. If a theory
1
instruments, and other methodological choices enough offers very little information about this, we can hardly
===== PAGE 10/20 =====
10
delimit the space of possible confounding factors for cess precisely?) deeply worsens contrastive underde-
our hypothesized relationships, which in turn causes termination by allowing for many alternative underly-
lacking auxiliary assumptions about these in terms of ing mechanisms, whilst worsening holistic underdeter-
experimental design. This compromises our ability to mination due to our resulting inability to specify con-
designinternallyvalidexperimentswhilstalsoinflating founds and good measurement techniques. However,
the likelihood of the C -clause being violated – i.e., the currentlylackingvalidationofmeasurementtechniques
p
prevalenceof‘hiddenmoderators’isunknown,andthus (see e.g. Chester and Lasko, 2021; Flake and Fried,
possiblylarge. 2020) and often lacking consensus on and conceptual-
Theory is also relevant to most other auxiliary as- ization of key constructs even in non-ontological terms
1
sumptions related to experimental design: only our (Eronen & Bringmann, 2021; Feest, 2019) by them-
theory can specify which aspects of the design matter selves already lead to severe problems with the degree
1
tofindingtheeffectornot(seealsoKlein,2014). Thisis of holistic underdetermination we encounter. In turn,
very clear when determining construct validity of mea- we are in the dark when we are faced with our results:
surementtechniques: notonlyhasconstructvalidityal- do these support or disconfirm our theory, or are they
waysbeenstronglytiedtotheoriesfromapsychometric whollyirrelevant?
view (e.g., Kane, 2001), every single method for estab- Moreconciselyput,thelackofspecificitymeansthat
lishingconstructvalidityalsoreliesonsometypeofthe- the results of many of our studies are currently unin-
oretical reasoning about the to-be-measured construct, formative;theydonotconstrainwhatbeliefsweshould
suchasaspecifiednomologicalnetworkofallthiscon- holdinresponsetothem,neitherinregardtowhichthe-
struct’s relationships (Cronbach & Meehl, 1955), the oriesweshouldholdnorinregardtowhetherthefind-
specification of a causal connection between construct ingsareactuallyrelevantfortheevaluationofthesethe-
and measurement technique (Borsboom et al., 2004), ories. Andimportantly,wethencannotreliablyuseour
anargumenttotheeffectthatourproposedinterpreta- previous findings to inform or help evaluate future re-
tion of the measurement technique is in fact valid for searchorfindings. Thisunderdeterminationthenisnot
our intended use (Kane, 2001) or the minimal claim just a problem for theory evaluation, but also caused
1
that other constructs are to be positively, negatively or byalackoftheoreticalspecificityinthefirstplace4.
not associated with it in a certain pattern (Campbell The ‘theory crisis’ then refers to the high degree
& Fiske, 1959). Since whatever construct is (validly) of underdetermination we encounter when testing our
measured by the technique must also be the one the theories , due to their lack of specification as well as
1
theory discusses, this implies that not just the valid- lackingspecificationofthebackgroundassumptionsin-
1
ityof ourassumptions aboutconstruct validitybutalso volved in the creation of hypotheses and their testing
the degree to which we can in fact investigate this are (i.e., theory ). Even though this may not be the only
2
largely theory -dependent (see also Borsboom et al., problem with psychological theory and theorizing (see
1
2004;Kane,2001). Also,notethatinthecasethemea- e.g., Van Rooij and Baggio, 2021), I want to stress that
surement is independent from theory (e.g., measuring this nonetheless is a serious problem as highly under-
1
temperature when testing for disease presence), its va- determined research is an exercise in futility. If we are
liditywilldependontheory nonetheless–ashasbeen uncertainaboutnotjustthevalidityofourauxiliaryas-
2
shownabove. sumptionsbutalsowhichassumptionsweactuallyhold
Specificity thus is a necessity if we are to decrease (e.g.,whichfactorscouldbeconsideredapossiblecon-
the degrees of underdetermination we are confronted found and which not, whether our measurement tech-
with. Yet, there is often no such specificity in psycho- niques are actually valid), even successful predictions
logicaltheory,becauseourtheoriescurrentlyoftenoffer
no clear, ontologically specific conceptions of the phe-
4NotethatthisisatoddswithapreviousanalysisbyTrafi-
mow and Earp (2016), who, in response to an argument by
nomena,constructsorprocesseswestudy: i.e.,itisun-
Klein(2014)similartomine,arguedthatnotbadlyspecified
clear how exactly they are realized in the world, or we
theoriesbutauxiliaryassumptionsarethecauseoftherepli-
are not committed to any particular realization. This is
cation crisis. Although I do not claim that theoretical prob-
the case for our theories in both the narrow and broad
lemsunderliethereplicationcrisishere,Iwouldcontendthat
sense: there is often no clear background paradigm or auxiliaryassumptionsarenotalwaystheory-independent;say,
set of ontological commitments (Kellen et al., 2021; whetherameasurementtechniquecanbearguedtobevalid
Muthukrishna & Henrich, 2019). The absence of spe- depends on what we conceive its measurand to be. Without
cific theory in terms of ontological commitments about such a conception within the theory, auxiliary assumptions
thenatureofhumancognitionandresultantdefinitions aboutconstructvaliditywillalwaysremainweaklymotivated.
of constructs (e.g., what is a belief, trait or mental pro- Well-specifiedtheoriesinturnwillstrictlyimplytheauxiliary
assumptionsunderwhichtheycanbetested.
===== PAGE 11/20 =====
11
canhardlybearguedtoprovideevidenceforthetested unformalized verbal theory, due to the possibil-
theory due to the possibility of assumption violations ity to directly apply the rules of formal logic or
– if not here, then in the future. Similarly, replication mathematics to formalized theories or models as
andvalidationattemptsarelikelytobecomebothgoose well as the concomitant elimination of any ambi-
chases and money pits due to being similarly underde- guity inherent to natural language. This allows
termined by theory. And if we engage in tests of hy- us to make hypotheses that must be the case ac-
pothesesthatcouldbetrueunder(comparatively)many cording to our theories, instead of merely being
theories, we do not actually learn much from our ex- possible (Borsboom et al., 2021; Fried, 2020a,
periments. Then, if much of our research indeed is as 2020b; Guest & Martin, 2021; Haslbeck et al.,
underdetermined as I and the aforementioned authors 2022; Oberauer & Lewandowsky, 2019; Robin-
argue, thetwoformsofunderdeterminationalsoentail augh et al., 2021; Smaldino, 2017, 2019, 2020;
that the path towards a cumulative psychological sci- VanRooij&Baggio,2021).
ence currently is blocked, as we are unable to derive
2. Evaluability and simulation: Formalization also
much (if any) evidence for our theories from our ex-
allows us to formally evaluate whether a (tested)
perimental research. In such a case, the evidential rel-
hypothesis actually follows/is deducible from a
evance of any highly underdetermined study after all
(formalized) theory. This allows us to test the
is either low to begin with (high contrastive underde-
viability of our theories as an explanation for
termination) and/or extremely uncertain (high holistic
their explanandum, as well as check for any con-
underdetermination)–meaningthatwecannotrelyon
straint violations or unlikely implications, in ad-
any findings to inform our theories or knowledge. In
vanceofempiricaltesting(Borsboometal.,2021;
other words, this suggests that without strong theories
Fried, 2020a; Guest & Martin, 2021; Oberauer
webuildresearchprogramsontheevidentialequivalent
& Lewandowsky, 2019; Robinaugh et al., 2021;
ofquicksand.
Scheel et al., 2021; Smaldino, 2020; Van Rooij &
Baggio,2020).
Doesformalmodellingsolvethetheorycrisis?
3. Explicitness: The creation of a formal model
Assuming that the ‘theory crisis’ currently is a seri-
forces you to make core variables and auxiliary
ous problem for (parts of) psychology and refers to the
assumptions about e.g. variable interrelation-
highdegreesofunderdeterminationpresentinthetest-
ships, moderator variables and boundary condi-
ingofpsychologicaltheories ,wecannowasktheques-
1
tionsexplicit(OberauerandLewandowsky,2019;
tionwhetherformalmodellingiscapableofsolvingthis
Smaldino, 2020, p. 1614; Borsboom et al., 2021;
problem,andifso,towhichextent. Iwillapproachthis
Guest and Martin, 2021; Robinaugh et al., 2021;
question by first identifying the main arguments in fa-
Scheeletal.,2021;VanRooijandBaggio,2021).
vor of formal modelling, after which I respectively dis-
cuss its effects for contrastive and holistic underdeter- 4. Risky testing: Following Meehl (1990a, 1990b)
mination. During this discussion, I argue that formal andPopper(1959),formalmodelscansupplypre-
modelling is neither sufficient nor necessary for the re- cisemathematicalpredictions,whichincreasethe
duction of either degree of underdetermination in psy- testability and falsifiability of theories – i.e., they
chological science, as well as show that it is not inher- allowtheoriestoberiskilytested. Thisispossible
ently superior to ‘verbal’ or otherwise ‘informal’ theory by, for example, comparing theory-implied simu-
regarding this end (e.g., verbal descriptions, mechanis- lated data with actual empirical data (Borsboom
ticmodels). etal.,2021;Fried,2020a;Robinaughetal.,2021;
Letusbeginbyidentifyingthemainargumentsinfa- Scheeletal.,2021).
vorofformalmodellinginthecurrentliterature. Ihere
include arguments of all proponents of formal mod- 5. Open theorizing: Formal theories are ‘open the-
elling,notjustthoseclaimingtoaddressthe‘theorycri- ories’, which – in contrast to unformalized, ver-
sis’, to make the case for formal modelling as strong as bal theories – can be easily interpreted, used and
possible. In order of their overall acceptance amongst modified by those who did not conceive them, as
proponents of modelling, the expected benefits of for- well as being transferrable across domains. Fur-
malmodellingare: thermore, their (annotated) code can be shared
openly (Fried, 2020a; Guest & Martin, 2021;
1. Deductiveprecision: Itismorestraight-forwardto Robinaughetal.,2021;Smaldino,2020).
deducehypothesesfromformalizedtheory(i.e.,a
6. Emergence from simulations: Simulations based
theoryformalizedintoaformalmodel)thanfrom
on formal models can lead to new hypotheses
===== PAGE 12/20 =====
12
as well as the prediction of emergent phenom- in the structure of either of the two, such as changes
ena that would not be identified without for- in the hypothesized real-world referents of core con-
mal modelling, due to the intractability of rea- cepts. Robinaugh et al. (2021) do not offer a direct
soningthroughallpossiblevariationsofvalues/s- solution to these problems, but instead argue that pos-
tatesincomplexverbalmodels(Robinaughetal., sible measurement problems will become apparent by
2021; but also partially present in Oberauer and alsoformalizingourmeasurementtheories. Inturn,this
Lewandowsky,2019). formalizationwillmakeourhidden(auxiliary)assump-
tions about our measurement techniques explicit, such
Though not necessarily intended as such by some, as what our measurements actually indicate. They go
most of these arguments can be brought to bear on is- ontostatethatthisnewfoundexplicitnesswillimprove
sues with underdetermination. Let us begin with the our measurement techniques, without describing how
reductionofcontrastiveunderdetermination,forwhich thiswillactuallycometopass.
formal modelling appears to be an especially fruitful Whilst useful, specifying the (previously tacit) as-
approach. To formalize a verbal theory 1, we after all sumptionsrequiredforriskytestswithcertainmeasure-
need to (3) specify the exact mathematical or logical ment techniques however does not yet make these in-
relationships between all variables (e.g., Fried, 2020a; strumentsvalidorprecise–theonlywaytoachievethe
GuestandMartin, 2021), makinganysuchmodelafar latter would be to eliminate sources of error in our ex-
more specific instantiation of the verbal theory it is de- istingmeasurementsortoconceivebettermeasurement
rived from – especially given the fact that this transla- techniques. Neither of these latter solutions is depen-
tioncanoftenoccurinmultiplemutuallyexclusiveways dentonorsupportedbyformalmodelling,norbyother
(Robinaugh et al., 2021). Such specification in turn formsofformalization. Formalmodellingalsodoesnot
allows (1) direct derivation of highly precise hypothe- fulfill any role for the specification of what our mea-
ses and thus allows us to (4) engage in risky testing by surementtechniquesinfact(aresupposedto)measure.
formulating unlikely hypotheses, especially if the for- Instead, more specific verbal theorizing is required for
malmodel’svariablevaluesaredirectlytranslatableinto such improvements to measurement instruments and
real-life measurement values (Haslbeck et al., 2022). their interpretations, as these require knowledge about
An added benefit here is that (2) we can evaluate the the real-world referent of the measured construct or
fitofhypothesestotheory 1 quicklythroughsimulation, quantityanditsembeddinginareal-worldsystem.
decreasing the chance we test an irrelevant or impos- We should, for example, first determine what the to-
sible hypothesis. Lastly, the possibility that the formal be-measuredthinginfactisintheworldbeforewecan
model leads to (6) unexpected, ‘emergent’ predictions even think about measuring it. Given such knowledge,
undersomeparametervalues,aspointedoutbyRobin- we could formulate an ontologically specific, mecha-
aughetal.(2021),furtherincreasesthevalueofformal nistic model (Bechtel & Abrahamsen, 2005) that cov-
modellingifwewishtoengageinriskytesting. ers the quantity and its interactions with the environ-
As Robinaugh et al. (2021) already recognized, the ment in order to identify new approaches to its mea-
possibility to in fact engage in such risky testing based surement, allowing us to validate measurements using
on point predictions depends on our already having triangulation or knowledge of the causal connections
highly precise, valid and accurate measurement instru- between measurement technique and construct (Bors-
ments – if not, any failed prediction can be simply boom et al., 2004). Such a mechanistic model is not
blamed on measurement problems such as invalidity, formal per se; in most cases, mechanistic models are
low reliability or random error. As mentioned previ- verbal and schematic descriptions of the components
ously, it has however recently been shown that both involvedingeneratingaphenomenon(Bechtel&Abra-
validationpracticesandsuchmeasurementinstruments hamsen, 2005). Another option would be to create a
are often missing (Chester & Lasko, 2021; Feest, 2019; completeoverviewofallthe(confounding)factorsand
Flake&Fried,2020)andthatthedevelopmentofmea- processes that contribute to the measurement process
surementtechniquesiscoupledtoadvancesinconcepts and its error, in order to see if these can be eliminated
(i.e., part of verbal theory) through a process of epis- orcontrolledforinourpredictions(i.e.,aformofnomo-
temic iteration (Chang, 2004; Eronen & Bringmann, logical validation; Cronbach and Meehl, 1955; Hagger
2021; Eronen & Romeijn, 2020). Furthermore, as I ar- et al., 2017). In either case, we need to engage in a
gued in the previous sections, the validity of measure- formofspecifictheorizing: weneedtospecifytheonto-
ment techniques and the degree to which we can es- logical referent of our to-be measured quantity or offer
tablishthisvalidityrelylargelyonthespecificityofour an otherwise clear conceptualization of it, specify not
theory 1 and the details of our theory 2. Previous valid- only which causal relations it enters into but also how
ity claims can after all be easily obviated by changes
===== PAGE 13/20 =====
13
these occur, and derive possible moderating variables ofthemeasurementinterpretationswerequire? Thisis
fromtheseassumptions. very useful in its own right, but not a solution to the
Whilethisincreasesspecificityofourtheory ,neither contrastive horn of the theory crisis, entailing that for-
1
oftheseapproacheshasanythingtodowithformalizing malmodellingbyitselfcannotbesufficientasasolution
atheory perse–theycouldeasilyoccurindependently tohighdegreesofunderdetermination.
1
of formalization. Furthermore, such specification also Notably,wealsodonotneedformalmodellingtode-
requires, for example, a complementary paradigmatic crease contrastive underdetermination, even though it
view of human cognition implying ontological commit- is very helpful for this. It is, after all, more than pos-
ments that can support and guide such specific inter- sible to derive specific, risky predictions from theories
pretations. Infact,ifourtheories andexperimentsare without actually engaging in formalization. Consider,
1
notdeeplyinformedbysuchcommitments,itisunlikely for example, positing not a single effect but a larger
we can exclude other theories or interpretations de- pattern of directional effects across pre-specified varia-
1
rived from other paradigms (see also Oude Maatman, tionsinexperimentalcircumstancesthatarestrictlyim-
2020 for an example of this regarding interpretations plied by the (verbal) theory (see also Tunç and Tunç,
1
of ‘mental states’). This also goes for formal models 2023) – which is already far more risky than gambling
of such theories ; without a commitment to a paradig- onsingleeffectdirections. Anotherexampleispositing
1
matic background theory, there are extremely few con- that a hypothesized mechanism or construct exists as
straints that could eliminate any particular formaliza- hypothesized by the theory , which is essentially a hy-
1
tion(seealsoVanRooijandBaggio,2021). Thisentails pothesisaboutexistenceandformratherthaneffects. A
that specification of theory also is an important, if not goodexampleofthiswouldbethepredictionandlater
2
necessary, tool for reduction of contrastive underdeter- discovery of the double helix structure of DNA by Wat-
minationingeneral. son, Crick, Franklin and Wilkins. Ontologically specific
The aforementioned points also show that a prema- descriptions of mechanisms also imply their own con-
ture move to risky testing based on formal models – founding variables, and therefore can be riskily tested
that is, without good measurement techniques or an by investigating whether these confounds indeed are
embedding in a broader paradigmatic view on human ‘confounding’aslongastheseconfoundsareoverallun-
cognition – could make the degree of holistic under- likelyinothertheories.
determination worse. Without some conception about Though offering less reduction of contrastive under-
what we measure as well as possible sources of mea- determinationthanmathematicalpointpredictions,the
surementvarianceanderror,itisdifficulttosupportthe above examples show that such ‘informal’, verbal pre-
many assumptions about the target system, reliability, dictions can nonetheless be risky, especially if they are
validityandaccuracyrequiredtotrustprecisemeasure- stacked in a broader theory-testing program. And no-
ments, let alone even create such precise measurement tably,theyachievethiswithoutthenecessitytofirstcre-
techniques. Evenifsuchmeasurementtechniquescould ate highly precise measurement techniques, offering a
be created in absence of advances in (informal) verbal way to empirically establish warrant for a theory be-
1
theory, a predictive success could be heavily criticized fore such steps are taken. From a purely experimental
as possibly irrelevant to the theory due to invalid mea- perspective,itwouldthenbeadvisabletospecifybefore
surement. This mirrors the calls for deeper considera- weformalize. Toconclude,formalmodellingisalsonot
tion of the importance of conceptualization and mea- necessary to reduce degrees of contrastive underdeter-
surement by Eronen and colleagues (2021, 2020) and mination–thoughitremainsahighlyusefulmethodfor
others(Feest,2019;Morawski,2019). doingso.
The decrease in contrastive underdetermination of- Letusnowturntothequestionwhetherformalmod-
fered by formal modelling then appears to be counter- elling can help decrease holistic underdetermination.
balanced with the inability to properly capitalize on it Formal modelling is argued to have direct bearing on
due to an increase in its holistic sibling. That is, unless the degree of holistic underdetermination through the
seriousadvancesinmeasurementaremadethatarede- (3) specification of theoretical assumptions it requires
pendent on more specific theorizing and increased vis- and, through this requirement, is argued to forcibly
ibility of our deeper theoretical and ontological com- lead to (Oberauer and Lewandowsky, 2019, p. 1614;
mitments (i.e., theory ) – and thus not on formal the- Robinaugh et al., 2021). For example, Oberauer and
2
orizing or modelling alone. The actual contribution of Lewandowsky (2019, p. 1614) argue that the formula-
Robinaugh and colleagues’ (2021) formalization strat- tion of a Bayesian network model (e.g., a DAG) would
egy then would be to make our problems with holistic involvetheidentificationandincorporationof“assumed
underdetermination more explicit: can we be certain moderator variables, boundary conditions and other
===== PAGE 14/20 =====
14
auxiliary assumptions”. Similarly, Guest and Martin howprecisetheyare.
(2021) argue that computational modeling forces “sci- Contra Oberauer and Lewandowsky (2019), I would
entists to explicitly document an instance of what their thereforearguethat“adoptingformalmodelling‘forces’
theory assumes, if not what their theory is”, which in specificity”isaclaimthatputsthecartbeforethehorse:
their view notably is possible not just in mathematics, theoretical specificity is not a concomitant benefit of
butalsoinnaturallanguage. formal modelling as suggested but instead a prerequi-
GuestandMartin(2021)therebyalsotouchuponthe site for maximizing its utility, and thus should not be
importanceofdistinguishingformalizationfromspecifi- conflated with it. The possibility to improve on these
cation, although I do not use these words in the same mattersiswhollyindependentoftheprocessofformal-
way as they do. Formalization of a theory is a form of ization, unless we conflate formalization with carefully
1
specification in my sense of the word: it is the specifi- thinking about what we assume and what our theory
cation of the logical or mathematical relationships be- implies (which we can also do non-formally). If the
tween variables or entities in the theory and thereby counter-argument then is that one might or must start
1
the overall dependency structure amongst these. This thinking about these matters whilst or due to engaging
canalsobeappliedtoconcreteinstancesofthetheory in formal modelling – i.e., formal modelling forces the-
1
(i.e., a specific context or task to which the theory orizing (Guest & Martin, 2021) – I would counter we
ought to apply) if adapted to real-life measurement could just as well proscribe a method where this is not
techniques, and offers the benefit of computable sim- aside-effectbutthe‘maindish’,suchastheapplication
ulation of our theory’s implications. As we have seen, of conceptual analysis, reading the history and philos-
this can lead to a welcome decrease in contrastive un- ophy of psychology, or the simple method of carefully
derdetermination under the right circumstances. For- thinking about what we assume and what our theory
malization in itself however does not help us identify, implies.
say, the underlying mechanism of the phenomena we Nevertheless, formal modelling is an incredibly use-
study, even though it might help evaluate our hypoth- fultoolforinstanceswherethetheoryistoocomplexto
esized mechanism in regard to prior theoretical con- reason through unaided (for examples; see Smaldino,
2
straints (Van Rooij & Baggio, 2021). Similarly, it is not 2017). Yet, even then it is only likely to highlight
formalization or formal modelling that would allow us and improve a specific subset of auxiliary assumptions,
to identify the relevant moderator variables, boundary which differs markedly from those we are drawn to
conditions and other auxiliary assumptions Oberauer reason about unaidedly. Formal models are merely a
andLewandowsky(2019)arespeakingof. mathematical or otherwise formal decontextualized re-
Guest and Martin’s (2021) account instead shows description of the theory, from which all such informa-
that general specificity is necessary for our creation of tionnecessaryforexperimentaldesignandotherimple-
(useful) formal models to begin with: without preced- mentationshasbeenpurposefullyeliminatedinorderto
ing (verbal) theoretical specificity, our formal models achievetheclarityrequiredformoreformalevaluation.
areunderconstrainedbyreality,andill-adaptedtocom- Notably,thisisnotabug,butafeatureofformalization.
parison with or prediction of real systems and environ- It is quite literally the goal of formalization to elimi-
ments. Though they can potentially inform experimen- natesemanticnoise(i.e.,meaning,reference)andkeep
tal practice by providing precise or emergent hypothe- onlythemoreeasilyevaluablesyntacticstructure. This
ses, formal models and the process of formalization do move is very useful – but not for a reduction of holis-
not offer further relevant information for this experi- ticunderdetermination. There,thisfeaturepossiblybe-
mental practice itself, nor for its evaluation. Although comes a bug due to indirectly directing our attention
all formalized aspects of theories are necessarily spe- away from real-world implementability and the afore-
1
cific (e.g., variable interrelationships), few things that mentionedpracticalissueswithmeaningandreference
ought to be specific to successfully reduce holistic un- psychology is often plagued with, and towards mathe-
derdeterminationcanbeexplicitlyformalized,afterall, matical, logical and structural intricacies of the model.
suchasontologicalcommitments,definitions,referents, Robinaughetal.(2021,2024)themselvesalreadyshow
andauxiliariesaboutexperimentaldesignandmeasure- suchaneffectwhentheyfocusontheauxiliaryassump-
ment. Norwilltheseautomaticallybecomespecificdue tions about mathematical relationships between mea-
to engaging in formalization: we cannot, for example, surements and quantities that formalization uncovers,
identify real-life confounds for causal connections be- instead of the preceding, experimentally more pressing
tween variables on the basis of (generating) the math- questionwhetherthesemeasurementsactuallymeasure
ematical or logical relationships that might represent what they ought to measure – let alone whether the
these causal connections after formalization, no matter theoretical entities involved are well-defined enough.
===== PAGE 15/20 =====
15
Due to its inherent decontextualization, formal mod- tle bearing on holistic underdetermination, and there-
elling thus appears to potentially move in exactly the foreisneithersufficientnornecessaryfortheresolution
oppositedirectionfromwhatisrequiredtoreduceholis- ofthishornofthetheorycrisiseither. Inordertobeable
tic underdetermination in practical experimentation; it toreduceholisticunderdetermination,weinsteadmust
directs attention away from experimental practice and engage in several non-formal types of theorizing, such
implementation, where the problems with holistic un- as clear conceptualization, specifying real-life mecha-
derdeterminationhoweveraremostpresent. nisms and referents, or, like Van Rooij and Baggio’s
Even given the above, one could still argue that for- (2021)useofcomputationalism,explicitlyadoptingthe
malmodellingmightstillserveageneralroleinresolv- assumptionsofanexistingwell-developedparadigmatic
ing the theory crisis as a method that enforces specific theoretical framework (i.e., one important element of
theorizing upon the researcher, and thus forms an in- our theory ). In other words, we must create specific
2
direct countermeasure to underdetermination. Whilst theories , which also requires awareness and explicit-
1
neither sufficient nor necessary, it thus still confers a nessoftheory . Onlythencanformalmodellingbeap-
2
possible benefit if adopted by psychologists, and could pliedfruitfully.
beunproblematicallycombinedwithothertoolsforrea- Given the inability of formal modelling to address
soning. holistic underdetermination, we can conclude it is nei-
It however is important to recognize that as a thersufficientnornecessarytoresolvethecurrent‘the-
method, formal modelling is not and cannot be theory- ory crisis’, drawing my argument to a close. Neverthe-
neutral (Danziger, 1985), which partially counters this less,afewlooseendsremainafterthisconclusion.
last, middle-of-the-road perspective. The applicability First, there is the possible counter-argument that all
offormalmodellingafterallalsoreliesoncertaintheo- of the above is implicit in the current literature. Yet,
reticalandauxiliaryassumptionsofitsown,suchasthe the necessary types of specification outlined above re-
general viability of quantifying (all) variables and rela- main unmentioned in current proposals for theoretical
tionships in the theory if the theory is to be translated improvement in psychology; though closest to what I
into a mathematical formula or if point predictions are outline – whilst occupied with a wholly different prob-
to be achieved, or of the possibility to coherently ap- lem – even Van Rooij and Baggio (2020, 2021) do not
ply a form of logic or computational language without drawtoomuchattentiontothefactthattheirproposed
problematically‘deforming’whateverisdescribed. method relies on many (disputable) theoretical back-
Assumptions about the quantifiability of the psycho- ground assumptions about the structure of human cog-
logical as well as the viability of our current attempts nition, such as the deeply theoretical claim that com-
atquantificationhoweverhavebeenseriouslycriticized putable capacities are the core explananda of psychol-
(e.g., Michell, 2021; Tafreshi et al., 2016). Non- ogy. Therecentformalization-basedtheoryconstruction
mathematical approaches to formal modelling may be methods instead focus on the intricacies of the formal-
exemptfromthelattercritiques,butarealsonotwholly izationprocesswhilstdefiningtheorypurelyastheory
1
theory-neutral. This is the case because formal mod- (e.g., Borsboom et al., 2021; Haslbeck et al., 2022;
elling as a method can only be applied to theories that VanRooijandBaggio,2020),largelyignoringnecessary
are amenable to it. It therefore imposes constraints on specificationsinandawarenessoftheory thatarenec-
2
what type of theories and research can be pursued if it essaryforcreationandtestingofaspecifictheory (e.g.,
1
is to be adopted as a new standard in the field (i.e., it paradigmatic assumptions, tacit knowledge, which the-
enforcesamethodologicalimperative;Danziger,1985). ory of causality is adopted – though see Van Rooij and
As Navarro (2021) points out, formal modelling is not Baggio,2021forastrongexamplethatdoesdothisim-
well-suitedtotasksandtheoriesthatarethemselvestoo plicitlybyadoptingcomputationalism). Indoingso,the
complex,therebyindirectlyforcingresearchersintothe current literature thereby appears to primarily aim at
directionofsimplifiedtheoryandhighlyconstrainedre- providing methods for formalizing and evaluating ex-
searchdesigns,whichalsodelimitsthetypeofresearch isting theories instead of in fact telling us something
1
questions we might ask. Though I cannot delve deeply about how to construct specific theories from scratch,
1
into this debate here, I therefore want to stress that includingthecreationofwell-definedconceptsandthe
theassumptionsunderlyingtheviabilityofformalmod- processofdemarcatingphenomenatobeginwith.
ellingitselfaswellasitsdesirabilityforapsychological Second,Ihavenottrulydealtwiththeintroduction’s
research area should also be considered in any future pejorative treatments of verbal theory yet. After all,
pushtowardsitsadoption–likeseveralproponentsalso it could be argued that any verbal theorizing in the
argue(e.g.,Borsboometal.,2021). end could or should be formalized, meaning that ver-
Formal modelling or formalization itself then has lit- baltheoryisstillsomeformof‘prototheory’(Borsboom
===== PAGE 16/20 =====
16
et al., 2021). In response to this, I argue that many theories. IndoingsoIalsooutlinedadifferentapproach
of the theories and assumptions in theory are inher- totheresolutionofthiscrisis: an‘informal’route,which
2
ently ‘informal’, due to being verbal or schematic (e.g., involves a deeper engagement in and appreciation of
a schematic image of a synaptic cleft). That these are specific non-formal theorizing. Whilst I recognize the
not formal does not invalidate them, nor does it make added value of formalization and formal modelling in
them imprecise by definition: many such assumptions psychologicalresearchasawhole,Ihopetohaveshown
are either simply not formalizable, or their formaliza- thatwecannotrelegate(good)verbaltheorizingtothe
tion would lead to information loss. Similarly, I have bargain bin, and that it should not be considered nec-
not explicitly shown that verbal theory is not necessar- essarily imprecise (Fried, 2020a; cf. Robinaugh et al.,
ily ambiguous or imprecise (Fried, 2020a; Robinaugh 2021) or a mere stepping stone towards actual, formal
et al., 2021). To this I would say that if a construct is theory; ‘prototheory’ (Borsboom et al., 2021). Instead,
vague or ambiguous, this may not be the result of the specific verbal theorizing is a necessary component of
imprecision of language, but of the imprecise usage of anyattemptatsolvingthetheorycrisis,andaprerequi-
language. Ifitisdifficulttodefinecoretheoreticalterms site before we should even start to think of formaliza-
such as ‘tendency’ (Navarro, 2021), the answer there- tion.
foredoesnotnecessarilyhavetobeformalizationifwe After all; the quality of a theory is not only a mat-
wish to make our theory testable. Instead, we should ter of form, but primarily one of content. As men-
make explicit what it is we mean, as this is necessary tioned throughout the article, formal modelling can
to connect our theory to experimental practice for all doubtlessly assist in making this content more explicit
theories, even formal ones. By doing so, we after all and evaluable, but as we have seen, its usefulness re-
gain the ability to reason about and reduce the holistic mainsheavilylimitedbytheprecedingverbalbasisitis
underdetermination associated with our measurement appliedto–atheory thatislimitedinitsspecificityby
1
techniquesandexperimentaldesigns. Eventhoughsuch the theory drawn on to support it. To strengthen this
2
conceptual specification may be complicated and per- basis, I believe we must not just create specific verbal
haps more suited to philosophers than to experimen- theoriesbutalsolookbeyondourdisciplinarybordersto
tal psychologists, it will be a necessary step if we want fields engaging with the foundational assumptions un-
toderivewarrantforourtheoriesfromourresults(see derlyingourwork. Inordertobeexplicitabouttheory ,
2
alsoMayo,2018,p. 99-101). to evaluate its quality and coherence with our theory ,
1
Ifoneagreeswithmeuptothispoint,theremaining we after all will also need to be aware of it. We there-
solution is to not only improve our ‘informal’ theories, fore must engage with fundamental philosophical and
but also engage in theorizing in a much broader sense theoreticaldiscussionsabouttheseverybackgroundas-
than is implied by the current debate. Strong theory is sumptions–whichluckilyhavecontinuedintheshadow
not derived from, nor dependent on, the form of theo- of mainstream empirical psychology. Fields like theo-
rizing (i.e., verbal or formal), but only stems from the retical and critical psychology, science and technology
process of theorizing itself – that is, formulating a co- studies (STS), philosophy of mind and philosophy of
herent(andintimewell-supported)setofassumptions science can be drawn from to inform and criticize not
aimed at the explanation of a single or multiple phe- just theories but also to become aware of and evalu-
1
nomena(i.e.,theory )thatisconsistentwithabroader, ate our theory : our tacit knowledge (e.g., Morawski,
1 2
explicitsetofassumptionsandpracticalknowledgethat 2019), ontological commitments and metaphysical po-
informsthistheory andisrequiredtoconnectittoreal- sitions (e.g., Hochstein, 2019), and other implicit as-
1
life practice (i.e., theory ). Formal modelling can po- sumptionsinvolvedinourresearchpractice.
2
tentiallyassistinsuchtheorizinginareasthathavesuf-
ficiently specific verbal theory and can shoulder the as- AuthorContact
sumptionsofformalmodels,whilstspecificverbaltheo-
Correspondence should be addressed to Freek J.W.
rizingwillbenecessaryeverywhere.
OudeMaatmanatfreek.oudemaatman@ru.nl.
ORCID - Freek Oude Maatman: 0000-0002-4795-
Conclusion
435X
In this paper, I have argued that formal modelling
is not a solution to the ‘theory crisis’, since it does not ConflictofInterestandFunding
engage with the problem that lies at its core: the high
Theauthordeclarednopotentialconflictsofinterest.
degreeofbothcontrastiveandholisticunderdetermina-
tion of psychological theories by our experiments and
results, which is caused by a lack of specificity of our
===== PAGE 17/20 =====
17
AuthorContributions Campbell, D. T., & Fiske, D. W. (1959). Convergent
and discriminant validation by the multitrait-
FreekJ.W.OudeMaatman: Conceptualization, Writ-
multimethod matrix [Place: US Publisher:
ing-originaldraft,Writing-review&editing
American Psychological Association]. Psycho-
logicalBulletin,56(2),81–105.https://doi.org/
OpenSciencePractices
10.1037/h0046016
This article is conceptual and not eligible for Open Chang, H. (2004). Inventing Temperature: Measurement
Science badges. The entire editorial process, including andScientificProgress.OxfordUniversityPress.
theopenreviews,ispublishedintheonlinesupplement. Chester, D. S., & Lasko, E. N. (2021). Construct Vali-
dationofExperimentalManipulationsinSocial
Acknowledgements Psychology: Current Practices and Recommen-
dations for the Future [Publisher: SAGE Pub-
I want to thank Jan Bransen, Sander Bisselink,
lications Inc]. Perspectives on Psychological Sci-
Markus Eronen and the Radboud Theoretical Psychol-
ence, 16(2), 377–395. https://doi.org/10.
ogy group for their feedback on early versions of this
1177/1745691620950684
manuscript. I also want to thank Iris van Rooij, Olivia
Collins, H. (1985). Changing Order: Replication and
Guest,andPaulSmaldinofortheircommentsandfeed-
Induction in Scientific Practice. University of
backonpreviouspreprintedversionsofthemanuscript.
ChicagoPress.
Cronbach,L.J.,&Meehl,P.E.(1955).Constructvalid-
References
ity in psychological tests [Place: US Publisher:
Bechtel, W., & Abrahamsen, A. (2005). Explanation: American Psychological Association]. Psycho-
A mechanist alternative. Studies in History and logical Bulletin, 52(4), 281–302. https://doi.
Philosophy of Science Part C: Studies in History org/10.1037/h0040957
andPhilosophyofBiologicalandBiomedicalSci- Danziger, K. (1985). The Methodological Impera-
ences, 36(2), 421–441. https://doi.org/10. tive in Psychology [Publisher: SAGE Publica-
1016/j.shpsc.2005.03.010 tions Inc]. Philosophy of the Social Sciences,
Borsboom, D., Mellenbergh, G. J., & van Heerden, 15(1), 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1177/
J. (2004). The Concept of Validity [Place: 004839318501500101
US Publisher: American Psychological Associa- Earp, B. D., & Trafimow, D. (2015). Replication, falsi-
tion].PsychologicalReview,111(4),1061–1071. fication, and the crisis of confidence in social
https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.111.4. psychology [Publisher: Frontiers]. Frontiers in
1061 Psychology, 6. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.
Borsboom, D., van der Maas, H. L. J., Dalege, J., 2015.00621
Kievit,R.A.,&Haig,B.D.(2021).TheoryCon- Eronen, M. I., & Bringmann, L. F. (2021). The The-
struction Methodology: A Practical Framework oryCrisisinPsychology:HowtoMoveForward
forBuildingTheoriesinPsychology[Publisher: [Publisher:SAGEPublicationsInc].Perspectives
SAGE Publications Inc]. Perspectives on Psycho- onPsychologicalScience,16(4),779–788.https:
logical Science, 16(4), 756–766. https://doi. //doi.org/10.1177/1745691620970586
org/10.1177/1745691620969647 Eronen, M. I., & Romeijn, J.-W. (2020). Philosophy of
Brenninkmeijer, J., Derksen, M., & Rietzschel, E. science and the formalization of psychological
(2019). Informal Laboratory Practices in Psy- theory[Publisher:SAGEPublicationsLtd].The-
chology (S. Vazire & M. Nuijten, Eds.). Col- ory & Psychology, 30(6), 786–799. https://doi.
labra: Psychology, 5(1), 45. https://doi.org/ org/10.1177/0959354320969876
10.1525/collabra.221 Fabrigar, L. R., Wegener, D. T., & Petty, R. E. (2020).
Bringmann, L. F., & Eronen, M. I. (2016). Heating up A Validity-Based Framework for Understand-
the measurement debate: What psychologists ingReplicationinPsychology[Publisher:SAGE
canlearnfromthehistoryofphysics[Publisher: PublicationsInc].PersonalityandSocialPsychol-
SAGE Publications Ltd]. Theory & Psychology, ogy Review, 24(4), 316–344. https://doi.org/
26(1), 27–43. https://doi.org/10.1177/ 10.1177/1088868320931366
0959354315617253 Farrell, S., & Lewandowsky, S. (2010). Computational
Models as Aids to Better Reasoning in Psychol-
ogy [Publisher: SAGE Publications Inc]. Cur-
rent Directions in Psychological Science, 19(5),
===== PAGE 18/20 =====
18
329–335. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / Psychology, 29(5), 579–600. https://doi.org/
0963721410386677 10.1177/0959354319860591
Feest, U. (2019). Why Replication Is Overrated. Philos- Iso-Ahola, S. E. (2017). Reproducibility in Psycholog-
ophy of Science, 86(5), 895–905. https://doi. ical Science: When Do Psychological Phenom-
org/10.1086/705451 ena Exist? [Publisher: Frontiers]. Frontiers in
Fiedler, K., Kutzner, F., & Krueger, J. I. (2012). The Psychology, 8. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.
Long Way From -Error Control to Validity 2017.00879
Proper: Problems With a Short-Sighted False- Kane, M. T. (2001). Current Concerns in Validity The-
Positive Debate [Publisher: SAGE Publications ory.JournalofEducationalMeasurement,38(4),
Inc].PerspectivesonPsychologicalScience,7(6), 319–342. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1745-
661–669. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 3984.2001.tb01130.x
1745691612462587 Kellen, D., Davis-Stober, C. P., Dunn, J. C., & Kalish,
Flake,J.K.,&Fried,E.I.(2020).MeasurementSchmea- M.L.(2021).TheProblemofCoordinationand
surement:QuestionableMeasurementPractices thePursuitofStructuralConstraintsinPsychol-
andHowtoAvoidThem[Publisher:SAGEPub- ogy[Publisher:SAGEPublicationsInc].Perspec-
licationsInc].AdvancesinMethodsandPractices tives on Psychological Science, 16(4), 767–778.
in Psychological Science, 3(4), 456–465. https: https://doi.org/10.1177/1745691620974771
//doi.org/10.1177/2515245920952393 Klein, S. B. (2014). What can recent replication fail-
Fried, E. I. (2020a). Lack of Theory Building and Test- ures tell us about the theoretical commitments
ing Impedes Progress in The Factor and Net- of psychology? [Publisher: SAGE Publications
work Literature. Psychological Inquiry, 31(4), Ltd]. Theory & Psychology, 24(3), 326–338.
271–288.https://doi.org/10.1080/1047840X. https://doi.org/10.1177/0959354314529616
2020.1853461 Kuhn,T.S.(1962).Thestructureofscientificrevolutions.
Fried, E. I. (2020b). Theories and Models: What They Chicago.
Are, What They Are for, and What They Are Landy, J. F., Jia, M. (, Ding, I. L., Viganola, D., Tier-
About. Psychological Inquiry, 31(4), 336–344. ney, W., Dreber, A., Johannesson, M., Pfeiffer,
https://doi.org/10.1080/1047840X.2020. T., Ebersole, C. R., Gronau, Q. F., Ly, A., Van
1854011 denBergh,D.,Marsman,M.,Derks,K.,Wagen-
Guest, O., & Martin, A. E. (2021). How Computational makers, E.-J., Proctor, A., Bartels, D. M., Bau-
Modeling Can Force Theory Building in Psy- man, C. W., Brady, W. J., ... Uhlmann, E. L.
chological Science [Publisher: SAGE Publica- (2020). Crowdsourcing hypothesis tests: Mak-
tions Inc]. Perspectives on Psychological Science, ing transparent how design choices shape re-
16(4), 789–802. https://doi.org/10.1177/ search results [Place: US Publisher: American
1745691620970585 Psychological Association]. Psychological Bul-
Hagger,M.S.,Gucciardi,D.F.,&Chatzisarantis,N.L.D. letin, 146(5), 451–479. https://doi.org/10.
(2017). On Nomological Validity and Auxil- 1037/bul0000220
iary Assumptions: The Importance of Simulta- Maier, M., Van Dongen, N., & Borsboom, D. (2024).
neouslyTestingEffectsinSocialCognitiveThe- Comparing theories with the Ising model of
ories Applied to Health Behavior and Some explanatory coherence [Place: US Publisher:
Guidelines [Publisher: Frontiers]. Frontiers in American Psychological Association]. Psycho-
Psychology, 8. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg. logical Methods, 29(3), 519–536. https://doi.
2017.01933 org/10.1037/met0000543
Haslbeck, J. M. B., Ryan, O., Robinaugh, D. J., Wal- Marr, D. (1982). Vision: A computational investigation
dorp, L. J., & Borsboom, D. (2022). Modeling into the human representation and processing of
psychopathology: From data models to formal visualinformation.W.H.Freeman.
theories [Place: US Publisher: American Psy- Mayo, D. G. (2018). Statistical Inference as Severe Test-
chological Association]. Psychological Methods, ing:HowtoGetBeyondtheStatisticsWars.Cam-
27(6), 930–957. https://doi.org/10.1037/ bridge University Press. https://doi.org/10.
met0000303 1017/9781107286184
Hochstein, E. (2019). How metaphysical commitments Mayo,D.G.,&Spanos,A.(Eds.).(2009).ErrorandIn-
shape the study of psychological mechanisms ference: Recent Exchanges on Experimental Rea-
[Publisher: SAGE Publications Ltd]. Theory & soning, Reliability, and the Objectivity and Ra-
===== PAGE 19/20 =====
19
tionalityofScience.CambridgeUniversityPress. Oude Maatman, F. (2020). Folk psychology and net-
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511657528 work theory: Fact or gamble? A reply to Kalis
Meehl,P.E.(1978).Theoreticalrisksandtabularaster- and Borsboom [Publisher: SAGE Publications
isks:SirKarl,SirRonald,andtheslowprogress Ltd]. Theory & Psychology, 30(5), 729–734.
ofsoftpsychology[Place:USPublisher:Ameri- https://doi.org/10.1177/0959354320952863
can Psychological Association]. Journal of Con- Piccinini, G. (2009). Computationalism in the Philoso-
sultingandClinicalPsychology,46(4),806–834. phy of Mind. Philosophy Compass, 4(3), 515–
https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-006X.46.4.806 532. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1747-9991.
Meehl, P. E. (1990a). Why summaries of research 2009.00215.x
on psychological theories are often uninter- Popper, K. R. (1959). The logic of scientific discovery
pretable[Place:USPublisher:PsychologicalRe- [Pages:480].BasicBooks.
ports]. Psychological Reports, 66(1), 195–244. Proulx, T., & Morey, R. D. (2021). Beyond Statistical
https://doi.org/10.2466/PR0.66.1.195-244 Ritual: Theory in Psychological Science [Pub-
Meehl, P. E. (1990b). Appraising and Amending The- lisher: SAGE Publications Inc]. Perspectives on
ories: The Strategy of Lakatosian Defense and Psychological Science, 16(4), 671–681. https://
TwoPrinciplesthatWarrantIt.PsychologicalIn- doi.org/10.1177/17456916211017098
quiry, 1(2), 108–141. https://doi.org/10. Quine, W. V. (1951). Main Trends in Recent Philos-
1207/s15327965pli0102_1 ophy: Two Dogmas of Empiricism [Publisher:
Michell, J. (2021). Representational measurement the- [DukeUniversityPress,PhilosophicalReview]].
ory: Is its number up? [Publisher: SAGE Publi- The Philosophical Review, 60(1), 20–43. https:
cationsLtd].Theory&Psychology,31(1),3–23. //doi.org/10.2307/2181906
https://doi.org/10.1177/0959354320930817 Richters, J. E. (2021). Incredible Utility: The Lost
Molenaar, P. C. M. (2004). A Manifesto on Psychol- Causes and Causal Debris of Psychological
ogyasIdiographicScience:BringingthePerson Science. Basic and Applied Social Psychology,
Back Into Scientific Psychology, This Time For- 43(6), 366–405. https://doi.org/10.1080/
ever. Measurement: Interdisciplinary Research 01973533.2021.1979003
and Perspectives, 2(4), 201–218. https://doi. Robinaugh, D. J., Haslbeck, J. M. B., Ryan, O., Fried,
org/10.1207/s15366359mea0204_1 E. I., & Waldorp, L. J. (2021). Invisible Hands
Morawski, J. (2019). The replication crisis: How might andFineCalipers:ACalltoUseFormalTheory
philosophyandtheoryofpsychologybeofuse? asaToolkitforTheoryConstruction[Publisher:
[Place: US Publisher: Educational Publishing SAGE Publications Inc]. Perspectives on Psycho-
Foundation]. Journal of Theoretical and Philo- logical Science, 16(4), 725–743. https://doi.
sophical Psychology, 39(4), 218–238. https:// org/10.1177/1745691620974697
doi.org/10.1037/teo0000129 Robinaugh, D. J., Haslbeck, J. M. B., Waldorp, L. J.,
Muthukrishna, M., & Henrich, J. (2019). A problem in Kossakowski, J. J., Fried, E. I., Millner, A. J.,
theory [Publisher: Nature Publishing Group]. McNally, R. J., Ryan, O., de Ron, J., Van der
NatureHumanBehaviour,3(3),221–229.https: Maas, H. L. J., Van Nes, E. H., Scheffer, M.,
//doi.org/10.1038/s41562-018-0522-1 Kendler,K.S.,&Borsboom,D.(2024).Advanc-
Navarro, D. J. (2021). If Mathematical Psychology Did ing the network theory of mental disorders: A
Not Exist We Might Need to Invent It: A Com- computational model of panic disorder [Place:
ment on Theory Building in Psychology [Pub- US Publisher: American Psychological Associa-
lisher: SAGE Publications Inc]. Perspectives on tion].PsychologicalReview,131(6),1482–1508.
Psychological Science, 16(4), 707–716. https:// https://doi.org/10.1037/rev0000515
doi.org/10.1177/1745691620974769 Scheel, A. M., Tiokhin, L., Isager, P. M., & Lakens, D.
Nelson, L. D., Simmons, J., & Simonsohn, U. (2021). Why Hypothesis Testers Should Spend
(2018). Psychology’s Renaissance [Publisher: LessTimeTestingHypotheses[Publisher:SAGE
Annual Reviews]. Annual Review of Psychology, Publications Inc]. Perspectives on Psychological
69(Volume 69, 2018), 511–534. https://doi. Science, 16(4), 744–755. https://doi.org/10.
org/10.1146/annurev-psych-122216-011836 1177/1745691620966795
Oberauer, K., & Lewandowsky, S. (2019). Address- Shapiro, L., & Spaulding, S. (2021). Embodied Cog-
ingthetheorycrisisinpsychology.Psychonomic nition. In E. N. Zalta & U. Nodelman (Eds.),
Bulletin & Review, 26(5), 1596–1618. https:// The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Win-
doi.org/10.3758/s13423-019-01645-2 ter 2021). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford
===== PAGE 20/20 =====
20
University. Retrieved December10, 2025, from ogy,30(4),415–437.https://doi.org/10.1080/
https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2021/ 09515089.2016.1274023
entries/embodied-cognition/ Trafimow, D., & Earp, B. D. (2016). Badly specified
Shrout, P. E., & Rodgers, J. L. (2018). Psychology, Sci- theories are not responsible for the replication
ence,andKnowledgeConstruction:Broadening crisis in social psychology: Comment on Klein
Perspectives from the Replication Crisis [Pub- [Publisher: SAGE Publications Ltd]. Theory &
lisher: Annual Reviews]. Annual Review of Psy- Psychology, 26(4), 540–548. https://doi.org/
chology,69(Volume69,2018),487–510.https: 10.1177/0959354316637136
//doi.org/10.1146/annurev-psych-122216- Tunç, D. U., & Tunç, M. N. (2023). A Falsification-
011845 ist Treatment of Auxiliary Hypotheses in So-
Skinner, B. F. (1953). Science and human behavior cial and Behavioral Sciences: Systematic Repli-
[Pages:x,461].Macmillan. cations Framework. Meta-Psychology, 7. https:
Smaldino, P. (2017). Models Are Stupid, and We Need //doi.org/10.15626/MP.2021.2756
More of Them [Num Pages: 21]. In Computa- Van Bavel, J. J., Mende-Siedlecki, P., Brady, W. J., &
tionalSocialPsychology.Routledge. Reinero, D. A. (2016). Contextual sensitivity
Smaldino, P. (2019). Better methods can’t make up for inscientificreproducibility[Publisher:Proceed-
mediocre theory [Bandiera_abtest: a Cg_type: ingsoftheNationalAcademyofSciences].Pro-
WorldViewPublisher:NaturePublishingGroup ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
Subject_term:Researchmanagement,Careers]. 113(23), 6454–6459. https://doi.org/10.
Nature, 575(7781), 9–9. https://doi.org/10. 1073/pnas.1521897113
1038/d41586-019-03350-5 Van Geert, P. L. (2019). Dynamic Systems, Process
Smaldino,P.(2020).HowtoBuildaStrongTheoretical and Development. Human Development, 63(3-
Foundation. Psychological Inquiry, 31(4), 297– 4), 153–179. https://doi.org/10.1159/
301. https://doi.org/10.1080/1047840X. 000503825
2020.1853463 VanRooij,I.,&Baggio,G.(2020).TheoryDevelopment
Stanford, K. (2017). Underdetermination of Scientific Requires an Epistemological Sea Change. Psy-
Theory. In E. N. Zalta & U. Nodelman (Eds.), chologicalInquiry,31(4),321–325.https://doi.
The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Win- org/10.1080/1047840X.2020.1853477
ter 2017). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford Van Rooij, I., & Baggio, G. (2021). Theory Before
University. Retrieved December10, 2025, from the Test: How to Build High-Verisimilitude Ex-
https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2017/ planatory Theories in Psychological Science
entries/scientific-underdetermination/ [Publisher:SAGEPublicationsInc].Perspectives
Stroebe, W., & Strack, F. (2014). The Alleged Crisis onPsychologicalScience,16(4),682–697.https:
andtheIllusionofExactReplication[Publisher: //doi.org/10.1177/1745691620970604
SAGE Publications Inc]. Perspectives on Psycho- Wallot, S., & Kelty-Stephen, D. G. (2018). Interaction-
logical Science, 9(1), 59–71. https://doi.org/ DominantCausationinMindandBrain,andIts
10.1177/1745691613514450 ImplicationforQuestionsofGeneralizationand
Tafreshi, D., Slaney, K. L., & Neufeld, S. D. (2016). Replication. Minds and Machines, 28(2), 353–
Quantification in psychology: Critical analysis 374. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11023-017-
ofanunreflectivepractice[Place:USPublisher: 9455-0
EducationalPublishingFoundation].Journalof
TheoreticalandPhilosophicalPsychology,36(4),
233–249. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 /
teo0000048
Teo, T. (2020). Theorizing in psychology: From the
critique of a hyper-science to conceptualizing
subjectivity[Publisher:SAGEPublicationsLtd].
Theory & Psychology, 30(6), 759–767. https://
doi.org/10.1177/0959354320930271
Trafimow, D. (2017). Implications of an initial empiri-
calvictoryforthetruthofthetheoryandaddi-
tionalempiricalvictories.PhilosophicalPsychol-