
===== PAGE 1/3 =====
Opendata:NotApplicable Editedby:FelixD.Schönbrodt
Meta-Psychology,2025,vol9,MP.2024.4325 Openmaterials:NotApplicable Reviewedby:Merle-MariePittelkow,BertN.Bakker
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2024.4325 Openandreproducibleanalysis:NotApplicable Analysisreproducedby:NotApplicable
Articletype:Commentary Openreviewsandeditorialprocess:Yes AllsupplementaryfilescanbeaccessedatOSF:
PublishedundertheCC-BY4.0license Preregistration:No https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/Y4MZE
Replication Value in the Courtroom: a Commentary on Isager, van
’t Veer & Lakens
Edith Beerdsen1
1TempleUniversity,JamesE.BeasleySchoolofLaw
ThiscommentaryisaresponsetoIsager,P.M.,van’tVeer,A.E.&Lakens,D.(2025):
Replication value as a function of citation impact and sample size. It argues that, in
assessing"thevalueofofbeingcorrectaboutthetruthstatusofaclaim,"itisimpor-
tant to try to capture nonscientific impact. This commentary focuses in particular on
theimpactthatoriginalresearchcanhaveinalegalcontext.
Keywords: Replication,Impact,Law
Introduction who has been retained by one or more of the parties
to present it. It typically takes one of two distinct
Original research is abundant and can propagate in
forms: (1) framework evidence or (2) diagnostic evi-
unexpected ways. Results can be transmitted around
dence(Faigmanetal.,2014). Frameworkevidenceusu-
the globe in seconds and can not only add to the col-
allyconsistsof“off-the-shelf”scientificevidence. Itpro-
lective knowledge of the scientific community, but also
vides an empirical framework, built on a foundation of
have an impact far outside of that community. They
research,thatisofferedtohelpajury(orjudge)2under-
mayshowupincourtrooms,inpolicydebates,inboard-
stand a relevant topic of scientific inquiry. Framework
rooms, and in classrooms, and wherever research re-
evidence can inform the jury on matters such as how
sultsgo,theymightaffectdecisionprocessesandendup
witnesses’ memories or perception might be distorted,
affectingrealpeople’slives. The“valueofbeingcorrect
or the effects of trauma on human behavior (Faigman
aboutthetruthstatusofaclaim”(Isageretal.,2025)is
and Monahan, 2005). It might teach a jury about
evenmoreimportantthantheauthorssuggest.
such topics as inattention blindness, change blindness,
Tohelpresearchersdeterminewhichclaimstoprior-
or other topics from visual metacognition (Jaeger and
itize for replication, Isager et al. (2025) propose a sen-
Levin, 2017). It is scientific evidence of a general na-
sible and simple approach, based primarily on citation
ture, and while it is usually introduced in an effort to
counts (as a measure of value) and sample sizes (as a
help the jury draw certain inferences with respect to
measure of uncertainty). When it comes to using cita-
thecasetheyareevaluating,frameworkevidenceisnot
tioncountsasameasureofvalue,theauthorsacknowl-
specifically aboutthe case. Itis evidence aboutgroups,
edgethatclinical,political,andeducationalimpactand
populations, general trends, that jurors are invited to
other sources of value are unlikely to be captured fully
apply to the facts of the case. Diagnostic evidence, on
by citation counts (Isager et al., 2025, pp. 10-12). In
the other hand, is evidence that specifically relates to
this commentary, I argue that citation counts represent
thefactsofthecase,andthatusuallyisspecificallycre-
a promising start for evaluating the value of a claim,
ated for use in the case. A single expert witness may
but that it is important to try to capture nonscientific
offer both types of evidence—e.g., explaining a frame-
impact as part of assessing value, even if doing so will
workandthenapplyingittothecaseathand—oroffer
bemorecomplexthanassessingscientificimpact. Iwill
justoneortheother.
focus on the impact that original research can have in
a legal context.1 A full accounting for nonscientific im- 1My commentary focuses on the US legal system. Courts
pactwilllikelyrequiresignificantfollow-upwork,butI in other countries, of course, also rely onscientific evidence,
believe that a beginning can be made within Isager et buttheproceduresandadmissibilityrequirementsofsuchev-
al.’sproposedframework. idencedifferfromjurisdictiontojurisdiction.
2In the US legal system, the finder of fact may be a jury
Scientificevidenceinthecourtroom or a judge. For readability’s sake, this paragraph describes
the process with respect to juries, but expert witnesses can
Scientific evidence typically comes into the court-
beemployedtoexplainscientificevidencetobothjuriesand
room through a scientific expert witness (or “expert”) judges.
===== PAGE 2/3 =====
2
It is framework evidence where the truth status of said, if a study did turn up in court opinions, motions,
published research results is most acutely at issue. indexedexpertreports,orotherfilings,thiswouldpro-
When a scientific researcher publishes a claim relat- videanindicationthatthestudyhadcourtroomimpact
ing to, e.g., the effect of distraction on memory, that that should be considered along with its scientific im-
claimcouldendupinanexpertreportthenextdayand pactasdeterminedthroughascientificcitationcount.
presented in court a few weeks later. An expert who How to combine scientific citation counts with le-
presents framework evidence in court oftentimes is not gal references, for purposes of calculating RV , is a
Cn
theresearcherwhoperformedtheunderlyingresearch; complex question. Perhaps in the future there will be
theexpertcanbeanyonewhois“qualifiedasanexpert replicationprojectsspecificallytargetingclaimswithan
byknowledge,skill,experience,training,oreducation” impact in a specific (legal, clinical, policy, educational,
(“Federal Rule of Evidence 702,” 2023). If the origi- etc.) setting. Fornow,choosinghowtocombinediffer-
nal researcher were in the courtroom, they could be enttypesofimpactnecessitatessomesubjectivechoices.
questioned about the details of their research process Themoststraightforwardoptionwouldbetogiveasin-
in a way that most experts witnesses cannot. An ex- glelegalreferencethesameweightasasinglescientific
pertwhosummarizesastudyforthejurymightbeable citation. Ifascientificcitationrepresentsaresearcher’s
to answer questions about the details insofar as those use of an article as support for a research decision (Is-
details have been included in publications, but (espe- ager et al., 2025, p. 10) then a legal reference repre-
cially for older published results) they will usually not sents the use of the article by a legal actor (usually an
be able to speak to the kinds of methodological details expert, lawyer, or judge) as support for a legal or fac-
thatcanrenderresearchresultsunreliableandunrepli- tual argument. Whether a research decision has more,
cable—details that may not have been included in the less,orequalimportancecomparedtoacourt-basedar-
publishedresults. Themethodologicalproblemsuncov- gument that may affect a person’s freedom or financial
eredduringtheReplicationCrisisarenotwidelyknown situationisaquestiontowhichthereisnoobjectivean-
or understood within the legal community (Beerdsen, swer.
2021;Chin,2014). Itisthereforeparticularlyimportant Another option—one taking into account the rela-
to vet studies that are being used in court, especially if tive frequency of scientific references in science and in
theyarewidelyused.3 law—might suggest giving a legal reference a bit more
weightthanascientificcitation,notbecauselegaluseof
Proposals researchresultsisinherentlymore"weighty"thanscien-
tific use, but in recognition of the disciplines’ different
Under Isager et al.’s proposal (2021), legal impact
citation practices. Most scientific articles cite numer-
is likely not entirely invisible. If claims generated by a
oussources, whichdilutesthevalueofasinglecitation
particulardisciplineareroutinelyusedincourt,thenre-
as a marker of support for a research decision. Legal
searchersworkinginthatfieldmayalreadybepursuing
proceedings, conversely, will rarely generate references
researchthatbuildsonpastcourt-relevantresearchand
to more than a select few studies, even when consid-
generatingcitationsthatservetogrowtheclaims’RV .
Cn
eringonlythoseproceedingsthatinvolvesomeformof
Butscientificresearchprojects,orcourse,arenotneces-
scientific evidence. A scientific study cited in a legal
sarilydrivenbylegalorothernonscientificusesofpast
proceeding,then,arguablyrepresentsalargerspotlight
researchresults, andsolegalimpactwillnotalwaysbe
on the article than the study’s appearance in the refer-
capturedincitationcounts.
encelistofanotherscientificarticle,andbyimplication
One way to build on the framework proposed by Is-
representsagreaterarticle-specificimpact.
ager et al. would be to expand variable “C” to include
Tosomeextent,legalimpactcouldalsobetakeninto
notonlycitationsinscientificpublications,butalsonon-
accountwithintheframeworkproposedbyIsageretal.
scientific references. To measure impact in courtroom
The authors envision a four-step process for selecting
settingsspecifically,suchaneffortcouldincludesearch-
claims for replication (Isager et al., 2025, pp. 27-28).
ing legal databases for documents referencing a study.
Step 3 involves an in-depth study of replication candi-
A fully comprehensive survey of all courtroom uses of
dates. The authorsacknowledge thatthe details ofthis
a particular scientific study is likely not possible with
step are “a topic of discussion.” Their discussion sug-
currently available research tools. Trial transcripts and
geststhatoneofthelikelycriteria,“theperceivedvalue
other hearing transcripts, for example, are (unfortu-
of the research claim,” could be a measure that is dis-
nately for these purposes) not systematically included
in publicly available databases. Additionally, not ev- 3Studies have consistently found that experts are used in
ery court’s opinions are systematically indexed and in- more than half of civil cases that reach trial. (Champagne
cluded in legal databases (Hoffman et al., 2007). That etal.,1991;Gross,1991;Jurs,2016).
===== PAGE 3/3 =====
3
tinctfromthecitationcountusedtoassessV(andfrom References
thereRV )inStep2. Perhapsthein-depthstudyatthis
Cn Beerdsen,E.(2021).Litigationscienceaftertheknowl-
stage could include indicia of value that lie outside of
edge crisis. Cornell Law Review, 106(3), "529–
citationcounts, includinglegalimpactbutalsoclinical,
589". https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.
political, and educational impact. Of course, such an
cfm?abstract_id=3674258
approachwouldfailtocapturealllegalimpact,because
Champagne, A., Schuman, D., & Whitaker, E. (1991).
it would be performed only on replication candidates
An empirical examination of the use of expert
that have made it to Step 3 of the process. A claim
witnesses in american courts. Jurimetrics Jour-
that has significant nonscientific impact but somehow
nal, 31(4), "375–392". https://www.jstor.org/
has not garnered many citations in scientific journals
stable/29762231
wouldbeassignedalowRV andwouldbefilteredout
Cn Chin, J. M. (2014). Psychological science’s replicability
atanearlierstage.
crisisandwhatitmeansforscienceinthecourt-
room.Psychology,PublicPolicy,andLaw,20(3),
Conclusion
"225–238".https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.
Isager et al.’s proposal is a thoughtful first step to- 1037/law0000012
ward determining which claims to include in replica- Faigman,D.L.,&Monahan,J.(2005).Psychologicalev-
tion studies. As the authors acknowledge, it does leave idence at the dawn of the law’s scientific age.
out any nonscientific impact that a claim might have. Annual Review of Psychology, 56, "631–659".
Thelegalsystemdoesnotcurrentlyhaveastrongability https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1146/
to evaluate the reliability of published research results, annurev.psych.56.091103.070316
and yet the use of scientific evidence can change the Faigman, D. L., Monahan, J., & Slobogin, C. (2014).
outcome of a lawsuit. Of course, the legal community Grouptoindividual(g2i)inferenceinscientific
is notthe onlynonscientific communitythat makesuse expert testimony. University of Chicago Law Re-
of scientific findings and there are likely numerous ar- view,81(2),"417–480".https://www.jstor.org/
eas where the impact of research results is significant. stable/23762370
Forthatreason,assessingthevalueofaclaimbasedon FederalRuleofEvidence702[AccessedJune27,2025].
scientificcitationsaloneisrisky. (2023). https://www.law.cornell.edu/rules/
fre/rule_702
AuthorContact Gross,S.R.(1991).Expertevidence.WisconsinLawRe-
view,1991,"1113–1232".
Theauthorcanbecontactedat: Hoffman, D. A., Izenman, A. J., & Lidicker, J.
edith.beerdsen@temple.edu. (2007). Docketology, district courts, and doc-
trine.WashingtonUniversityLawReview,85(4),
ConflictofInterestandFunding "681–751". https://journals.library.wustl.edu/
lawreview/article/6686/galley/23519/view
The author declares no conflicts of interest, and this
Isager,P.,van’tVeer, A.,&Lakens,D.(2025).Replica-
Commentaryisnotthesubjectofanygrant.
tion value as a function of citation impact and
sample size. Meta-Psychology, 9. https://doi.
AuthorContributions
org/10.15626/MP.2022.3300
Jaeger, C. B., & Levin, E., D. T. Porter. (2017). Justice
Conceptualization: Edith Beerdsen. Writing - Origi-
is (change) blind: Applying research on visual
nalDraftPreparation: EdithBeerdsen. Writing-Review
metacognitioninlegalsettings.Psychology,Pol-
andEditing: EdithBeerdsen.
icy, and Law, 23(2), "259–279". https://doi.
org/https://dx.doi.org/10.1037/law0000107
OpenSciencePractices
Jurs, A. W. (2016). Expert prevalence, persuasion, and
This is purely conceptual and as such is not eligible price:Whattrialparticipantsreallythinkabout
for Open Science badges. The entire editorial process, experts. Indiana Law Journal, 91(2), "353–
including the open reviews, is published in the online 391".https://www.repository.law.indiana.edu/
supplement. ilj/vol91/iss2/4