
===== PAGE 1/14 =====
Opendata:NotApplicable Editedby:DaniëlLakens
Meta-Psychology,2025,vol9,MP.2024.4603 Openmaterials:NotApplicable Reviewedby:InvitedCommentaries
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2024.4603 Openandreproducibleanalysis:NotApplicable Analysisreproducedby:NotApplicable
Articletype:Commentary Openreviewsandeditorialprocess:Yes AllsupplementaryfilescanbeaccessedatOSF:
PublishedundertheCC-BY4.0license Preregistration:No https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/Y5T7W
Responsible Research Assessment (Parts I and II):
Responses to the Commentaries
Daniel Leising1, Anne Gärtner1,2, and Felix D. Schönbrodt3
1TechnischeUniversitätDresden
2FreieUniversitätBerlin
3Ludwig-Maximilians-UniversitätMünchen
Wegiveabriefoverviewofourdeliberationsinrespondingtothecommentariesonour
two target papers presenting the RESQUE (Research Quality Evaluation) framework.
Whilewewereabletoincorporatemanysuggestionsforimprovementdirectly,weac-
knowledgethatotherareas(e.g.,qualityintheorizing)willrequirefurtherelaboration.
Inthispaper,wespecificallytouchonthefollowingissues: (a)eligibletypesofpubli-
cation,(b)measurability,(c)qualitycriteriaforsoftwareanddatasets,(d)theoretical
rigor, (e) quantity, (f) authorship, (g) potential bias (against certain methodologies,
typesofresearchcontributions,orsubdisciplines),(h)overallrigorscore,(i)weighting
ofindividualindicators,(j)typesofdataandsamples,(k)impact,(l)interdisciplinary
value, (m) teaching, (n) expertise, (o) gaming the new metrics, and (p) representa-
tiveness. The RESQUE framework has met with largely positive reception so far, but
continuestoevolveandwillthrivebestwhencommunityinvolvementstaysstrong.
Keywords: Metascience,Incentive,Evaluation
Preface 2022). Fifteencommentariesonthesebyvariousmem-
bers of the community have been published in Meta-
Research assessment is at the heart of our academic
Psychology. Six additional commentaries in German
culture, as it defines what we value, what gets pub-
were published in response to a project report (Gärt-
lished, and which research projects get funded. As a
ner et al., 2023) that we had written for Psychologis-
consequence, it also plays a crucial role in determining
che Rundschau (the main outlet of the DGPs). Here,
whocanstayandthriveinacademia. Giventhatscience
we aim to provide some insight into the considera-
willcontinuetobeahighlycollaborativeendeavor,any
tions that guided our responses to all of these com-
reformofresearchassessmentmustrelyonthewisdom
mentaries. Sometimes we respectfully disagree with
of the crowd, consider diverse perspectives from many
thecommenters’viewpointsandexplainourreasonsfor
subfields,andseekabroadconsensusinthecommunity.
doing so. In many cases, however, we wholeheartedly
In light of a now widespread acknowledgment that
embracedthesuggestionsandrevisedthetargetpapers
research assessment needs to be reformed (Chap-
andtheratingschemesaccordingly.
man et al., 2019) (https://sfdora.org/read,https:
//coara.eu/agreement/the-agreement-full-text,https:
TopicsConsideredintheCourseoftheRevision
//data.europa.eu/doi/10.2777/707440), a working
group of the German Psychological Society (DGPs) (a)EligibleTypesofPublication
proposed a framework for the evaluation of research
In the first versions of our two target articles, we
quality in the context of hiring decisions in academic
considered only published research articles, but multi-
psychology: RESQUE, which stands for “RESearch
plecommentersconvincinglyarguedthatothertypesof
QUalityEvaluation”. Theworkinggroupnowmaintains
textoutputsshouldbeconsideredaswell(Brown,2024;
a central landing page (https://www.resque.info/) to
Fink-Lamotte et al., 2024; Karhulahti, 2024; Sparfeldt
provide updates and versioning of the rating schemes,
et al., 2024; Syed, 2024; Witte, 2024). We agree,
interactive web tools for data collection and for
and now suggest giving full consideration to preprints,
aggregating, enriching and visualizing the relevant
conferenceproceedings,Stage1registeredreportswith
information,aswellasforthcomingexpansionpacks.
or without “in principle acceptance”, study protocols,
The first version of RESQUE was described in two
monographs, book chapters, and test manuals – basi-
target papers (Gärtner et al., 2022; Schönbrodt et al.,
callyanytextdocumentthathasadoi(orotherpersis-
===== PAGE 2/14 =====
2
tent identifier). All of these publication types have the proposal for giving issues related to “theory” too lit-
samepotentialforscientificrigorandimpact. Notethat tle weight. We wholeheartedly agree. Although good
many or even most RESQUE indicators can be applied scientific work may be entirely descriptive and/or ex-
to meta-analyses as well (Fink-Lamotte et al., 2024). ploratory in nature, it goes without saying that much
Giventheintransparentnatureandunknownqualityof ofwhatscientistsdorevolvesaroundthegoalofdevel-
mostpre-publicationpeerreview(Bornmann,2012;Ci- oping and refining abstract ideas about how the world
cchetti,1991),wethinkitisreasonabletoperformeval- works (i.e., building and testing theories). This type of
uations of methodological rigor regardless of whether work may also vary in quality, and those who are able
a text has been accepted for publication or not. As a andwillingtoproducethebesttheoreticalworkshould
side effect, this practice also makes the assessment in- berewardedfordoingso. Sincewewereunabletofind
dependent of (often long) publication delays. This will an established set of criteria for evaluating the quality
be particularly helpful for early career researchers on ofpeople’stheoreticalwork,wehavenowbegundevel-
fixed-termcontracts. oping such a set ourselves, in cooperation with several
colleagues. Basicfeaturesofthepresentversionofthat
(b)Measurability criterion set are briefly described in the revised version
of the second target paper (Gärtner et al., 2025; Lange
Some commenters (e.g., Niessen et al., 2023; Sten-
etal.,2025).
gelinetal., 2024)offeredlistsofadditionalqualitycri-
teria for academic work that may also be considered in
(e)Quantity
hiring and promotion procedures (e.g., building infras-
tructure; appropriate design and analysis choices). We Thereseemstobeawidelysharedsentimentamong
agree that many of these things are important (Leising scientiststhatthequalityofone’sworkshouldbeclearly
etal.,2022b),andwedonotclaimthatthecurrentset prioritizedoveritsmerequantity(e.g.,Chapmanetal.,
of indicators exhausts the full spectrum of what consti- 2019). Unfortunately, the current incentive structure
tutes “good research”. However, a system like RESQUE inacademialargelyrewardstheopposite(Abele-Brehm
requires indicators that are not only valid but also ob- & Bühner, 2016; Leising et al., 2022b). The RESQUE
jectively measurable with relative ease. This is partic- framework attempts to address this problem by ask-
ularly important in the first, more algorithmic phase of ing authors to self-nominate a relatively small sample
the assessment process. For practical reasons, we did of what they consider to be their own best work. The
notincludeadditionalcriteriawhosemeasurabilitywas average methodological quality of this small sample of
yet unclear to us. But given that RESQUE is conceived researchoutputsisthendeterminedusingadetailed,al-
of as a living and versioned system, we remain open to gorithmicscoringprocedure, andthoseapplicantswith
includingadditionalindicatorslater. thebestworkproceedtothesecondassessmentphase.
The desired effects of this approach are: (a) a min-
(c)QualityCriteriaforSoftwareandDatasets imum level of productivity (in terms of sheer output
quantity) is ensured, (b) applicants can not increase
Itturnedoutthatdevelopingready-to-usequalitycri-
their chances by increasing the sheer number of their
teria for software and data will take significantly more
research outputs, but they will increase their chances
time and effort than we had anticipated. In this re-
directly by investing in the methodological quality of
gard, our first proposal was simply too optimistic. In
their work. Note, however, that we are not arguing
their commentary, Brandmaier et al. (2024) suggested
against using quantity as a metric in general, but only
awholesetofhighlyappropriateindicatorsofqualityin
against using quantity as a metric without establishing
software development and maintenance. We have thus
quality first (Ortner et al., 2013). For example, of two
invitedtheseauthorstohelpusdevelopaworkingindi-
applicantswithcomparablequalityscoresinphase1,a
cator set for this type of research output. This work is
committeemaystillfavortheonewiththehigherquan-
nowwellunderway. Asimilarapproachwillbeneeded
titativeoutputinphase2.
forassessingthequalityofpublisheddatasets. Weinvite
thoseofourcolleagueswhofeeltheyhavesomethingto
(f)Authorship
contributeinthisregardtocontactusanddojustthat.
Aftercarefuldeliberation, wedecidedtotreattheis-
(d)TheoreticalRigor sues of authorship and author order as follows: First,
authorship represents a claim that one has contributed
Several commenters (Dames et al., 2024; Niessen
substantially to the process that resulted in a research
et al., 2023; Ulpts, 2024; Witte, 2024) criticized our
article. However,wearefullyawarethatguestandhon-
orary authorships constitute one of the most common
===== PAGE 3/14 =====
3
forms of scientific misconduct (Fong & Wilhite, 2017; It should also be easier to disprove false claims of
Pruschak & Hopp, 2022). This may be explained by having made certain types of contributions. For ex-
the fact that the mere length of an applicant’s publica- ample, a hiring committee could scrutinize a candidate
tionlistcontinuestobeapredictorofwhowillbehired whoclaimstohavehadtheleadingroleindataanalysis
(Abele-Brehm & Bühner, 2016; Chapman et al., 2019), by asking in-depth questions about that analysis. How-
andbythefactthatthereiscurrentlynoreliablemech- ever, false claims of having made a contribution will
anismfordetectingthistypeofmisconduct. Indeed,we stillbepossibletosomeextent(Chapmanetal.,2019),
arenotawareofasinglecaseinwhicharesearcherhas perhaps more easily for some CRediT categories (e.g.,
ever been sanctioned for this. Note that this is despite “supervision”) than for others (e.g., data analysis). De-
thefactthatthepracticeitselfhasbeenclearlyidentified spite this limitation, the CRediT system enables draw-
as a form of scientific misconduct for decades. Given ingamorefine-grainedpictureofanauthor’scontribu-
this lack of effective oversight, we have no choice for tions than the order of authors does. Furthermore, if
now but to continue taking authorship claims at face adepartmentisspecificallyinterestedinhiringascien-
value. tist who is likely to make certain types of contributions
Second, we recommend using a version of the now- (e.g., fundraising, coordinating large scale projects),
established CRediT system (Contributor Roles Taxon- this goal can be promoted by awarding bonus points
omy; https://credit.niso.org), which asks applicants to to candidates who (claim to have) demonstrated the
explicitly state the type and degree of their contribu- respective abilities, according to their previous CRediT
tiontoeachsubmittedresearchoutput. Thetypeisone roles.
of 14 standardized roles (such as “Conceptualization”,
“Data Curation”, or “Writing – original draft”), and the (g)PotentialBias
degree is one of lead, equal, support or no role. As
With any assessment scheme, it is likely that some
the CRediT standard does not yet provide precise def-
cases will not be adequately covered. The more im-
initions of these degrees, we developed the following
portant question, however, is whether an assessment
workingdefinitionsforusewithRESQUE:
scheme is systematically biased in favor of certain
methodologies(e.g.,experimental),certaintypesofre-
• Lead: You were the single leader for this specific
search contributions (e.g., publications), or entire sub-
activity. If you are the only person in a specific
fieldsofresearch(e.g.,personalitypsychology). Several
role,choose’lead’.
commenters raised the concern that this might be the
• Equal: You contributed equally to this activity, casewiththeRESQUEframework.
together with one or more other contributors.
Biasagainstcertainmethodologies
Choosing this option implies that no other co-
authorwouldchoosethe’lead’option,andatleast Somecommenterscriticizedthatourproposedrating
one other co-author would choose the ’equal’ op- schemeisnot(fully)suitableforassessingresearchcon-
tion. tributions based on qualitative methodology (Hostler,
2024; Karhulahti, 2024; Syed, 2024; Ulpts, 2024). As
• Supporting: Youhadasupportingrole,whichwas
a consequence, researchers specializing in this type of
lower than the contribution of a leading or equal
research might face a systematic disadvantage. We re-
role.
spondtotheseconcernsasfollows:
• No role: You did not contribute substantially to First, as mentioned in some of the commentaries,
thisactivity. some proposals on how to assess the quality of qual-
itative research do exist (e.g., Campbell et al., 2023;
• n/a: This role was not relevant for the research Johnson et al., 2020; Stenbacka, 2001). This suggests
outputathand. that assessing the quality of qualitative research is not
per se impossible. We would thus like to encourage
With this approach, we hope to reduce existing am-
ourcolleaguesworkingwithqualitativemethodstoget
biguitiessurroundingtheinterpretationofauthorships,
in touch with us and help develop an expansion pack
and to make lying about contributions at least some-
for the RESQUE framework that will do this type of re-
whatharder: Thethresholdforfalselyclaimingtohave
search justice in evaluation contexts. Perhaps doing so
madeaparticularkindofcontributionshouldbehigher
wouldalsohelpbroadentheacceptanceofqualitystan-
than the threshold for falsely claiming to have made
dards for qualitative research more generally (a deficit
“some”unspecifiedkindofcontribution.
highlightedbyHostler,2024).
===== PAGE 4/14 =====
4
Second, several of the quality criteria present in the current, revised version should be seen as containing a
RESQUE Collector App are actually applicable to qual- “core set” of indicators that are likely to be applicable
itative studies. For example, a researcher interviewing tomostsubfields,butshouldbecomplementedbymore
many participants about their experiences in a certain tailored “expansion packs” where necessary. Work on
context may pre-register many aspects of her research these expansion packs has already begun, with several
design (e.g., sample size and recruitment strategy, re- taskforcesfromDGPsdivisionscontributingtotheirde-
searchquestions;Karhulahtietal.,2022)andmakeher velopment. Oncefinishedandtested,theywillbemade
researchmaterials(e.g.,interviewforms)available. Al- availableontheRESQUEwebsiteforfreeuse.
thoughanonymizationandprovisionofopenqualitative Unduebiasesmayalsoarisefromthefactthatmeet-
data is often more difficult, it is not impossible in all ing certain quality criteria may be more difficult for
cases. researchers working in a particular subfield. For ex-
Third, applicants who feel that they will be disad- ample, several colleagues argued that they may not
vantaged by the scoring algorithm have the option of easily make their data available for a variety of valid
declaringtheirentirebodyofresearch(orpartsofit)to reasons pertaining to data protection and privacy con-
beexemptfromscoringatall. Departmentsspecifically cerns (Fink-Lamotte et al., 2024; Niessen et al., 2023;
interested in hiring a specialist in qualitative research Schwartzetal., 2023). Similarconcernscamefromre-
mayevenignoretheRESQUEapproachaltogetheruntil searchers using qualitative methodology (e.g., Hostler,
it becomes capable of adequately capturing the merits 2024), because the level of detail in such data is of-
ofgoodqualitativestudies. ten high and may make individuals or organizations
identifiable. Some of these concerns may be allevi-
Biasagainstcertaintypesof(research)contributions
ated by making data available only as scientific use
files(i.e.,withaccessrestrictionsandcontractualreuse
Some commenters argued that certain types of re-
agreements). Thispossibilityisalreadyincorporatedin
search contributions (especially software development;
RESQUE.
seeAugerandClaes,2024)mightbeovervaluedwithin
The RESQUE Collector App offers the option to de-
theRESQUEframework,comparedtoothertypes(e.g.,
claretheentiresetofopendataindicatorsinapplicable
publications). Wedecidedtopostponethedevelopment
toagivenresearchoutput,aslongasaplausibleexpla-
ofindicatorsetsforpublisheddatasetsandsoftwarebe-
nation is provided. In addition, members of a commit-
causewerealizedthatthisismorecomplexthanwehad
teemaydecideinadvancetotreatcertainindicatorsas
initiallyexpected.
generallyinapplicableiftheyfindthemirrelevantorun-
Regardless, the question of how to weigh different
suitabletothedecision-makingprocessaheadofthem.
types of research contribution is ultimately to be de-
cided by the respective evaluation committee. We trust
(h)OverallRigorScore
that acceptable standards in this regard will emerge
over time. It should be noted that, at present, nei- The question of whether the individual indicators
ther the provision of datasets nor the development and shouldbeusedtoformasingle,overallscoreofmethod-
maintenance of research software are in any way re- ological rigor has been discussed since the early stages
warded in typical hiring and promotion procedures. of the RESQUE project. Many people seem to feel un-
Their being valued in some way is almost certainly a comfortablewiththeideathatsuchimportantdecisions
stepintherightdirection. (e.g., whether to invite an applicant for an interview)
may be made on the basis of a single metric. Would it
Biasagainstcertainsubdisciplines
not be better to compare the individual strengths and
Several commenters expressed the concern that the weaknessesofapplicantsinamoredifferentiatedman-
proposed evaluation scheme might not be equally ap- ner? This is indeed possible, as the RESQUE frame-
plicable to all subfields of psychology, and that certain workhasnowevolvedtoapointwherecomprehensive
criteria of particular relevance to some fields might be profiles for individual applicants can be easily derived.
missing. For example, Brandt et al. (2024) pointed This, however, does not obviate the necessity to make
out that simulation studies play an important role in decisionsatsomepoint. Andinmakingthesedecisions,
methoddevelopmentbutthatdesirablefeaturesofsim- assessorswillhavetoapplysomekindofimplicitorex-
ulationstudieswerenotcapturedinthefirstversionof plicit cut-off to some kind of implicit or explicit contin-
ourproposal. Weagreethataone-fits-allversionofthe uumofsuitabilityforthepositioninquestion.
RESQUECollectorAppisunlikelytobepossible. There Thistouchesdirectlyonthedecades-longdebateover
may be criteria that are more relevant to certain sub- whetherdiagnosticdecisionsshouldbemadeinamore
fields than others. Therefore, we now suggest that the intuitive or algorithmic fashion (a.k.a. “clinical vs. sta-
===== PAGE 5/14 =====
5
tistical prediction”; Meehl, 1954). Research has consis- discussionswithinourgroup. Forthefuture,itwouldbe
tentlyshownthatthelatterapproachisthemoresound desirable to determine these values in a more system-
one,asitnotonlymaximizesinter-individualcompara- atic and representative manner, by surveying a larger
bility and transparency but also yields equal or better groupofresearchers. Forexample,severalcommenters
predictive validity (e.g., Grove et al., 2000). We thus (Auger&Claes,2024;Brandtetal.,2024;Witte,2024)
proposeembracingthisviewandarguethatusingasin- wereskepticalthatthefirstversionofourproposalgave
glebroadscoreasametricoftheoverallmethodological toomuchweighttosoftwaredevelopment. Amoresat-
rigorofanapplicant’sbestworkisacceptable,including isfying solution in this regard might be derived by in-
the comparison of such a score with a cut-off for short- volving a larger number of expert judges (e.g., people
listing. Of course, this claim rests on the assumption whoknowhoweffortfulitistocreateandcontinuously
that the individual indicators feeding into the overall updatecomplexsoftwarepackages).
scorehavesufficientvalidity. Webelievethisisthecase
withthecurrentversionoftheRESQUEcriteria. (j)TypesofDataandSamples
The RESQUE Collector App provides an overall
The original version of the empirical rigor criteria
methodological rigor score for each applicant, as well
in RESQUE did not consider the type of data and the
asamulti-dimensionalrigorprofile. Thisscoreisbased
type of the samples that were used in an applicant’s
onouradmittedlysubjectiveweightingoftheindividual
work. However, certain types of data and samples are
criteria,buttheseweightsmayeasilybeadaptedifnec-
usuallymoreinformativethanothersregardingagiven
essary. Sparfeldt et al. (2024) argued that committees
research question (i.e., they have a higher value), and
should openly discuss their evaluation schemes in ad-
moreinformativedataisoftenmoreeffortfultocollect.
vanceandmakethemexplicit. Langeetal.(2024)also
In recent years, the field of psychology has become in-
suggested making these decisions in advance to maxi-
creasingly - and rightfully - critical of studies that only
mize fairness and transparency. We agree with them.
usecross-sectionalself-reportdata,especiallywhenthis
For example, it would be possible for a committee to
data is gathered online. This type of data has played
define in advance that only applicants with hands-on
a very prominent role in the field, mainly because it
experiencein(a)preregistrationand(b)replicationat-
canbecollectedveryquicklyandatlowcost(e.g.,from
temptswillbeconsideredfortheshortlist. Thealterna-
undergraduatestudents,inexchangeforcoursecredit).
tive to such an algorithmic approach would essentially
However, such data certainly is not ideal for answering
be to make functionally equivalent decisions, just in a
many important research questions because of the in-
lesstraceablemanner.
abilitytodistinguishbetweentherealityoneistryingto
A committee that prefers not to make shortlisting
assess and the participants’ potentially biased views of
decisions entirely dependent on a single methodolog-
thatreality.
ical rigor score could instead adopt an approach in
TherevisedversionofRESQUEnowassessesthetype
which this score is given a weight smaller than 1, and
of data (e.g., self/other report, behavioral, physiolog-
thenmaketherestofthejudgmentvariancedependent
ical measures, content data, ...) and some relevant
on other sources. Even in these cases, however, we
features of study samples (e.g., students, general pop-
would recommend defining the selection rules in ad-
ulation,rarecondition;WEIRDness)inamoredetailed
vance. Likewise, a committee may always choose to
manner. While these indicators do not by themselves
inspect the more differentiated rigor profiles for each
contribute to the overall rigor score, they can be used
candidate, and to consider this information in their de-
topresentaricherprofileofanapplicant’sresearch. In
cisionmaking(e.g.,inphase2).
addition, they can be easily used to define “red flags”
(e.g., when all of an applicant’s empirical papers only
(i)WeightingofIndividualIndicators
usecross-sectionalself-reportdata).
Ifoneembracesthegeneralideaofusinganalgorith-
mic approach in the first phase of the assessment pro- (k)Impact
cess, one needs to employ some set of specific weights
It seems justifiable to demand that research should
for each indicator. The exact point values we propose
be impactful, especially when it is being paid for with
inthesecondtargetpaperprimarilyreflectourownde-
public funds. But measuring impact properly is more
liberations as to how much effort it takes to meet the
difficult than it might seem at first sight (Greenhalgh
respectivequalitystandard,andofhowmuchthevalue
etal.,2016). Weweresurprisedtodiscoverhowmurky
of a paper is increased by meeting it. Of course, there
theissuestillisinconceptualtermsandwillthusbegin
will always be a certain amount of subjectivity in such
withabriefconceptualanalysis.
estimates. For now, the values are simply the result of
===== PAGE 6/14 =====
6
Finger-is-Moon-Mode
RELEVANCE Analyst: Daniel Leising
SOCIETAL
IMPACT
0
DISSEMINATION
AND MERIT EFFORT
SCIENTIFIC
IMPACT
RIGOR
RIGOR SCORE MERIT IMPACT SCIENTIFIC EXTRANEOUS
STATEMENT STATEMENT CITATIONS FACTORS
Figure1
Conceptual model of how rigor, relevance, merit, impact and citations relate to one another. This analysis uses the
VAST system (Leising et al., 2023). All paths are causal in nature. The zero coefficient implies that MERIT necessarily
requires both RELEVANCE and RIGOR, and that no other relevant influences on MERIT exist. Boxes with thick borders
denotemeasurements. “Finger-is-MoonMode”impliesthatconceptsareindexeddirectlybyoneoftheirnames, instead
ofseparatingconceptsfromtheirnames.
Figure1displaysthisanalysisusingthenotationrules sideredindependentlyinphase2ofanassessmentpro-
of the VAST system (Leising et al., 2023). Here, boxes cess,afterabasiclevelofmethodologicalrigorhasbeen
symbolize concepts that may or may not apply to cer- established in phase 1. This is to avoid rewarding high
tain objects. The objects in this analysis are individual citation counts for methodologically questionable pa-
research papers, so the boxes in the display all sym- pers. In the following, we will focus exclusively on sci-
bolize potential properties of research papers. Boxes entific impact, because there is already a widely used -
withthickblackbordersontheleft-handsidesymbolize albeitquitecontroversial-metricforit: citationcounts.
something that can be measured. In the present anal- In addition, we propose asking candidates for “impact
ysis, this applies to RESQUE rigor scores, merit state- statements”.
ments, impact statements, and the number of scientific Second, an article’s scientific impact is a function of
citations to a paper (i.e., citations from other scientific its scientific merit and of the dissemination efforts sup-
articles). porting it - by an article’s authors (e.g., by attending
The analysis captures the following ideas: First, conferences or promoting the paper on social media),
scientific citations are a measure of scientific impact, or by others (e.g., publishers). These two influences
which has to be distinguished from societal impact on a paper’s impact may compensate for each other:
(Schwartz et al., 2023). For example, the invention of Highly meritorious papers may need little dissemina-
the steam engine had an enormous scientific and so- tion effort to become impactful, and papers with lit-
cietal impact. In contrast, the discovery of the Higgs- tle merit may still be impactful (and thus get cited) if
Bosonwasamajorscientificbreakthroughbutleftmost they are supported by strong dissemination efforts. In
people’s everyday lives unaffected so far. Within the fact,weassumethatevenresearchwithzeromeritmay
RESQUE framework, both types of impact may be con- become impactful. It should be noted, however, that
===== PAGE 7/14 =====
7
we do consider the independent influence of dissemi- intended,becauseoftwocandidateswhomadeittothe
nation efforts on impact to be legitimate in principle: shortlist,theonewiththemorerigorousworkshallstill
In our view, researchers do have a responsibility to in- be rewarded more. In addition, merit statements may
form their colleagues and the wider public about their alsocontaininformationregardingadditionalaspectsof
research. Amongtworesearcherswithequallymeritori- rigorthatarenotcapturedbythecurrentversionofthe
ouswork,theonewhohasinvestedmoreindisseminat- RESQUE indicators. Note that we decided not to sep-
ingtheirworkandthereforehadmoreimpactshouldbe arately account for the novelty or creativity of a can-
rewardedmore. didate’s scientific work. The reason is that these are
It should also be noted that, in this model, scientific unexpectedly tricky conceptual issues. For example, it
workmayhavegreatmeritevenifithasnoimpact(yet) seems that the extent to which novelty and creativity
at all. We assume that there may be applicants whose are deemed praiseworthy is largely moderated by the
work is in fact highly meritorious but has not yet been respectiveproject’ssuccess. Addressingtheseandother
recognized enough by their peers (Peter Higgs being a complexities in sufficient depth is beyond the scope of
good example, at least in the first years after publish- thepresentpaper. Fornow,werecommendmakingnov-
inghisgroundbreakingpapers). Ourframeworkissup- eltyandcreativitypartofin-depthdiscussionsinphase
posed to give these people a better chance than they 2oftheassessmentprocess.
would have under the current mainstream evaluation Fourth, it is well known that a paper’s citation count
practices. For this purpose, we suggest using explicit tendstobestronglyinfluencedbyanumberofextrane-
meritstatementsthatcaptureapaper’sessentialcontri- ousfactors(e.g.,Sandoval-Lentisco,2024;Stroebeand
bution from a candidate’s perspective. These are sup- Strack, 2023). Some of these influences are rather un-
posedtobeusedasastartingpointforin-depthdiscus- avoidable. Forexample,papersinlargerresearchfields
sionsinphase2oftheassessmentprocess. tend to be cited more, older papers have more time to
Third, we assume that the scientific merit of a re- acquire citations, and meta-analyses tend to be cited
search paper depends on a combination of (empirical instead of the original studies that they are based on.
and theoretical) rigor on the one hand, and the rele- For some of these influences, effective corrections (i.e.,
vanceofthegivenresearchquestionontheotherhand. age and field normalizations) are available (Stroebe &
“Relevance”concernsthescopeofthequestionorprob- Strack,2023).
lem that is addressed (broader problems are more rel- In addition, there are extraneous factors of a more
evant than narrow ones), and the perceived urgency problematicnature. Forexample,someauthorsengage
of finding an answer to the question or a solution to in excessive self-citation to boost their citation counts.
the problem. Other than merit and dissemination ef- This can be easily corrected by excluding self-citations.
fort, which may compensate for each other entirely in Butthenthingsquicklybecomeevenmoredifficult: For
creating impact, rigor and relevance affect merit in a example, some authors are more or less forced (by re-
multiplicative fashion. Accordingly, the VAST display viewers and/or editors) to cite certain papers in the
(Figure 1) connects these two predictors using an AND course of review processes, whereas other authors pre-
diamond: Both rigor and relevance are necessary for emptively cite eminent figures in the field who might
achieving merit - as soon as either rigor or relevance is act as reviewers on their papers. Thus, citation counts
zero,therecanbenomerit. may partly reflect the cited author’s perceived power,
While the RESQUE framework does provide a evenwhencontrollingforthecitedpaper’smerit. Cita-
method for assessing the rigor of research, we are not tionnetworksmayalsoreflectinterpersonalandinstitu-
aware of an established method for assessing the per- tional networks (Blashfield & Reynolds, 2012): people
ceived relevance of research questions. A consensus may cite each other if they know and like each other.
paper describing shared research goals may serve this Moreover, articles appearing in journals with high im-
function(Leisingetal.,2024),butconsensualaccounts pactfactorsmaybecitedmore-notbecauseoftheirbet-
ofimportantfutureresearchgoalsarerelativelyrarein terquality,butbecauseoftheirgreatervisibilityand/or
the psychology literature (Leising et al., 2022a). As because those who cite them use the JIF as a proxy for
long as relevance may not be convincingly assessed in quality. Currently, these (and many other) extraneous
an algorithmic fashion, we recommend delegating dis- influences on citation counts are not corrected for in
cussions of relevance to phase 2 of the assessment pro- anyway,andoftentheygounnoticed.
cess. The candidates’ merit statements are supposed to Given the surprising lack of evidence for a posi-
be used as the basis for these discussions. As evident tive association between research quality and citation
from Figure 1, merit statements may not only contain counts(Aksnesetal.,2019;Dougherty&Horne,2022),
aspects of relevance, but also aspects of rigor. This is quality thus needs to be established first. Within the
===== PAGE 8/14 =====
8
RESQUE framework, explicit assessments of method- makeanimpact.
ological rigor serve this purpose. If a committee de- Summarizing these points, we conclude that, at
cides that it wants to consider scientific impact as well, present, the measurement of interdisciplinarity is too
we would propose (a) using a citation metric that cor- messytobeusedinanalgorithmicfashion.
rects for self-citation, field, and the age of a publica- We did incorporate an automatic assessment of in-
tion,and(b)collectingseparateimpactstatementsfrom terdisciplinarity into the RESQUE Collector App (using
applicants. The latter should explain a paper’s scien- thearticle-basedclassificationsysteminOpenAlex),but
tific impact in narrative terms, without referencing ci- recommend using this information only in phase 2 of
tation numbers at all. For example, a candidate may the assessment process, if deemed helpful by the re-
explain how a methodological contribution they made spective committee. At this stage, it can be discussed
was adopted as the go-to-approach by a larger number how much a candidate’s collaborations with colleagues
ofcolleagueswhowroteaconsensuspaperonbestprac- inotherfieldsactuallycontributedtothequalityand/or
ticesintheirfield(accountingforjust1citation). Note scopeand/orimpactoftheirwork.
againthatbothoftheseassessmentsofscientificimpact
should only be used in phase 2: Impact may only be (m)Teaching
reasonablyconsideredafterrigorhasbeenestablished.
In their commentary, Hansen et al. (2024) clearly
stated that they consider current practices for assess-
(l)InterdisciplinaryValue
ingapplicants’teachingabilitiesinappropriate. Wefully
Karhulahti (2024) suggested adding the interdisci- agree with them. Hansen et al. also provided detailed
plinaryvalueofacademicworkasa“fifthprinciple”. Af- suggestions for a better approach. As explained in the
terconsiderabledebateamongstus,weconcludedthat, first target paper (Schönbrodt et al., 2025), we think
while we share the general sentiment, this would not that ultimately all five types of academic contribution
befeasibleaspartofthefirst(algorithmic)phaseofthe (research,teaching,leadership,servicetotheacademic
evaluationprocess. Thisisforseveralreasons: First,the field,societalimpact)shouldbeconsideredinacademic
boundaries between academic (sub-)fields are rather hiring and promotion processes. In the second target
fuzzy and somewhat arbitrary. Consequently, using dif- paper,wefocusonlyonevaluationcriteriaforresearch.
ferentcategorizationsystemswouldleadtodifferentas- Criteria for the other four types of contribution remain
sessments of interdisciplinarity. Second, in some cases, to be developed - if possible. A commission of the Ger-
themethodologicalandtheoreticaldifferenceswithina man Psychological Society has been tasked with devel-
fieldaregreaterthanthosebetweenfields. Forinstance, opingcriteriafortheteachingdomain. Here,wewould
researchers from quantitative vs. qualitative sociology liketosuggestmakingthisthefocusofamoreextensive
may find it easier to collaborate with researchers from debate in Meta-Psychology: What does “good teaching”
entirelydifferentdisciplinesthanwitheachother. (ofpsychologyandotheracademicsubjects)looklikein
Third, it is not entirely clear what would qualify a the21stcentury? Whatbehaviorsshould“good”teach-
work as interdisciplinary. Does an author’s paper be- ersexhibitandberewardedfor? Andhowshouldtheir
come interdisciplinary if it is published in a journal performancebeassessed?
from "another field” and/or if it is co-authored with re-
searchersfrom“anotherfield”,and/orifitgetscitedby (n)Expertise
researchers from “another field”? Fourth, shall authors
Frischkorn (2024) argued that the second phase of
receive additional credit for every new field that they
our proposed assessment scheme is underdeveloped,
associate with? Fifth, given the current lack of over-
and that an appropriate assessment of the quality of
sight regarding deserved vs. undeserved authorship,
candidates’workduringthisphasewouldrequirethein-
naivelyrewardinganyappearanceofinterdisciplinarity
volvementofexpertsintherespectivearea. Atpresent,
via co-authorship would create an additional incentive
thisrequirementisrarelymetintypicalhiringandpro-
foraddingguestauthorsfromotherfields.
motion processes. Frischkorn argues that, as a conse-
Sixth, and most important, “true” interdisciplinarity
quence, committees often resort to using invalid met-
is likely to be a necessity rather than a choice. For ex-
rics. Weagree.
ample, most psychologists lack the training to engage
Frischkorn then went on to argue that the problem
in complex modeling efforts and will thus have to rely
maybemitigatedbyestablishingmorepermanent(e.g.,
onmorecompetentcolleagueswhenengaginginsucha
lecturer) positions for people with the respective ex-
project. Ifsuccessful,theoutcomewillbeapaperofbet-
pertise at the local faculties. While there is nothing
terquality(thatis,withgreaterscientificmerit),which
wrong with establishing more permanent positions for
inturn shouldincrease thechances thatthe articlewill
academics,wedodisagreewiththisview. Giving“local
===== PAGE 9/14 =====
9
experts” the power to ultimately determine the scien- this with all the criteria they fail to meet. We there-
tific merit of a candidate’s work bears a risk of inviting fore recommend that using the “not applicable” option
a strong influence of local micropolitics. To avoid this should always require a justification. When using it,
and the associated risk to scientific integrity, we would applicantsshouldhavetoexplainwhytherespectivein-
ratherrecommendincreasingtheproportionofexternal dicatorisnotapplicabletothisparticularpieceofwork.
experts on hiring committees (i.e., experts who are not Weproposecheckingalltheself-reportedcharacteris-
members of the hiring faculty but from a relevant sub- ticsofthepaperssubmittedbycandidateswhoaresup-
field;Boessel-Debbertetal.,2025). posed to move from the longlist to the shortlist (and
maybe for border cases). Preliminary research (Etzel
(o)GamingtheNewMetrics et al., 2025) suggests that this would be feasible with
acceptable effort. Justifications for declaring criteria to
Several commenters (Brandt et al., 2024; Dames et
be“notapplicable”maybeincludedinthesechecks.
al., 2024; Fink-Lamotte et al., 2024; Hostler, 2024;
If the effort of checking the candidates’ self-
Ulpts, 2024) were concerned that the new metrics pro-
assessments is still considered to be too high, one may
posedheremightbevulnerabletogamingefforts. This
resort to only checking random subsamples of indica-
is a reasonable concern, given that the current metrics
torsforeachshortlistedapplicantinstead. Eventhisap-
ofscientificproductivityhavebeenshowntobesocom-
proachwouldalreadyimplygreaterdiagnosticdiligence
monly gamed (Chapman et al., 2019; Fong & Wilhite,
as compared to typical contemporary committee work,
2017; Pruschak & Hopp, 2022) that one may legiti-
and likely help improve the average level of method-
matelyaskwhatvariancetheyreflectapartfromgaming
ological rigor among shortlisted candidates. To further
efforts. We know of Goodhart’s Law, and we are aware
reduce the effort associated with such checks, we are
ofthestrongincentivetosomehow“comeoutontop”in
now exploring the possibility of establishing a central
thecompetitionforpermanentjobsinacademia. Asthis
open access registry to which people may submit their
incentiveislikelytocontinuetoexist,thequestionisnot
scientific output. These would then be independently
whether the new metrics will be gamed, but whether
evaluated with regard to our quality criteria just once
they are harder to game than the current ones. We do
andthencandidateswouldonlyhavetosendacommit-
think that this is the case, because the RESQUE indica-
teethelinktothatevaluation.
torsaremoreamenabletoactuallybeingchecked(e.g.,
whether data were actually made available, whether
(p)Representativeness
analyses were actually pre-registered). We also see the
possibilitythat“gaming”themactuallyleadstotheirful- In their commentary, Stengelin et al. (2024) high-
fillment because they are closer to the actual practice lighted the current debate over a “generalizability cri-
they are supposed to measure 1. Undeniably, there is sis” in psychology, emphasized the importance of sam-
room for fraudulent behavior concerning the RESQUE plerepresentativenessandsuggestedincorporatingitas
indicators,butwedothinkitislikelytobesubstantially an indicator in the first assessment phase. We agree
smaller than with mere numbers of authorships and ci- wholeheartedlyandhaveamendedtheRESQUECollec-
tations. torAppaccordingly. Infact,ourinitialproposal(Leising
If certain indicator points principally cannot be et al., 2022b) had already contained this as one of the
achieved by certain types of research, this would in- tenmostimportantqualityindicators. Indevelopingthe
cur an unfair disadvantage. Therefore, we introduced RESQUE framework, however, we became a bit more
a “not applicable” option for most indicators. Using skeptical regarding the feasibility of actually checking
this option removes the points for that indicator from claimsofrepresentativenessfortheirvalidity. Butgiven
the maximum of attainable points. The overall rigor that representative data is still very rare in psychology,
score is calculated as a “percentage of maximum possi- wenowassumethatanypaperexhibitingthisdesirable
ble”(POMP)acrossapplicableindicatorsonly. Thereby, qualitywillmakethatfactknowninunambiguousterms
applicants who are unable to achieve certain points for (e.g.,bydetailingthestrategythatwasusedforrecruit-
reasonsbeyondtheircontrolmaystillachievethemax- ingresearchparticipants).
imumof100percent. It should be noted that sample representativeness is
However, this approach does allow for some gam- justoneoftwokeydimensionsinthisregard. Theother
ing of the system, as well: Instead of selecting “not
available” (e.g., open data), which would result in 0 1For example, the bonus points for an open license of
sourcecode(whichisoneoftheFAIRnessindicators)canbe
points, applicants could simply select “not applicable”,
achieved within seconds. But once the code has an open li-
which would exclude the respective indicator from be-
cense,itsbenefitsofreusabilityareactuallyachieved.
ingcounted. Takentotheextreme,applicantscoulddo
===== PAGE 10/14 =====
10
-stimulusrepresentativeness-mayinfactbeevenmore torsofresearchpublicationsisalreadyquiteacceptable,
neglected, despite being equally important. Stimulus and high for an aggregated rigor score. However, the
representativenessmeansthatthestimulithatresearch sameresearchalsoshowsthatsomequalitycriteriaare
participants are exposed to resemble those whose ef- much harder to judge than others, so psychology (like
fects in the natural environment the researchers want manyotherfields)wouldclearlybenefitfromestablish-
to model. First and foremost, this concerns the ranges ing more consensual reporting standards, to make the
of the relevant stimulus characteristics, but it may also jobeasierforratersofresearchquality.
concern the central tendencies and the variance of the Third, the procedure would become better legit-
distribution(s)ofthosecharacteristics. Astimulussam- imized if the weights of the individual indicators were
ple may be viewed as representative for the stimulus derived in a more representative fashion. At present,
populationifthesamplingoftheformerfromthelatter they basically reflect the outcome of in-depth discus-
took place at random. We assume that authors aiming sions among the members of the group developing the
for stimulus representativeness in their study are likely system. Amorerepresentativeweightingschemecould
to highlight that desirable feature. Thus, we have now be obtained by surveying a large sample of commu-
addedthisindicatortotheRESQUECollectorApp,too. nity members for their views on the matter. Lange et
al. (2024) even argued that it would be desirable for
Outlook committees hiring people for similar positions to use a
joint set of indicators and weights for the given field.
We envision the development and improvement of
We agree, as this would establish greater comparabil-
RESQUEtobeanongoingcollaborativeprocess,shaped
ity between the procedures applied at different insti-
over time by shared community experiences and re-
tutions. As a side effect, such standardization would
peated evaluations. Hence, the state of the system de-
significantlyreducetheeffortassociatedwithusingthe
scribed in this rejoinder and the revised versions of the
system.
two target papers can only be an intermediate step of
Fourth, for the same reason (effort reduction) it
a longer journey. Fortunately, at this point, community
would be desirable to establish a system in which each
involvement is very strong, once more confirming that
research product is scored once in a reliable fashion by
many colleagues also perceive an urgent need for re-
anindependentteamofassessors,andtheevaluationis
forming research assessment, and their great willing-
then made publicly available. Parts of this assessment
nesstoactivelyhelpwiththisreform.
could (and should) be part of the traditional peer re-
We will close with an overview of current develop-
view process at journals. This database could be used
ments and a few suggestions for additional steps that
by hiring and promotion committees as needed. On an
may be taken to improve the RESQUE framework and
opt-in basis, it could also be one data source for a pub-
make it more effective. First, as we stated above, the
lic author’s profile. We could imagine the Leibniz Insti-
coresetofindicatorsshouldbeaccompaniedbyexpan-
tute for Psychology (ZPID) taking on this responsibility
sionpacksthataccountforthespecificsofsomeofpsy-
withintheGermanacademiclandscape.
chology’s subdisciplines. The core set also has to in-
Fifth, we are pleased to be able to announce that
corporate reliable and valid indicators of what is good
the RESQUE project has been honored with the 2023
theorizing and indicators for other types of research
Einstein Award for Promoting Quality in Research
contributions (i.e., data and software). Work on all of
(https://award.einsteinfoundation.de/award-winners-
thisisnowwellunderway. Regardingqualityindicators
finalists/recipients-2023/early-career-award-2023). As
for contributionsbased on qualitative methodology, we
a next step, we will test and evaluate the current set
wouldliketorepeatourinvitationtoexpertsinthisfield
of quality indicators with regard to reliability, validity,
tocollaborateonthiswithus.
usability, and efficiency in different appointment
Second, the applicability of a system like RESQUE
contexts. Several academic institutions have already
(especially its more algorithmic phase 1) crucially
agreedtoparticipateandpilottheRESQUEframework,
hinges on the extent to which the given indicators can
thus providing an invaluable real-world testing envi-
be objectively assessed at all. If the presence of cer-
ronment. Allresultsandmaterialsfromtheprojectwill
tain desirable features of a piece of research were only
bemadeavailablewithanopenlicenseintheRESQUE
in the eye of the beholder, then any attempt to as-
repository(https://github.com/RESQUE-Framework).
sess them as part of hiring or promotion procedures
It seems that academia is in the process of seriously
wouldnotbejustifiable. Atpresent,thenumberofem-
reconsidering several issues of vital importance to the
pirical studies on this issue is still small (Etzel et al.,
functioning of the science system. We are delighted to
2025; Leising et al., 2022a), but they do show that
seethishappen,andproudthattheRESQUEframework
inter-rater agreement in assessing some quality indica-
===== PAGE 11/14 =====
11
continues to make a contribution to this ongoing dis- OpenSciencePractices
course.
This article is a conceptual paper and as such is not
eligible for Open Science badges. The entire editorial
AuthorContact
process,includingtheopenreviews,ispublishedinthe
Corresponding author is Daniel Leising, Technis- onlinesupplement.
che Universität Dresden, Germany (daniel.leising@tu-
dresden.de). References
ORCID:
Abele-Brehm,A.,&Bühner,M.(2016).WersolldiePro-
Leising0000-0001-8503-5840
fessur bekommen? Eine Untersuchung zur Be-
Gärtner0000-0003-4296-963X
wertungvonAuswahlkriterieninBerufungsver-
Schönbrodt0000-0002-8282-3910
fahrenderPsychologie[Whoshouldreceivethe
professorship? A research on the evaluation of
differenthiringcriteriaforappointmentsinaca-
ConflictofInterestandFunding
demic psychology]. Psychologische Rundschau,
Theauthorsstatethattheyhavenoconflictofinterest 67(4), 250–261. https://doi.org/10.1026/
todeclare. 0033-3042/a000335
This project and publication is supported by the Ein- Aksnes, D., Langfeldt, L., & Wouters, P. (2019). Cita-
stein Foundation Berlin as part of the Einstein Founda- tions, Citation Indicators, and Research Qual-
tion Award for Promoting Quality in Research - in co- ity: An Overview of Basic Concepts and The-
operation with the BIH QUEST Center for Responsible ories. SAGE Open, 9(1), 2158244019829575.
Research. The contents are those of the author(s) and https://doi.org/10.1177/2158244019829575
donotnecessarilyrepresenttheofficialviewsof,noran Auger, V., & Claes, N. (2024). Comment on "Responsi-
endorsement by, the Einstein Foundation or the award ble Research Assessment: Implementing DORA
jury. forhiringandpromotioninpsychology”.Meta-
Psychology, 8, 2158244019829575. https://
AuthorContributions doi.org/10.15626/MP.2023.3779
Blashfield,R.K.,&Reynolds,S.M.(2012).AnInvisible
Conceptualization: DL, AG, FS Writing - Original
CollegeViewoftheDSM-5PersonalityDisorder
Draft: DLWriting-ReviewandEditing,DL,AG,FS
Classification. Journal of Personality Disorders,
Theorderinwhichtheauthorsarenamedreflectsthe
26(6), 821–829. https://doi.org/10.1521/
perceived size of their respective contributions (first >
pedi.2012.26.6.821
last>middle).
Boessel-Debbert, N., Kluge, A., Leising, D., Mis-
Acknowledgments chkowski,D.,Phan,L.V.,Richter,F.,&Stahl,J.
(2025). An analysis of functional relationships
We are most grateful to the Executive Committee between systemic conditions and unethical be-
of the German Psychological Society for their ongoing havior in german academia [Preprint]. https:
enthusiastic support, to the Editorial Board of Meta- //doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/xj2m6_v1
Psychology for providing us with the forum for the Bornmann, L. (2012). The Hawthorne effect in journal
present discussion, and to Daniël Lakens for oversee- peer review. Scientometrics, 91(3), 857–862.
ing the editorial processes for these three papers. We https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192-011-0547-y
also would like to sincerely thank all members of the Brandmaier,A.M.,Ernst,M.,&Peikert,A.(2024).Com-
community who have helped us develop and improve mentary: ’Responsible Research Assessment II:
the RESQUE framework to its current state. This in- Aspecificproposalforhiringandpromotionin
cludesnotonlytheauthorsofthe21commentaries,but psychology’. Meta-Psychology, 8. https://doi.
also everyone who contributed to the project and with org/10.15626/MP.2023.3715
whom we have had fruitful discussions at conferences, Brandt, H., Henninger, M., Ulitzsch, E., Kleinke, K., &
aftertalks,orviaemail. Itisaprivilegetoworkinanen- Schäfer, T. (2024). Responsible research as-
vironmentwheresomanycolleaguesdevotetheirvalu- sessment in the area of quantitative methods
abletimeandenergytoimprovingresearchassessment research: A comment on Gärtner et al. Meta-
withsuchdedication. Psychology, 8. https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.
2023.3796
===== PAGE 12/14 =====
12
Brown, G. (2024). A broader view of research contri- on open science in clinical psychology. Meta-
butions: Necessary adjustments to DORA for Psychology, 8. https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.
hiring and promotion in psychology. Meta- 2023.3794
Psychology, 8. https://doi.org/10.15626/MP. Fong, E. A., & Wilhite, A. W. (2017). Authorship and
2022.3652 citation manipulation in academic research.
Campbell, R., Javorka, M., Engleton, J., Fishwick, K., PLOSOne,12(12),e0187394.https://doi.org/
Gregory, K., & Goodman-Williams, R. (2023). 10.1371/journal.pone.0187394
Open-Science Guidance for Qualitative Re- Frischkorn, G. T. (2024). Responsible Research Assess-
search: An Empirically Validated Approach for ment requires structural more than procedural
De-Identifying Sensitive Narrative Data. Ad- reforms. Meta-Psychology, 8. https://doi.org/
vances in Methods and Practices in Psychologi- 10.15626/MP.2023.3734
cal Science, 6(4), 25152459231205832. https: Gärtner, A., Leising, D., Freyer, N., Musfeld, P., Lange,
//doi.org/10.1177/25152459231205832 J.,&Schönbrodt,F.D.(2022).ResponsibleRe-
Chapman, C. A., Bicca-Marques, J. C., Calvignac- search Assessment II: A specific proposal for
Spencer, S., Fan, P., Fashing, P. J., Gogarten, hiringandpromotioninpsychology[Preprint].
J., Guo, S., Hemingway, C. A., Leendertz, F., https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/5yexm_v1
Li, B., Matsuda, I., Hou, R., Serio-Silva, J. C., Gärtner, A., Leising, D., & Schönbrodt, F.
& Stenseth, N. C. (2019). Games academics (2023). Empfehlungen zur Bewertung wis-
play and their consequences: How authorship, senschaftlicher Leistungen bei Berufungsver-
h -index and journal impact factors are shap- fahren in der Psychologie [Recommendations
ing the future of academia. Proceedings of the for the evaluation of academic performance
Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 286(1916), for hiring and promotion in psychology].
20192047. https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb. Psychologische Rundschau, 74(3), 166–174.
2019.2047 https://doi.org/10.1026/0033-3042/a000630
Cicchetti, D. V. (1991). The reliability of peer review Gärtner, A., Leising, D., Freyer, N., Musfeld, P., Lange,
for manuscript and grant submissions: A cross- J., & Schönbrodt, F. D. (2025). Responsible
disciplinaryinvestigation.BehavioralandBrain Research Assessment II: A Specific Proposal
Sciences, 14(1), 119–135. https://doi.org/10. for Hiring and Promotion in Psychology. Meta-
1017/S0140525X00065675 Psychology, 9. https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.
Dames, H., Musfeld, P., Popov, V., Oberauer, K., & 2024.4604
Frischkorn, G. T. (2024). Responsible research Greenhalgh, T., Raftery, J., Hanney, S., & Glover, M.
assessment should prioritize theory develop- (2016). Research impact: A narrative review.
ment and testing over ticking open science BMC Medicine, 14, 78. https://doi.org/10.
boxes. Meta-Psychology, 8. https://doi.org/10. 1186/s12916-016-0620-8
15626/MP.2023.3735 Grove, W. M., Zald, D. H., Lebow, B. S., Snitz, B. E.,
Dougherty,M.,&Horne,Z.(2022).Citationcountsand & Nelson, C. (2000). Clinical versus mechan-
journal impact factors do not capture some in- ical prediction: A meta-analysis. Psychological
dicators of research quality in the behavioural Assessment, 12(1), 19–30. https://doi.org/10.
and brain sciences. Royal Society Open Science, 1037/1040-3590.12.1.19
9(8).https://doi.org/10.1098/rsos.220334 Hansen, M., Beitner, J., Horz, H., & Schultze, M.
Etzel, F. T., Seyffert-Müller, A., Schönbrodt, F. D., (2024). Indicators for teaching assessment.
Kreuzer,L.,Gärtner,A.,Knischewski,P.,&Leis- Meta-Psychology,8.https://doi.org/10.15626/
ing,D.(2025).Inter-raterreliabilityinassessing MP.2023.3763
the methodological quality of research papers in Hostler,T.(2024).Researchassessmentusinganarrow
psychology. https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/ definitionof“researchquality”isanactofgate-
4w7rb_v2 keeping: A comment on Gärtner et al. (2022).
Fink-Lamotte, J., Hilbert, K., Bentz, D., Blackwell, S., Meta-Psychology,8.https://doi.org/10.15626/
Boehnke, J. R., Burghardt, J., Cludius, B., MP.2023.3764
Ehrenthal, J. C., Elsaesser, M., Haberkamp, A., Johnson, J. L., Adkins, D., & Chauvin, S. (2020). A re-
Hechler, T., Kräplin, A., Paret, C., Schulze, L., viewofthequalityindicatorsofrigorinqualita-
Wilker,S.,&Niemeyer,H.(2024).Responseto tiveresearch.AmericanJournalofPharmaceuti-
responsible research assessment I and II from calEducation,84(1),7120.https://doi.org/10.
the perspective of the DGPs working group 5688/ajpe7120
===== PAGE 13/14 =====
13
Karhulahti,V.-M.(2024).Interdisciplinaryvalue.Meta- 189. https://doi.org/10.1026/0033-3042/
Psychology, 8. https://doi.org/10.15626/MP. a000638
2023.3679 Pruschak,G.,&Hopp,C.(2022).Andthecreditgoesto
Karhulahti, V.-M., Branney, P., Siutila, M., & Syed, —Ghostandhonoraryauthorshipamongsocial
M. (2022). A primer for choosing, designing scientists. PLOS One, 17(5), e0267312. https:
and evaluating registered reports for qualita- //doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0267312
tive methods. MetaArXiv. https://doi.org/10. Sandoval-Lentisco, A. (2024). Commentary: “Responsi-
31222/osf.io/2azkf ble Research Assessment: Implementing DORA
Lange, J., Degner, J., Gleibs, I. H., & Jonas, E. (2024). forhiringandpromotioninpsychology”.Meta-
Faires und valides shortlisting in Phase 1 [Fair Psychology, 8. https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.
and valid shortlisting in phase 1]. Psychologis- 2022.3655
che Rundschau, 74(3), 187–189. https://doi. Schönbrodt,F.D.,Gärtner,A.,Frank,M.,Gollwitzer,M.,
org/10.1026/0033-3042/a000641 Ihle,M.,Mischkowski,D.,&Leising,D.(2022).
Lange,J.,Freyer,N.,Musfeld,P.,Schönbrodt,F.,&Leis- ResponsibleResearchAssessmentI:Implement-
ing,D.(2025).Achecklistforincentivizingand ingDORAandCoARAforhiringandpromotion
facilitating good theory building. Zeitschrift für in psychology [Preprint]. https://doi.org/10.
Psychologie, 233. https://doi.org/10.1027/ 31234/osf.io/rgh5b_v1
2151-2604/a000604 Schönbrodt,F.D.,Gärtner,A.,Frank,M.,Gollwitzer,M.,
Leising, D., Grenke, O., & Cramer, M. (2023). Visual Ihle,M.,Mischkowski,D., Phan,L.V.,Schmitt,
Argument Structure Tool (VAST) Version 1.0. M., Scheel, A. M., Schubert, A.-L., Steinberg,
Meta-Psychology,7.https://doi.org/10.15626/ U., & Leising, D. (2025). Responsible Research
MP.2021.2911 AssessmentI:ImplementingDORAandCoARA
Leising, D., Liesefeld, H., Buecker, S., Glöckner, A., for Hiring and Promotion in Psychology. Meta-
& Lortsch, S. (2024). A tentative roadmap Psychology, 9. https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.
for consensus building processes. Personality 2024.4601
Science, 5. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / Schwartz, B., Szota, K., Schmitz, J., Lueken, U., &
27000710241298610 Lincoln, T. (2023). Mehr Differenzierung nach
Leising, D., Thielmann, I., Glöckner, A., Gärtner, A., & Fachgebieten[Moredifferentiationbysubdisci-
Schönbrodt,F.(2022a).Tenstepstowardabet- plines]. Psychologische Rundschau, 74(3), 184–
terpersonalityscience–arejoindertothecom- 185. https://doi.org/10.1026/0033-3042/
ments. Personality Science, 3. https://doi.org/ a000639
10.5964/ps.7961 Sparfeldt, J. R., Spörer, N., Greiff, S., & Schneider, R.
Leising, D., Thielmann, I., Glöckner, A., Gärtner, A., & (2024). Ein Plädoyer für valide(re) Bewertun-
Schönbrodt,F.(2022b).Tenstepstowardabet- genderwissenschaftlichenLeistungeninBeru-
terpersonalityscience–howqualitymaybere- fungsverfahren [A call for (more) valid evalu-
warded more in research evaluation. Personal- ations of scientific achievement in hiring pro-
ityScience,3.https://doi.org/10.5964/ps.6029 cesses]. Psychologische Rundschau, 74(3), 185–
Meehl, P. (1954). Clinical versus statistical prediction: A 187. https://doi.org/10.1026/0033-3042/
theoreticalanalysisandareviewoftheevidence. a000640
UniversityofMinnesotaPress.https://doi.org/ Stenbacka, C. (2001). Qualitative research requires
10.1037/11281-000 quality concepts of its own. Management De-
Niessen, C., Melchers, K. G., Ohly, S., Fay, D., Handke, cision, 39(7), 551–556. https://doi.org/10.
L., & Kern, M. (2023). Ein Plädoyer für 1108/EUM0000000005801
breitgewählteundanforderungsbezogeneLeis- Stengelin, R., Bohn, M., Sánchez-Amaro, A., Haun,
tungsindikatoren [a call for using broad and D., Thiele, M., Daum, M., Felsche, E., Fong,
demand-focused achievement indicators]. Psy- F., Gampe, A., Giner Torréns, M., Grueneisen,
chologische Rundschau, 74(3), 180–182. https: S., Hardecker, D., Horn, L., Neldner, K., Pope-
//doi.org/10.1026/0033-3042/a000637 Caldwell, S., & Schuhmacher, N. (2024). Re-
Ortner, T. M., Kretzschmar, A., Rauthmann, J. F., sponsible Research is also concerned with
& Tibubos, A. N. (2013). Berufungsverfahren generalizability: Recognizing efforts to reflect
unter einer diagnostischen Perspektive durch- upon and increase generalizability in hiring
führen. Psychologische Rundschau, 74(3), 187– and promotion decisions in psychology. Meta-
===== PAGE 14/14 =====
14
Psychology, 8. https://doi.org/10.15626/MP. Psychology, 8. https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.
2023.3695 2023.3758
Stroebe, W., & Strack, F. (2023). Zweierlei Maß? Ulpts, S. (2024). Responsible assessment of what re-
WarummanchePsychologendenGebrauchvon search? Beware of epistemic diversity! Meta-
quantitativen Indikatoren der Forschungsqual- Psychology, 8. https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.
ität ablehnen[A double standard? Why some 2023.3797
psychologistsrejecttheuseofquantitativeindi- Witte,E.(2024).Commenton:responsibleresearchas-
catorsofresearchquality].PsychologischeRund- sessmentIandresponsibleresearchassessment
schau, 74(3), 175–189. https://doi.org/10. II. Meta-Psychology, 8. https://doi.org/10.
1026/0033-3042/a000631 15626/MP.2023.3685
Syed, M. (2024). Valuing preprints must be part
of responsible research assessment. Meta-