
===== PAGE 1/11 =====
Meta-Psychology,2025,vol9,MP.2024.4604 Opendata:NotApplicable Editedby:DaniëlLakens
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2024.4604 Openmaterials:NotApplicable Reviewedby:InvitedCommentaries
Articletype:Commentary Openandreproducibleanalysis:NotApplicable Analysisreproducedby:NotApplicable
PublishedundertheCC-BY4.0license Openreviewsandeditorialprocess:Yes AllsupplementaryfilescanbeaccessedatOSF:
Preregistration:No https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/MU6ED
Responsible Research Assessment II: A specific proposal for hiring
and promotion in psychology
Anne Gärtner1,2, Daniel Leising1, Nele Freyer1, Philipp Musfeld3, Jens Lange4, and Felix D.
Schönbrodt5
1TechnischeUniversitätDresden,Germany
2FreieUniversitätBerlin,Germany
3UniversityofZurich,Switzerland
4HMUHealthandMedicalUniversityErfurt,Germany
5Ludwig-Maximilians-UniversitätMünchen,Germany
Traditional metric indicators of scientific productivity (e.g., journal impact factor; h-
index)havebeenheavilycriticizedforbeinginvalidandfuelingaculturethatfocuses
onthequantity,ratherthanthequality,ofaperson’sscientificoutput. Thereisnowa
wide-spread demand for viable alternatives to current academic evaluation practices.
In a previous report, we laid out four basic principles of a more responsible research
assessmentinacademichiringandpromotionprocesses(Schönbrodtetal.,2025).The
presentpaperoffersaspecificproposalforhowtheseprinciplesmaybeimplementedin
practice: Weargueinfavorofbroadeningtherangeofrelevantresearchcontributions
andproposeasetofconcretequalitycriteria(includingaready-to-useonlinetool)for
research articles. These criteria are supposed to be used primarily in the first phase
oftheassessmentprocess. Theirfunctionistohelpestablishaminimumthresholdof
methodological (i.e., theoretical and empirical) rigor that candidates need to pass in
ordertobefurtherconsideredforhiringorpromotion. Incontrast, thesecondphase
of the assessment process focuses more on the actual content of candidates’ research
and necessarily uses more narrative means of assessment. The debate over ways of
replacing current invalid evaluation criteria with ones that relate more closely to sci-
entific quality continues. Its course and outcome will depend on the willingness of
researcherstogetinvolvedandhelpshapeit.
Keywords: DORA,CoARA,researchassessment,researchquality,impact
Introduction decisions(Abele-BrehmandBühner,2016)–apractice
that hasbeen massively, andrepeatedly, denouncedfor
The San Francisco Declaration on Research Assess-
a number of good reasons (e.g. Leising et al., 2022a;
ment(DORA)andtheCoalitionforAdvancingResearch
DORA:https://sfdora.org/read;ThePLoSMedicineEd-
Assessment (CoARA) call on academic institutions to
itors, 2006). The critics of the current approach in-
abandon the use of invalid metrics of research quality
sist that, instead of focusing on predominantly quan-
and productivity in hiring and promotion. One metric
titative measures of research productivity, more atten-
that should no longer be used to assess individual re-
tion should be paid to markers of actual research qual-
search achievement is the Journal Impact Factor (JIF)
ity(DFG:PackageofMeasurestoSupportaShiftinthe
asitcorrelatesnegativelywithmultipleindicatorsofre-
CultureofResearchAssessment;EuropeanCommission
search quality (Brembs et al., 2013; Kepes et al., 2022;
2021: Towardsareformoftheresearchassessmentsys-
Paulus et al., 2018). Other indicators such as a per-
tem; (Leising et al., 2022b, 2022a). However, it is still
son's number of (co-)authorships, number of citations,
unclearhowexactlya“better”approachwouldlooklike.
andh-indexhavebecomethetargetofcriticismaswell,
Schönbrodtetal. (2025)proposedfourprinciplesfor
given their rather loose connection to scientific quality
amorequality-basedresearchassessmentinpsychologi-
andtheirsusceptibilitytobeinggamed(Chapmanetal.,
calscience: (1)Academiccontributionsaremultifaceted.
2019;Leisingetal.,2022a).
Regarding research contributions, do not only value (a)
Despite their well-documented negative side-effects,
publishedjournalarticles, butalsootherresearchreports
thesemetricscontinuetobeamongthemostimportant
(includingpreprints,conferenceproceedings,Stage1reg-
and frequently used measures in hiring and promotion
===== PAGE 2/11 =====
2
istered reports with or without an “in principle accep- rigor is a crucial component of research quality and
tance”, protocols, monographs, bookchapters, psychome- can be measured relatively objectively, once a field has
trictestmanuals),(b)datasetsand(c)researchsoftware agreeduponcommonstandardsofgoodscientificprac-
development. (2) Quantitative indicators do have prac- tice. The concept refers to whether the research has
tical advantages, but they have to be valid and need to been skillfully executed according to the standards of
be used responsibly. (3) Use (a) methodological rigor, the field, and can be further subdivided into empirical
(b) impact, and (c) quantity as independent evaluative and theoretical rigor. Rigor makes it more likely that
dimensionsinresearchassessment. (4)Valuequalityover research is reliable, reproducible, and of high scientific
impactandquantity. integrity.
Inourview,aresearcher'scommitmenttoresponsible In contrast, innovation, creativity, and ingenuity are
research practice should play a crucial role in making morecomplexanddifficulttomeasure. Theseaspectsof
hiring and promotion decisions (Gärtner et al., 2023, research quality contribute to the actual advancement
2024). The main reason is that hiring and promoting of knowledge, by offering new perspectives on impor-
suchresearchersismostlikelytocontributetotheemer- tantquestionsandintellectuallysoundwaysofanswer-
genceofacrediblescientificknowledgebase. Asaside- ing them. Importantly, these aspects of quality cannot
effect, such an approach would also document the in- be reduced to methodological rigor. In other words,
stitution’s commitment to transparent and responsible methodological rigor is not a sufficient condition but
research conduct, which may help enhance the institu- only a necessary condition for high quality research. It
tion’sscientificreputation. is the combination of methodological rigor with inno-
The goal of this paper is to put forward a concrete vation,creativityandingenuitythatdriveshigh-quality
proposal on how to implement these rather abstract research.
principlesinpractice,specificallyinthefieldofpsychol- Phase 1 of the assessment process that we propose
ogy. In this, we aim to minimize the additional burden is supposed to help establish a minimum threshold of
on committees (both in terms of time and expertise). methodologicalrigorthatcandidatesmustpassinorder
Wealsorecognisethattheappropriatenessofeachindi- to be further considered for hiring/promotion. In the
vidual indicator in our proposal may be vigorously de- case of hiring processes, this may mean being invited
bated. It will always be possible to find examples of foraninterview. Phase2oftheassessmentprocessthen
articles, projects, or researchers to which the proposed focusesmoreontheactualcontentofthecandidates’re-
evaluation system would not do perfect justice. Never- search and necessarily uses more qualitative means of
theless,webelievethatourproposal—ifimplemented— assessment.
would represent a substantial improvement over the As a rule, the assessments in Phase 1 should be
statusquo. provided by the candidates themselves and be inde-
pendently verified for all candidates that proceed to
Phase1: Establishingaminimumthresholdfor Phase 2 (e.g., by committee members or by assis-
methodologicalrigor tants). Again, this is to keep the workload for the
committees within reasonable limits. For the same rea-
Schönbrodtetal. (2025)proposedassessingtheaca-
son, we provide a ready-to-use online tool with as-
demic performance and potential of applicants in two
sessment criteria for publication outputs, as well as
successive phases: In Phase 1, the overall methodolog-
an R package to automatically calculate multidimen-
ical rigor of an applicant's research is assessed by as-
sional profiles for methodological rigor, author contri-
signing quality scores to individual research outputs to
butions, scientific impact and open science practices
which the applicant has contributed. In order to keep
(seehttps://www.resque.info).
the workload of committees manageable, the assess-
ment in this phase is mainly algorithmic and uses in-
Typesofresearchoutput
dicatorsthatarerelativelyobjectiveandeasytoobtain.
However, unlike most indicators currently in use, these According to Schönbrodt et al.'s (2025) first princi-
alternative indicators focus more directly on research ple of responsible research assessment (“academic con-
quality. tributionsaremultifaceted”),thereareothertypesofre-
From a theoretical perspective, research quality can search contributions besides publications, namely pub-
beviewedasamultidimensionalconstructthatencom- lished data sets and research software, that should be
passesbothbasicandmorecomplexaspects. Thebasic valuedandtakenintoaccountinmakinghiringandpro-
aspects concern methodological rigor, while the more motion decisions. In what follows, we outline concrete
complex and elusive aspects concern concepts such as evaluationcriteriaforhowpublicationsmaybeassessed
innovation, creativity, and ingenuity. Methodological in Phase 1. Criteria for research data sets and software
===== PAGE 3/11 =====
3
productsarestillunderdevelopmentatthetimeofwrit- Nevertheless,othertypesofscientificpublications(e.g.,
ing. theoretical papers or simulation studies) do exist and
Besides research, there are other types of academic areequallyimportant. Topreventunfairdisadvantages
contributions, such as teaching, leadership, service to forcandidateswhoseworkmostlycomprisestheseother
the academic institution/field, and societal impact (cf. types of publications, candidates may list these papers
Schönbrodt et al., 2025), that should be considered in aswellandspecifytheirrespectivetypeofcontribution.
hiring and promotion decisions. A commission of the Wesuggestthatcandidatesnominatenomorethanten
German Psychological Society is currently developing of their own papers, and rate these papers themselves,
assessmentcriteriafortheteachingdomain,andwein- using the RESQUE Collector App. For papers that are
vite the scientific community to help develop measur- notadequatelycoveredbythegivenevaluationcriteria,
able criteria for the other domains as well, to further the required merit and impact statements (see below)
enhance fairness, inclusiveness, transparency and stan- may provide additional information as to why they are
dardizationinthehiringandpromotionofacademics. important and should be considered in the hiring/pro-
motion process. For multi-study papers, it is important
1)Publications/Researchreports
tospecifywhichparticularstudyisbeingrated,asstud-
ies may differ significantly with regard to research de-
Wesuggestthatcandidatesselectwhattheyconsider
signandqualityindicators.
to be the best (up to ten) of their own first-authored
Second, individual contributions to publications
research reports that were published within the past
should be specified using a modified version of CRediT
five years. These should then be evaluated according
(Contributor Roles Taxonomy; https://credit.niso.org).
to several quality criteria. The criteria are based on
Candidates are asked to make explicit the type and de-
Leising et al. (2022b; 2022a) with some modifications
gree of their contribution to each submitted publica-
(e.g.,furtherspecificationofCRediTroles,FAIRformat
tion. Whereas the type refers to 14 standardized roles
of data/scripts; engagement in theory-driven research;
(suchas“Conceptualisation”;“Formalanalysis”,“Super-
narrative statements on statistical power, sample size,
vision”or“Writing–originaldraft”),thedegreeisspec-
scientific merit, and impact). The rationale behind this
ifiedaslead,equal,support,ornorole. Thisinformation
is to make visible the average methodological quality
is not used in Phase 1 of the assessment procedure but
of the applicant's best, most recent work, while largely
providesarichresearchprofiletobediscussedinPhase
eliminatingmerequantityasanassessmentcriterion.
2(seebelow).
The current set of assessment criteria for re-
Thenextcriteriaassesstheempiricalrigorofthepub-
search reports can be found on the website of the
lication,whichincludesconsiderationsaboutopendata,
RESQUE (Research Quality Evaluation) framework
open scripts, open materials, and preregistrations. The
(https://www.resque.info). Note that they may still
open data criteria involve specifying the kind of data
be subject to change in the course of ongoing discus-
being used, whether it is original data, reused existing
sions in the scientific community and based on the
data, or simulated data. They also involve the sam-
results of evaluation studies that are currently un-
ple characteristics, such as type and representativeness
derway. The version that was current at the time
of sample, or its diversity. It also covers the type of
this paper was written is provided in the appendix
data (such as questionnaire responses vs. behavioral
(https://osf.io/mu6ed/files/n2zdm). The criteria de-
observationsorphysiologicalmeasurements),studyde-
scribed in the following represent the core set of indi-
sign (cross-sectional vs. longitudinal; experimental vs.
catorsthathasemergedintheprocesssofar. Weexpect
observational), and specifying if the raw data is avail-
them to be applicable to most areas of psychology. In
ableinaninstitutionalrepository,providingtheURLor
addition, field-specific expansion packs that apply only
DOI, along with details on access level and compliance
to certain areas within psychology will be provided on
with FAIR principles (Findable, Accessible, Interopera-
thewebsite.
ble,andReusable).
First, aspects that should be specified for each nom-
TheopenscriptscriteriainvolveaURLorDOIunder
inated publication output are its DOI (title and year
whichthescriptsareprovided,adherencetoFAIRprin-
of publication are automatically retrieved), publication
ciples (including proper licensing, comprehensive doc-
type(e.g.,empiricalvs. theoreticalvs. computational),
umentation, and version control), compliance with re-
andpublicationformat(e.g.,publishedvs. preprint,pa-
producibilitystandards,andwhetherthecorrectnessof
per vs. book vs. test manual). We recognize that the
computational results has been independently verified.
evaluationcriteriaaretailoredtotheassessmentoforig-
The latter means that someone who is not a co-author
inalempiricalresearcharticles,whichrepresentthevast
has verified computational reproducibility. This applies
majorityofpublicationsinmostsubfieldsofpsychology.
===== PAGE 4/11 =====
4
only if a verification report is published with a DOI or onthehomepage(https://www.resque.info/).
anotherpersistentidentifier. Weareawarethatthishas The RESQUE Collector App further allows specify-
rarelybeenimplementedsofar. However,somejournals ingsamplesizeandstatisticalpowerconsiderationsfor
already conduct independent checks, and some univer- each nominated publication. Applicants are asked to
sities have begun offering pre-submission certification provide free text responses summarizing all their re-
ofcomputationalreproducibility. spectiveconsiderations(e.g.,assumedeffectsize,apri-
TheopenmaterialscriteriainvolveaURLorDOIun- ori power calculations, significance threshold, correc-
derwhichstudymaterialsareprovided. Thismeansall tionsformultipletesting;plannedsamplesize). Tosim-
materials that would be necessary to replicate a study plify,theseresponsesmaybedirectlycopiedandpasted
(e.g., questionnaire items, experimental stimuli, texts fromthemanuscript. Thisinformationwillnotbeused
for vignettes, or code for software that controls the ex- inPhase1oftheassessmentprocedurebutmayberel-
perimentalflow). evant for the more qualitative assessment of the candi-
It should also be indicated whether the work was date's work in Phase 2 of the assessment process (see
preregisteredorcontainsaregisteredreport,specifying below).
what was preregistered (e.g., sample size planning, hy- The Collector App also provides applicants with the
potheses, analysis plan) and whether it constitutes at opportunitytoprovidea“meritstatement”anda“scien-
least one preregistered replication attempt of an exist- tificimpactstatement”,asperceivedbythemselves. The
ingstudy. merit statement briefly summarizes (max. 150 words)
Another group of criteria was added in response to the contribution of an article to the field and why the
several commentaries on the first version of this arti- article should be considered in the hiring/promotion
cle. Theseaddressthetheoreticalrigorofanapplicant's process. A merit statement might highlight, for exam-
work. Theory development and testing play a crucial ple, the interdisciplinary nature of the work (establish-
role in all of science and should thus be incentivised. ing connections with other fields), the development of
The criteria apply not only to purely theoretical work a new theory that was developed or tested for the first
but also to original empirical work that incorporates time, innovative methodological choices, or the unusu-
theoretical reasoning in generating its hypotheses. The ally great effort needed to collect the sample. The “sci-
criteria assess whether a study was theoretically mo- entificimpactstatement”brieflysummarizes(max. 150
tivated at all and, if yes, whether it adheres to cer- words) the scientific impact that the given work has
tain standards for reporting theoretical work. This in- made beyond bibliographic indicators (e.g., citations,
cludesadescriptionofthephenomenathataretobeex- which are automatically retrieved for each submitted
plained,oneormorehypotheticalmechanismsaccount- work) (see below). For example, a contribution may
ing for these phenomena, definitions of all elements in be considered scientifically impactful if it has changed
the theory, and, if applicable, a formalization of the thewayinwhichmostresearchersinthefieldanalyzea
theory (i.e., a formal model). We propose specifically certaintypeofdata. Again,thisinformationwillnotbe
rewarding formalization, as it comes with several de- usedinPhase1oftheassessmentprocedurebutmaybe
sirable properties that narrative theories rarely provide relevantforthemorequalitativeassessmentofacandi-
(e.g., full objectivity of the predictions derived from date's work in Phase 2 of the assessment process (see
the theory) (Lange et al., 2025; most recent version: below).
https://osf.io/preprints/psyarxiv/e7tdc 2). Additional
v
2)Datasetsandresearchsoftwarecontributions
criteriarefertohowatheorywasempiricallytested. Ifa
theorywastested,theworkshouldprovide1)adescrip-
The practice of making one's research data publicly
tionofalladditionalassumptionsthatwerenecessaryto
available (“open data”) is increasingly supported by
make the theory testable (e.g., estimation and/or fixa-
journals, publishers and funding agencies. Similar to
tion of parameters in a model, operationalizations), 2)
research articles, data sets can now be assigned a dig-
an explanation of how the tested predictions were de-
ital object identifier (DOI), making them easy to find
rivedfromthetheory(e.g.,byanarrativewalk-through
and cite. This in turn may help researchers get credit
orformally),3)anevaluationofthe(relative)fitofthe
for the data they collect. However, in academic hiring
theory/modeltotheempiricaldata,and4)adiscussion
and promotion processes, this type of research output
of what the results mean for the theory. The version of
is not (yet) valued as much as the traditional journal
thecriteriacurrentatthetimeofwritingisprovidedin
articles. This constitutes a disincentive and needs to
the appendix. Yet, these indicators are still undergoing
change (DFG: Package of Measures to Support a Shift
validationandmightchangeinresponsetoempiricalre-
in the Culture of Research Assessment). Therefore, we
sults. Themostup-to-dateversioncanalwaysbefound
decided to include “data sets” as a distinct type of re-
===== PAGE 5/11 =====
5
search output that should be considered in hiring and andmultipletypesofdocumentationareavailable.
promotionprocesses. Note, however, thatthiscategory
is intended to be used only for exceptional published Multidimensionalprofilesvs. makingdecisions
data sets whose size, scope, or reuse potential clearly
There is a broad consensus in the scientometric
exceedsthescientificvalueofdatasetsthatareprimar-
literature that single indicators capture only limited
ily used for a specific publication (in the RESQUE Col-
aspects of a researcher's profile. Consequently, a multi-
lector App, the latter type of data set should be listed
dimensionalperspectivehasbeenwidelyrecommended
under the “Open Data” item for the respective publica-
(Hicks et al., 2015; DORA: https://sfdora.org/read;
tion). Specificindicatorsforexceptionalpublisheddata
CoARA: https://coara.eu/agreement/the-agreement-
sets are still under development and will include the
full-text/). However, when a multidimensional profile
DataCRediT roles (e.g., Collection, Validation, or Cu-
is employed to inform decisions—such as whether
ration; see https://www.wsl.ch/datacredit/) and FAIR-
to invite a candidate for an interview—or to rank
nessindicators.
candidates, the multiple dimensions are inevitably
Research software is another essential part of mod-
reduced to a single evaluative metric. This dimen-
ern data-driven science, powering both data collection
sionality reduction can be performed either explicitly,
(e.g., PsychoPy, Peirce et al., 2019, or lab.js, Henninger
by specifying the weights of each dimension or the
etal.,2022)anddataanalysis(see,forexample,Rand
algorithmic process used, or implicitly. In the latter
the many contributed packages; R Core Team, 2024).
case, evaluations lack transparency and may introduce
In some cases, the functioning of entire scientific dis-
inconsistency or bias, as different implicit weights
ciplines depends on the work of a few (often unpaid)
might be applied to different candidates. To address
creators and maintainers of critical software (Muna et
thesechallenges,wepropose(a)maintainingamultidi-
al.,2016). Moreover,non-commercialopensourcesoft-
mensional perspective for as long as possible to enable
ware is a necessary building block for computational
a holistic and nuanced evaluation of a candidate's
transparency, reproducibility, and a thriving and inclu-
research profile and, at the same time, (b) ensuring
sivescientificcommunity. Therefore,itishightimethat
transparency by explicitly defining how the multiple
research software development is properly acknowl-
dimensionsarecombinedintoasingleevaluativemetric
edgedinacademichiringandpromotionprocedures.
whendiagnosticdecisionsaremade.
Some research software is accompanied by a citable
paperdescribingit(e.g.,forthelavaanstructuralequa-
Making decisions: The relative weight of individual
tion modeling package in R: Rosseel, 2012). How-
indicators
ever, these“one-shot”descriptionsofsoftwareoftendo
not adequately reflect the ongoing work and evolving We offer some suggestions as to how many points
teams required to maintain and develop research soft- should be assigned to research outputs that meet
wareovertime. Furthermore,notallvaluablesoftware the proposed quality criteria. The appendix con-
contributions have such an accompanying paper. Thus, tains the version of the criteria and their indi-
we need to find other ways of acknowledging and ap- vidual weightings current at the time of writing
preciating these valuable contributions in research as- (https://osf.io/mu6ed/files/n2zdm). For the most
sessment. Wesuggestevaluatingresearchsoftwareasa up-to-date version, please refer to the homepage
third type of scholarly output (besides research reports (https://www.resque.info). Althoughthesesuggestions
and datasets). Note that this category refers only to reflect the outcome of extensive discussions within our
reusableresearchsoftware(suchaslibrariesorbroadly groupandwithmanyothercolleagues,theystilllargely
reusable scripts) that represents a substantial scholarly reflectourownopinions,basedonourintuitionsabout
effort on the part of the applicant. It is not intended (a) the relative importance of each criterion in promot-
to be used for specific analysis scripts that are written ingresearchquality,and(b)theefforttypicallyinvolved
and used primarily for a specific research project (this inmeetingacriterion. Forthefuture,however,itwillbe
lattertypeofsoftwareshouldbelistedunderthe“Open desirabletodeterminethesevaluesinamoresystematic
reproduciblescripts”itemfortherespectiveresearchpa- and representative manner (e.g. by surveying a larger
per). Specific criteria for evaluating software contribu- groupofresearchers).
tionsarestillunderdevelopment, buttheywillcontain Ofcourse,eachcommitteemayeasilyadaptoursug-
contributorrolesinspiredbytheINRIAEvaluationCom- gestions to better meet their specific needs, depending
mitteeCriteriaforSoftwareSelf-Assessment1,whether
1https://www.inria.fr/sites/default/files/2019-
thecodebaseandthecommunityisactivelymaintained,
10/Criteria_software_self_assessment.pdf
andwhethercodetests(e.g.,unittests,functionaltests)
===== PAGE 6/11 =====
6
on the hiring or promotion process at hand. The nu- while at the same time making the promotion process
merical weights assigned to each indicator or category muchmoretransparentandpredictableforcandidates.
are a reflection of how much the committee values the Thecorrectnessofapplicants’self-reportscanbeveri-
individualcriteria. fiedbytherespectivecommitteeatanytime. Toencour-
Whenitcomestomakingdecisionsinanassessment agetruthfulreporting,werecommendinformingcandi-
procedure, we advocate for a transparent and repro- datesthatsuchcheckswilltakeplaceandthatproviding
ducible way of combining multiple dimensions into a incorrectinformationwillleadtoexclusionfromfurther
decision criterion. To this end, we suggest the compu- consideration for the position or promotion. To keep
tation of an overall relative rigor score (RRS). We use a this feasible, we recommend checking only small sam-
POMPscoringprocedure(percentofmaximumpoints), ples of the information provided by candidates in the
to ensure that the RRS for each research output can firstphase(longlist)oftheprocess. However,forcandi-
reach 100% even if some indicators are not applicable. dateswhoproceedtothesecondphase(shortlist),allof
Furthermore, we recommend weighting all submitted theirself-assessmentsshouldbechecked. The(limited)
research outputs equally. For example, if two publica- experience we have with such processes does suggest
tions are available, each one contributes 50% to the that this is feasible. However, institutions might also
overall score, even if they differ in their maximally at- considerpayingsomeonewhoissufficientlyqualifiedto
tainable points. The reasoning behind this approach is carryoutsuchchecksinaprofessionalandindependent
thatitshouldnotbepunishedifsomepointscannotbe manner.
obtainedinprinciple.
Should such assessments of methodological rigor Phase2: In-depthanalysisanddiscussionof
serve to establish a lower threshold, or should they researchcontent
rather be used to rank candidates? We assume that (a)
Phase 2 of the evaluation process focuses more on
at present, there is still considerable variation among
the actual content and merit of a candidate’s research.
applicants in how seriously they take methodological
Here, criteria such as scientific impact, relevance, in-
rigor in their own scientific work, but also that (b) al-
novation and creativity come into play. This requires
most15yearsafterthebeginningoftheso-calledrepli-
in-depth discussions of an applicant’s work with them,
cabilitycrisis,thereshouldbeasufficientnumberofap-
among committee members, and with external review-
plicants who have actually improved the rigor of their
ers.
own research. Based on these assumptions, we recom-
TheratingsondifferentindicatorscollectedinPhase
mend that committees use the RESQUE framework to
1 of the assessment process may be used to create a
establishalowerthresholdofmethodologicalrigorthat
multidimensional profile for each candidate. A sam-
isrequiredtoenterthesecondphaseoftheassessment
ple profile can be seen in Figure 1. It reflects a per-
procedure. In an evaluation study, where researchers
son's performance in various domains of methodologi-
from personality and social psychology submitted their
calrigor(opendata,openmaterials,preregistration,re-
three best papers (k = 52 scorable papers; Etzel et al.,
produciblecodeandverification,theorizingandformal
2025), an average RRS of 31% was found. However,
modeling) across all of their nominated papers. Note
othersubfieldsofpsychologyhavenotyetadoptedrigor
that the profile is calculated only for those criteria that
enhancingpracticesinthesamewayandhaveprobably
could be met in principle (without the "not applicable”
lowerRRSsonaverage.
option). Forexample,“opendata”isonlyscoredifshar-
Whencomparing(e.g.,tenure-track)promotionwith
ingwaspossibleandnotrestrictedbydatasecuritycon-
hiring processes, an important difference is that in the
cerns.
former cases there is no selection of a few short-listed
SeveraladditionalindicatorsarecollectedinPhase1
candidates from many more who applied. Instead, the
of the evaluation process but are only supposed to be
research output of a given researcher over a given pe-
considered in more detail in Phase 2. These include:
riodoftime(e.g.,thelastsixyears)mustbeevaluated.
merit statement, scientific impact statement, CRediT
Again, the quality criteria proposed in this paper may
roles, sample size and power considerations, type of
be used to support committees in making such deci-
data, type of sample, interdisciplinarity, and interna-
sions. Inthefuture,theymayevenbeusedtodefinecer-
tionality(Leisingetal.,2025).
tainfield-specificqualitystandardsforacandidates’re-
As laid out in Schönbrodt et al. (2025), the further
searchinadvance(e.g.,atleastonekeyhypothesistest
assessment of shortlist candidates should focus on the
must be pre-registered, all data must be made openly
actualcontentoftheirresearch. Thisislikelytoinclude
available, at least one replication attempt). This would
a discourse over how innovative, creative, and mean-
be an effective way to raise methodological standards
ingful the research is, whether and how it contributes
===== PAGE 7/11 =====
7
works,topreventunfairbiases. Adetaileddiscussionof
what scientific impact is and how it can be measured
canbefoundinthepaperbyLeisingetal. (2025).
Within the RESQUE framework, we suggest mea-
suring scientific impact in a two-fold manner:
(1) The RESQUE tool provides age- and field-
corrected BIP! scores for each nominated paper. BIP
Scholar (https://bip.imsi.athenarc.gr/site/home) is a
non-commercial open-source service intended to fa-
cilitate fair researcher assessment; it provides impact
scores (and five impact classes) for each publication.
(2) Candidates are also asked to provide “scientific im-
pact statements”, explaining how (in terms of content,
Figure1 not citation numbers) their research has had, or could
have,arelevantimpactontherespectivefield.
Methodological rigor profile. Exemplary output from the CRediT roles provide a clear and detailed account of
RESQUE tool, showing a summary of the methodological acandidate’sspecificcontributionstoaresearchoutput.
(i.e., empirical and theoretical) quality of an applicant’s By examining credit roles, the committee may better
workinvariousdomains. understand the candidate's skill set and determine if it
matchestherequirementsoftheposition. Forexample,
roles such as “Funding Acquisition” or “Project Admin-
istration” indicate a candidate’s ability to initiate and
something valuable to the knowledge base in the re-
manageprojects,whilerolessuchas“Writing: Original
spective field, and how it fits with the hiring institu-
draft”and“Visualisation”indicatethewritingskillsofa
tion's strategic vision and resources. To enable this dis-
candidate and their ability to interpret data and high-
course,itwillbenecessarytoactuallyreadresearchpa-
lightkeyfindingsthroughvisualrepresentation.
persthatthecandidatesnominatedinPhase1. Forthis
TheRESQUEtoolalsoallowsuserstoindicatethede-
task, applicants can nominate their three best papers
greeofacandidate'scontribution: lead,equal,support,
(among the, say, 10 best papers they submitted in the
no role. A sample illustration of a candidate's contri-
RESQUEtool). Thecontentofthemeritstatementsthat
butions across ten nominated publications is shown in
thecandidatesprovidefortheirnominatedpublications
Figure 2.
may become a basis for in-person discussions between
In fields where multi-author papers are common,
candidates and the committee. Committees may send
credit roles may help distinguish the individual con-
candidatesafewkeyquestionsregardingtheirresearch
tributions of several authors to the same paper more
inadvancetoenablethemtoproperlyprepareforthese
clearly (e.g., one candidate may have developed the
discussions. Adopting this practice might not only help
software and have performed most of the analyses,
mitigate unwanted influences of (e.g.) candidates’ per-
whereas another candidate may have conceptualized
sonalcharismaorabilityto“dodge”certainquestionson
the research project and acquired the funding). These
the committee's judgment, it would also demonstrate
specifics would remain hidden when only the order in
that at least some committee members have actually
whichauthorsarelistedwereinspected.
read the respective papers and thus foster the integrity
While Phase 2 emphasizes a detailed assessment of
oftheprocessoverall.
research content and the criteria discussed here, it is
As another way of emphazising the actual content of
importanttonotethatadditionalaspectsshouldalsobe
candidates’ research, we explicitly advise that Journal
evaluated at this stage of the selection process. These
ImpactFactorsandapplicants’h-indicesmustnotbecol-
include aspects such as the candidate's fit for the posi-
lectedorutilizedatanystageoftheassessmentprocess.
tion,contributionstoteaching,leadershipskills,service
Asageneralrule,werecommendconsideringthesci-
to the field/committee work, and societal impact (cf.
entific impact of an applicant’s work only after a cer-
Schönbrodtetal.,2025). Exploringtheseadditionaldi-
tainlevelofmethodologicalrigorhasbeenestablished,
mensions in detail goes beyond the scope of this paper.
i.e. only for candidates that have passed the respective
Nevertheless, we encourage our colleagues to actively
threshold in Phase 1 of the assessment procedure. Sci-
discussanddevelopsuchcriteria,strivingforconsensus
entific impact is typically measured in terms of citation
and further standardization in the selection process to
numbers, but these should always be adjusted for the
ensuretheseelementsaresystematicallyintegrated.
ageofthepublicationandthefieldinwhichacandidate
===== PAGE 8/11 =====
8
Figure2
Sample bar chart summarizing a candidate's contributions across ten nominated publications. The chart accounts for
boththetypeofcontributionandtherespectivedegreeofinvolvement/strengthofcontribution.
“Redflags”inevaluatingresearchperformance for during the hiring process. Ultimately, it is the re-
sponsibilityofeachindividualscientisttoguardagainst
To avoid rewarding candidates for engaging in “bad
the potential influence of p-hacking on his or her own
scientific practice”, additional indicators (“red flags”)
research, and scientists who take this responsibility se-
for fraud, QRPs, and sloppiness may be checked for all
riouslyshouldberewardedfordoingso.
research papers nominated by applicants on the short-
The following tools might be considered in this re-
list. This is not meant to imply that most researchers
gard: Statcheck (http://statcheck.io), the GRIM test
engage in QRPs willingly and with full awareness. P-
(Brown and Heathers, 2017), and the SPRITE test
hacking, forexample, isnotnecessarilyadeliberateat-
(Heathers et al., 2018) are tools that can be used to
tempt at gaming the system. It may just as well be a
checkresearchpapersforerrorsinstatisticalreporting.
product of human fallibility (e.g., conveniently forget-
We suggest using them to check the papers nominated
ting about one's previous attempts to test the same hy-
in Phase 1 of the process for consistency between re-
pothesisbyalternativemeans). Nevertheless,p-hacking
ported and recomputed p-values. Other aspects that
often does have important (and detrimental) conse-
may be considered are a) whether a highly cited study
quences for the quality of research (see Stefan and
haseverbeensubjectedtoadirect,independentreplica-
Schönbrodt, 2022) and should therefore be screened
tion attempt, b) sweeping claims, counterintuitive and
===== PAGE 9/11 =====
9
shockingresults,andc)resultsthatseemtobetoogood bleresearchassessment.
tobetrue,“excesssignificance”(i.e.,theobservednum- Regarding the chance of such alternative assessment
ber of statistically significant results is too large com- schemeseverbecomingmainstream,itshouldbenoted
paredtotheirexpectednumber). that evaluation criteria for academic work are already
Needless to say, none of these techniques is perfect changing significantly. Good scientific practice, sus-
and thus none should result in the “automatic” exclu- tainabledatamanagement,andoveralltransparentand
sion of candidates. However, when several red flags reproducible science are increasingly imposed as stan-
converge, caution is warranted. If concerns arise, the dards by national and international funding agencies
committeemaysendfollow-upquestionsandaskappli- (e.g., DFG, European Horizon, NIH, SNF, to name a
cantstorespondinwriting. few). Therefore, we see our present proposal as a con-
tributiontoamovementthatisalreadywellunderway.
Implementationinpractice Again, it should be noted that the present proposal
focuses on research, which is only one of many valu-
The use of explicit and measurable criteria for re-
able contributions that (aspiring) members of the aca-
sponsible research assessment in hiring and promotion
demic community can make (Schönbrodt et al., 2025).
decisionsislikelytohaveanumberofdesirableeffects:
We have chosen to focus on research because (a) it is
1) It emphasizes the critical importance of high quality
clearly of central importance and (b) many quality cri-
(asopposedtomerequantity)ofscientificresearch. 2)
teriaforthisareaofacademicactivityarerelativelywell
Itmakestheevaluationstandardsusedbyacommittee
definedandcanbeassessedwithgoodobjectivity(Etzel
(atleastinPhase1oftheprocess)transparenttoevery-
et al., 2025). However, much work remainsto be done
one involved, thus enhancing accountability and fair-
to develop similarly objective and valid quality criteria
ness. 3)Ithelpsestablishabasisforrelativelyobjective
for the other domains: teaching, academic leadership,
assessments of research quality, which should improve
service to the field/institution, and societal impact. We
inter-rater reliability, which in turn is a prerequisite for
thus call on our colleagues to begin a public discourse
validity. Indeed, in a pilot study, we found very good
(possibly in this journal) on how to properly assess the
inter-rateragreement(ICC(1,1)=.81)forassessments
valueoftheseothertypesofcontributions.
of empirical rigor using an earlier version of this rating
scheme (Leising et al., 2022b). In a recent study, the
Concludingremarks
estimate was even higher (ICC(1,1) = .91) for the em-
pirical rigor criteria (Etzel et al., 2025). Notably, both In a previous report, we outlined four basic princi-
assessments were provided by research assistants with ples of responsible research (Schönbrodt et al., 2025).
verylimitedresearchexperienceoftheirown. Thissug- Inthecurrentreport,wepresentaproposalforputting
gests that independent verification of candidates’ self- theseprinciplesintopractice, focusingonresearchasa
assessments should be relatively straightforward, espe- keyareaofacademicactivity. Specifically,weoffercon-
cially when the number of research papers nominated creteevaluationcriteria,includingaready-to-useonline
by each candidate is relatively small (e.g., 10). Note, tool, for research publications (soon to be followed by
however, that indicators for theoretical rigor have not criteria for data sets and research software). We hope
yet been validated and that results might look differ- thatbyadoptingthese(orsimilar)evaluationschemes,
ently. Still,webelievethatitispossibletoimplementan committeeswillbeabletogivegreaterweighttoquality
assessmentschemesuchastheoneproposedherewith (andlesserweighttoquantity)intheirhiringorpromo-
littletonoadditionaleffortforcommittees. Thethresh- tion decisions. This is crucial because the credibility of
old for implementing a process like the one described academic institutions, and of science more broadly, de-
hereshouldbefurtherloweredbythefactthatwepro- pendsonthequalityoftheirscientificoutputmorethan
vide a ready-to-use online tool for automated creation onanythingelse. However,thepresentproposalshould
ofmultidimensionalprofiles. still be seen as a starting point rather than the conclu-
We would like to reiterate, however, that the details sion of an important debate. We welcome criticism, al-
ofthisproposalarenotsetinstone. Rather,weseethem ternative proposals, and suggestions for improvement
as a starting point of a discussion over what criteria, if from our colleagues in the field. We would be partic-
notimpactfactorandh-indices,shouldbeusedinhiring ularly grateful for any feedback from colleagues who
andpromotingacademicscholars. Eachcommitteemay haveactuallytriedtoimplement(someof)oursugges-
develop and use its own version of such an evaluation tionsintheirowncommitteework.
scheme,includingmodifiedorevenentirelynewcriteria
and different rules for weighing criteria. We welcome
any feedback on such attempts to implement responsi-
===== PAGE 10/11 =====
10
ConflictofInterest Chapman, C. A., Bicca-Marques, J. C., Calvignac-
Spencer, S., Fan, P., Fashing, P. J., Gogarten,
All authors declare that they have no conflicts of in-
J., Guo, S., Hemingway, C. A., Leendertz, F.,
terest.
Li, B., Matsuda, I., Hou, R., Serio-Silva, J. C.,
& Stenseth, N. C. (2019). Games academics
AuthorsNote
play and their consequences: How authorship,
This project and publication is supported by the Ein- h-index and journal impact factors are shap-
stein Foundation Berlin as part of the Einstein Founda- ing the future of academia. Proceedings of the
tion Award for Promoting Quality in Research - in co- Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 286(1916),
operation with the BIH QUEST Center for Responsible 20192047. https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.
Research. The contents are those of the author(s) and 2019.2047
donotnecessarilyrepresenttheofficialviewsof,noran Etzel, F. T., Seyffert-Müller, A., Schönbrodt, F. D.,
endorsement by, the Einstein Foundation or the award Kreuzer,L.,Gärtner,A.,Knischewski,P.,&Leis-
jury. ing, D. (2025). Inter-rater reliability in assess-
ingthemethodologicalqualityofresearchpapers
OpenSciencePractices in psychology [PsyArXiv Preprint]. https://doi.
org/10.31234/osf.io/4w7rb_v2
This article is purely conceptual and as such is not
Gärtner, A., Leising, D., & Schönbrodt, F. D. (2023).
eligible for open science badges. The entire editorial
Empfehlungen zur berücksichtigung von wis-
process,includingtheopenreviews,ispublishedinthe
senschaftlicherleistungbeiberufungsverfahren
onlinesupplement.
in der psychologie. Psychologische Rundschau,
74(3), 166–174. https://doi.org/10.1026/
AuthorContributions
0033-3042/a000630
Author roles were classified using the Contributor Gärtner, A., Leising, D., & Schönbrodt, F. D. (2024).
Role Taxonomy (CRediT; https://credit.niso.org/) as Towardsresponsibleresearchassessment:How
follows: Anne Gärtner: conceptualization, visualiza- torewardresearchquality.PLoSBiology,22(2),
tion, writing; Daniel Leising: conceptualization, visual- e3002553. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
ization, writing; Nele Freyer: writing; Philipp Musfeld: pbio.3002553
writing;JensLange: writing;FelixD.Schönbrodt: con- Heathers, J. A., Anaya, J., Van Der Zee, T., & Brown,
ceptualization,visualization,writing. N. J. (2018). Recovering data from summary
Correspondenceconcerningthisarticleshouldbead- statistics: Sample parameter reconstruction via
dressed to Anne Gärtner, Email: anne_gaertner@tu- iterative techniques (sprite). https://doi.org/
dresden.de 10.7287/peerj.preprints.26968v1
AnneGärtner Henninger, F., Shevchenko, Y., Mertens, U. K., Kieslich,
P.J.,&Hilbig,B.E.(2022).Lab.js:Afree,open,
References
online study builder. Behavior Research Meth-
ods,54(2),556–573.https://doi.org/10.3758/
Abele-Brehm, A. E., & Bühner, M. (2016). Wer soll
s13428-019-01283-5
die Professur bekommen? Eine Untersuchung
Hicks, D., Wouters, P., Waltman, L., de Rijcke, S.,
zur Bewertung von Auswahlkriterien in Beru-
& Rafols, I. (2015). Bibliometrics: The lei-
fungsverfahren der Psychologie. Psychologische
den manifesto for research metrics. Nature,
Rundschau, 67(4), 250–261. https://doi.org/
520(7548), 429–431. https://doi.org/10.
10.1026/0033-3042/a000335
1038/520429a
Brembs,B.,Button,K.,&Munafò,M.(2013).Deepim-
Kepes, S., Keener, S. K., McDaniel, M. A., & Hart-
pact:Unintendedconsequencesofjournalrank.
man,N.S.(2022).Questionableresearchprac-
FrontiersinHumanNeuroscience,7,291.https:
tices among researchers in the most research-
//doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2013.00291
productive management programs. Journal of
Brown, N. J. L., & Heathers, J. A. J. (2017). The
Organizational Behavior, 43(7), 1190–1208.
grim test: A simple technique detects numer-
https://doi.org/10.1002/job.2623
ousanomaliesinthereportingofresultsinpsy-
Lange,J.,Freyer,N.,Musfeld,P.,Schönbrodt,F.,&Leis-
chology.SocialPsychologicalandPersonalitySci-
ing,D.(2025).Achecklistforincentivizingand
ence,8(4),363–369.https://doi.org/10.1177/
facilitating good theory building. Zeitschrift für
1948550616673876
===== PAGE 11/11 =====
11
Psychologie,233(4),279–283.https://doi.org/ deløv, J. K. (2019). Psychopy2: Experiments in
10.1027/2151-2604/a000604 behavior made easy. Behavior Research Meth-
Leising, D., Gärtner, A., & Schönbrodt, F. D. (2025). ods,51(1),195–203.https://doi.org/10.3758/
Responsible Research Assessment (Parts I and s13428-018-01193-y
II): Responses to the Commentaries. Meta- R Core Team. (2024). R: A language and environment
Psychology, 9. https://doi.org/10.15626/MP. forstatisticalcomputing[[Computersoftware]].
2024.4603 R Foundation for Statistical Computing. https:
Leising, D., Thielmann, I., Glöckner, A., Gärtner, A., & //www.R-project.org/
Schönbrodt,F.(2022b).Tenstepstowardabet- Rosseel, Y. (2012). Lavaan: An r package for structural
terpersonalityscience–arejoindertothecom- equation modeling. Journal of Statistical Soft-
ments. Personality Science, 3, e7961. https:// ware, 48(2). https://doi.org/10.18637/jss.
doi.org/10.5964/ps.7961 v048.i02
Leising, D., Thielmann, I., Glöckner, A., Gärtner, A., & Schönbrodt,F.D.,Gärtner,A.,Frank,M.,Gollwitzer,M.,
Schönbrodt,F.(2022a).Tenstepstowardabet- Ihle,M.,Mischkowski,D., Phan,L.V.,Schmitt,
terpersonalityscience–howqualitymaybere- M., Scheel, A. M., Schubert, A.-L., Steinberg,
warded more in research evaluation. Personal- U., & Leising, D. (2025). Responsible research
ityScience,3,e6029.https://doi.org/10.5964/ assessment I: Implementing DORA and CoARA
ps.6029 for hiring and promotion in psychology. Meta-
Muna, D., Alexander, M., Allen, A., Ashley, R., Asmus, Psychology, 9. https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.
D.,Azzollini,R.,Bannister,M.,Beaton,R.,Ben- 2024.4601
son, A., Berriman, G. B., Bilicki, M., Boyce, Stefan,A.M.,&Schönbrodt,F.D.(2022).Biglittlelies:
P., Bridge, J., Cami, J., Cangi, E., Chen, X., A compendium and simulation of p-hacking
Christiny, N., Clark, C., Collins, M., & Zonca, strategies. https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/
A. (2016). The astropy problem. https://doi. xy2dk
org/10.48550/arXiv.1610.03159 The PLoS Medicine Editors. (2006). The impact factor
Paulus, F. M., Cruz, N., & Krach, S. (2018). The impact game. PLoS Medicine, 3(6), e291. https://doi.
factor fallacy. Frontiers in Psychology, 9, 1487. org/10.1371/journal.pmed.0030291
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2018.01487
Peirce, J., Gray, J. R., Simpson, S., MacAskill, M.,
Höchenberger,R.,Sogo,H.,Kastman,E.,&Lin-