
===== PAGE 1/8 =====
Meta-Psychology,2025,vol9,MP.2025.4738 Opendata:Yes Editedby:FelixD.Schönbrodt
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2025.4738 Openmaterials:NotApplicable Reviewedby:Invitedcommentaries
Articletype:Commentary Openandreproducibleanalysis:Yes Analysisreproducedby:LucijaBatinovi´c
PublishedundertheCC-BY4.0license Openreviewsandeditorialprocess:Yes AllsupplementaryfilescanbeaccessedatOSF:
Preregistration:No https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/T5RPZ
Replication value as a function of citation impact and sample size:
response to commentaries
Peder Mortvedt Isager1, Anna E. van ’t Veer2, and Daniël Lakens3
1DepartmentofPsychology,OsloNewUniversityCollege
2MethodologyandStatisticsunit,InstituteofPsychology,LeidenUniversity
3DepartmentofIndustrialEngineering&InnovationSciences,EindhovenUniversityofTechnology
Theprimarygoalofourtargetarticle(Isageretal.,2025)istogivetheresearchcom-
munity an example of what a well-justified replication value metric could look like,
and toencourage discussionof howreplication valuecould be quantifiedin practice.
Furthermore, in the target article we discuss practical hurdles to quantification and
possible practical applications for RV and other metrics. As that article proposes a
Cn
method for how to do research—in this case a method to select which claims in the
literature need replication most—it is important to receive criticism, feedback, and
viewpoints from a diverse range of authors interested in this topic. We are delighted
to read the many thoughtful yet critical commentaries, several of which proposing
adjustments or alternatives to the equations we have proposed in the target article.
Thisisveryencouragingtosee,asouraimwithinitiatingthiscallinMeta-Psychology
wastocreateanopendialogueinthescientificrecord. RV isanefficientbutlimited
Cn
metric. Itslimitationsshouldbelaidbare, andwefullyexpectthatimprovedmetrics
andselectionprocedurescanbecreatedinthefuture. Wehopeourtargetarticleand
these commentaries together will inspire readers to continue the discussion of how
toefficientlyandtransparentlyselectstudiesforreplication. Inthisrejoinderwewill
summarize what we see as the major themes touched on in the commentaries, and
we will reply to some of the specific proposals and criticisms brought up by different
commentaryauthors.
Keywords: RVcn,replicationvalue,replication
PracticalusecasesforRV andothermetrics court, some of which may be more uncertain than oth-
Cn
ers, and some of which may be more important for the
RV and the four-step selection process we propose
Cn outcome of the case. However, as Beerdsen points out,
(seeFigure1)solveaquitespecificproblem;howtose-
‘value’ would need to be operationalized differently in
lectstudiesforreplicationwhenourgoalistomaximize
this context. Academic citations are relevant for scien-
the expected utility of the replication study, and when
tificimpact,butmayhavelittlebearingonlegalimpact.
we have many candidate studies to choose from. Feld-
We expect that adjustments to the RV equation will
man(2025)rightlypointsoutthatreplicationcanserve Cn
havetobemadeforittoworkinmoreappliedcontexts
other goals that RV does not help us achieve, such as
Cn (legal,medical,financialsettings,etc.).
generalizing findings to new contexts, validating mea-
Takashima and Yamada (2025) propose a context to
surementinstruments,orbringingrenewedattentionto
which RV is more directly applicable; helping aca-
neglectedresearch. Itisthereforeimportanttoconsider Cn
demic mentors recommend useful replication projects
thevariouspracticalcontextsRV couldbeappliedto,
Cn totheirstudents. Thisisexactlythekindofcontextwe
and to think carefully about whether it is actually use-
had in mind when designing RV . The person select-
fulforthegoalwearetryingtoachieve. Wearegladto Cn
ing (the mentor or supervisor) wants to prioritize im-
see several commentary authors propose and critically
portant and uncertain studies for replication, there are
discusspracticalusesofRV .
Cn manystudiestochoosefrom,thereislimitedtimetoget
AnexcellentexampleisBeerdsen(2025)whoconsid-
familiarwitheachstudy,anda“goodenough”decision
ers how RV might be used to replicate research used
Cn needstobemaderatherquickly. Wehopetheselection
in legal proceedings. The context described by Beerd-
procedurewehaveproposed(oranimprovedversionof
sen seems to fit well with the general utility of RV . A
Cn it) can help facilitate more student replication projects
widevarietyofclaimsareusedtosupportargumentsin
===== PAGE 2/8 =====
2
inthefuture. Pittelkow and colleagues proposed quantitative met-
We can think of a few more contexts in which RV rics of replication value in the past (Field et al., 2019;
Cn
and similar metrics may be useful, in addition to those Pittelkowetal.,2021),butintheircommentaryindicate
proposedbythecommentaryauthors: they have "shifted towards more qualitative and open
approachesfordescribingreplicationvalue,exemplified
• For scientific communities, to coordinate and dis- bythechecklistfortransparentreplicationtargetselec-
cuss which replications are most needed within a tion" (Pittelkow et al., 2025). Checklists are a useful
research field, and to issue calls for these replica- tool for researchers to transparently log why they de-
tions. cided to replicate a study. However, formulas such as
RV serve an additional goal. Such formulas not only
• For scientific journals, to promote continual qual- Cn
help to make the selection rationale transparent after
ity control of the science they publish (e.g.,
the fact, they also help make the actual selection pro-
through Registered Verification Reports; Isager et
cess more efficient, i.e., they are part of the selection
al.,2024).
rationale.
• For large scale collaborations like the Psycholog- When using a replication value metric in isolation,
ical Science Accelerator (Moshontz et al., 2018), for instance, a journal can—in a relatively fast and ef-
to select which replication studies to spend their ficient way—state that it will publish any replication
many-labresourceson. study for findings published in the same journal that
have a RV higher than some value (van ’t Veer et al.,
Cn
• For initiatives that facilitate replications, like 2025). RV doesnot‘fail’tocapturethecomplexityof
Cn
CREP (McLaughlin et al., 2013), to select which replication target selection, but it intentionally simpli-
studiestorecommendreplicationof. fies this complexity by reducing the features that form
the basis of a decision. There are situations where this
• Forfunders,toselectwhichreplicationprojectsto
is more desirable, and situations where this is less de-
fundorearmarkfundingfor(e.g. NWO,2019).
sirable. The goal of this simplification and quantifica-
tion is to develop a consensus about which replication
ResponsibleuseofRVcn
studies are valuable. This can be very useful in a time
Several of the commentaries rightfully indicate that wherethereisgreatuncertaintyaboutwhethertopjour-
metrics for replication study selection, as any met- nalswillpublishareplicationstudy,orwhetherfunders
ric, should be used responsibly. In the case of RV , will award a grant to a proposal to replicate studies.
Cn
thismeansinterpretingnumericalresultstogetherwith Ifstakeholdersagreeonaspecificreplicationvaluefor-
(subjective, qualitative) contextual information, as the mula,uncertaintyabouttheexpectedutilityofperform-
metric itself will not capture all aspects relevant to the ingthereplicationstudyisreduced,whichcanbeuseful
most optimal study selection. In a first step, as our tar- to motivate researchers to perform valuable replication
getarticledepictedandasisvisualisedhereinFigure1, studies,journalstopublishthem,andfundingagencies
study selection will be guided by the replication goals toawardgrantsforthiswork. Ofcourse,researchersre-
of the author(s). This could mean that the candidate mainfreetoreplicateanyotherstudytheyfeellike,and
set of articles are chosen to be in line with the authors hope that their subjective arguments for why a replica-
interest, expertise or possibilities (e.g., a set of studies tionstudyisimportantwillconvincereviewersandedi-
isselectedthatwouldbefeasibleforastudenttorepli- tors. But it is more difficult to see how mere subjective
cate; Takashima and Yamada, 2025). In Step 3 and 4, criteriaofferasystematicandefficientwaytoverifythe
where an in-depth inspection of a subset of candidates mostuncertainyetimpactfulclaims.
iteratively leads to replication target selection, there is As Rainey (2025) mentions, there is a risk re-
again room to tailor the decision to the most fitting searchers will mindlessly use a replication value for-
study based on subjective qualitative information such mula, without subsequently evaluating the target can-
as feasibility to conduct this replication within the au- didates in depth. A related problem might be that re-
thorteam(Pittelkowetal.,2025). Factorssuchasthose searchers believe only replication studies with a high
proposedbyBekkers(2025)–societalimpact,general- RV deservetobepublished,asFeldman(2025)notes,
Cn
ity of claim, effect size, test informativeness, etc. – can without considering that there are additional criteria
alsobeconsideredatthispoint,andshouldoverridethe thatcanjustifyperformingareplicationstudy. Wefully
RC rankorderwheneverappropriate. Thisprocedure, agreewithRaineythatdisagreementsaboutwhichstud-
Cn
withqualitativeandquantitativestepsinterwoven(Hes- ies deserve to be replicated should be embraced, as it
selsetal.,2022),facilitatesresponsibleuseofRV means scientists are finally explicitly discussing which
Cn.
===== PAGE 3/8 =====
3
Figure1
AgeneralprocedureforreplicationstudyselectionasproposedinIsageretal.(2025).
Figure 6 in target article. A general Responsible use of RVCn through qualitative
procedure for replication study selection. contextualization of the metric.
REPLICATION GOALS
STEP 1
Feasibility (cf. Pittelkow, Field, & van
Curate an initial set of replication candidates
Ravenswaaij, 2024);
based on interest and expertise.
Application in specific context (e.g., legal
context, see Beerdsen, 2024);
Educational (cf. Takashima & Yamada, 2024);
Coordinated efforts within scientific
communities;
STEP 2 For continual quality control of their published
Calculate RV Cn for all candidates claims by journals;
in the set. Verification of important claims with large scale
collaborations;
Prioritizing funding resources;
…
STEP 3
Conduct in-depth inspection of a subset of
candidates with the highest estimated
RV .
Cn
STEP 4
Select the candidate most suitable for
replication based on in-depth inspection,
or repeat step 3 and 4.
noitacfiitnedI
gniknaR
gnineercS
noitceleS
research is valuable to perform. We hope that each cases computing standard errors is necessary. Citations
field will reach consensus on a number of reasonable in the scientific literature are a crude measure of im-
replication value formulas, which should ensure a cer- pact, as there are many reasons why some papers re-
tain amount of diversity, while still guiding researchers ceive more citations than others (such as prestige bias,
to subsets of studies that are most valuable to replicate as noted by Fillon and Chandrashekar, 2025). Future
givenlimitedresources. research should work towards identifying and, where
The responsible use of a replication value formula possible, resolving these issues when replication value
(including RV ) requires explicitly stating its limita- formulas are proposed. In the end, any proposed pro-
Cn
tions. As Takashima and Yamada (2025) note, sam- cedureforidentifyinghigh-utilityreplicationcandidates
plesizeisonlyanindicatorofuncertainty,andinsome will have limitations. The trick is to decide which lim-
===== PAGE 4/8 =====
4
itations are acceptable, and to balance the limitations replication value metric based solely on a Bayes factor
ofanygivenselectionmethodagainstthelimitationsof alsoignorestheimpactofanoriginalstudy(whichRV
Cn
havingnomethodforselectingstudiesatall. incorporates in terms of citations). Because the two
metrics attempt to measure different things, estimates
Proposedmodificationsandalternativemetrics producedbytheapproachsuggestedbyPittelkowetal.
(2021)shouldnotbeexpectedtobestronglyrelatedto
RV is a measurement instrument. It aims to mea-
Cn
RV estimates.
sure the expected utility of replicating a given claim. Cn
DuetothedirectrelationbetweenBayesfactorsand
Like any measurement instrument, it is subject to is-
p-values(Francis,2017)itisperhapsmoreintuitivefor
sueswithreliabilityandvalidity,someofwhichmaybe
readers to see the relation between RV and p-values
resolved through adjustments to the formula. In addi- Cn
alongside the relation between RV and Bayes factors
tion, ‘value’ is a social construct whose definition may Cn
(see figure 2). This comparison makes it clear that the
change across contexts. There is no one true defini-
Bayesfactorapproachwillleadtotherecommendation
tion of value. Therefore, there is no one true measure
to replicate studies with a p-value relatively close to
of replication value. Any measure of replication value
0.05, regardless of how often the study has been cited.
mustbeadaptedtofittheusers’definitionofvalue.
P-values(andcorrespondingly,Bayesfactors)areinpart
Severalsuchissuesareidentifiedinthetargetarticle,
afunctionofthesamplesize(thelargerthesamplesize,
andsomeadjustmentstoimprovemeasurementvalidity
thelowerthep-valueandthefurtheraBayesfactorwill
areproposedinappendixes. Weareveryexcitedtosee
befrom1)butthep-valueandBayesfactoralsodepend
commentary authors propose further adjustments and
onthet-value. Asaconsequence,thereisnoone-to-one
adaptations. Alltheseproposalsmovethefieldforward,
relation between the sample size and the Bayes factor
andtheirdiversityallowsdifferentstakeholderstopick
(or p-value), andas aconsequence, theRV candiffer
areplicationvalueformulathattheyconsiderappropri- Cn
from Bayes factors. The authors empirically show the
ate for a specific time and place. We will first discuss
two measures are indeed unrelated. This nicely illus-
alternative ways to quantify or weigh uncertainty that
trates the importance of carefully considering how we
were raised in the commentaries, and then discuss dif-
wanttooperationalizethevalueofreplicationstudies.
ferentwaystoquantifyimpact.
Itisusefultoexamineafewspecificexampleswhere
Alternativequantificationsofuncertainty the RV Cn differs from a Bayes factor. For example, a
study by Olson et al. (2015) is valuable to replicate
Bakker et al. (2025) question whether our proposed based on RV because the small sample size (16 and
Cn
metricappropriatelyweighsimpactanduncertainty. As 17observationspercondition)combinedwiththelarge
the sample size grows, its influence on RV Cn becomes citation count (303 times) warrant a replication. The
smaller. Bakker and colleagues point out that in fields Bayes factor (126.1) and p-value (p < .001), however,
with large sample sizes, one may want to preserve the givelittlereasontodoubtthenullhypothesiscanbere-
impact of sample size on relative replication value by jected, given the observed effect size of d = 1.06. This
forexampletakingthelogofthesamplesize. Wethink highlightsanimportantdistinction: whenthereislittle
it is very sensible to create variations of a replication uncertainty about whether the effect is nonzero (indi-
value for fields with predominantly large sample sizes, catedbythehighBayesfactorandlowp-value)thesize
aslongasrelativelysmallersamplesizesinthisfieldare of the effect can still be highly uncertain (reflected in
stillconsideredareasontoprioritizereplicationstudies. the low sample size and subsequently wide confidence
Pittelkowetal.(2025)showhowBayesfactorsyield intervals). Which of these uncertainties should matter
adifferentrelativeorderingofstudiesthanRV Cn. Where moreforstudyselectionisatopicforfuturedebate. An
RV Cn operationalizesuncertaintyintermsofestimation opposite example is provided by a study by Dai et al.
(and hence only focuses on sample size) a Bayes factor (2015) which has a relatively low RV , as the sample
Cn
operationalizes uncertainty in terms of informativeness size was relatively large (N = 213), and the citation
with respect to distinguishing between a specific null countnotexceptionallylarge(123citations). However,
and alternative hypothesis. Here, a Bayes factor of 1 the Bayes factor is 0.97, which is very close to 1, and
impliesanuninformativetestresult,andvaluesfurther thep-valueis0.0481,whichisverycloseto0.05. There
awayfrom1providestrongersupportforonehypothe- canbegoodreasonstovaluereplicatingjust-significant
sisoveranother. Pittelkowetal.(2021)proposetheuse effectsinthescientificliterature,althoughgivenlimited
ofa’default’Bayesfactor,becausethesearewidelyused resources, it might still be desirable to take the impact
inpsychology. Thisistrue,buttheuseofadefaultprior ofstudiesintoaccount.
is also widely criticized as it does not actually reflect Finally, Takashima and Yamada (2025) raise the im-
an alternative hypothesis of interest in most cases. A
===== PAGE 5/8 =====
5
Figure2
Scatterplots plotting replication value (RV ) against Cn
BayesFactors(BF),p-valuesandlogsamplesize. Adopted
fromPittelkowetal.(2025)
0.1
1 Co RRRRR PnCF eeeeeSKs oahiiiiictu rnnnnnare th DD p Oo hhhhhK ebnroo aaaaa aa rulo l e srqerrrrr ii pK ee sttttt eute e oe td u oHeeeee tiat trt ae p nttttt ue ala a a lYYYYer o. .aaaaant ll l ePlt .r . . iiiie P. lllll nnnnga W t.....ait e c
i
l a c.l eeeeea ta c. l ctttttl a.it . is aaaaa el. eo lllllt .....
t
n a a− l. lJ .ones Het s a el e. et al. StF
F
oa
a
rmn
n
e
e
et tM
t
a
a
aHal
l
l. .d .soeree eett aal.l.
Kirk et aPS l.ilcocmi L ea iL tn e ia teeD l a. tti ln aa .g ll .. et al.
100 Cooney et al. Olson et al. Olson et al. Cooney etS akl.iPnnicecri eeSttc M aahDallr..io cnkeged yee tr e ae t lt a. a l.l.
Yin et al.
0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0
RVcn
)desrever(
FB
A
0.05 ConstaDbalei eett aall.. Watson−Jones et al. 0.04 R RRF e eeSa i iicn nnrho h hhKro a aauoq r rrpKet ttu od ue eei re p t tt e er oa aat P tr el ll a . ..ait ecl . la tc . l ai. e l.t al. Hsee et al. Hsee et al.
0.03 ReKiunphoarr te et ta Yal.iln. et al.
0.02 RCehineOhnal serstt oH eantu l Y. an eilng t. aee ltt . aall.. Fan etM aal.dore et al.
Dai et al.Picci et al.
Yin et al.
00 .. 00 SS01 aaiinnttPM−−CeAAerouuCtilcoP lbbooanCo iiounnler foZnxe t yeeKe o he eetter inoy r ttaate ek u eaalla yt ..e tlell Sa . ..etat l YYY M kt. ala P .iiii SPalnnnn al..i llnc i c.oceeec ekmcttti er L i aaa e ayeieSL lllt n... e tt eicM a t aateehDD l aa l. lattr..ii oclnnlaa. .keggll..ed yeee ttre aaet llta.. al.l. StF oa rmn e e OOt t a lla ssl ool. . nn eett aall.. Olson et al.
0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0
RVcn
eulav−P
B
Perilloux et al.
6
CSKhcuehDDpnroaao reiie eteed tatte alaar. lll...et al.
5 Cooney et al. Schroeder et al.
MetcPaolrfetOKe erul stpe saoto lra.n le .et Wta ala.l.tson−Jones et al. S S4a ai in nt t− −CA Aou uC nb bo si io n ntZ an e eK bh e t ti lo y r ea aKk u e l l eu . .eteS t pt at aoM k ala . lirS .lnal .. elncotek maer la ye. nteM ate DD alat. ii c nnla .k ggl. e y ee tte H aat llsa ..el.e et al. FFaann eett aall..
Cooney et PPPPaiilccii.cccccciiL ii eeiee ttett aataa lla..ll..l. OOllssoonn eett aall.. 3 RRRRRF eeeeea iiiiinnnnnro hhhhho aaaaaq rrrrrtttttu Heeeeei tttttue YYYYYYaaaaant iiiiiilllllnnnnnnga ..... l. eeeeeee ttttttt aaaaaaaL lllllll .......i et al. Storm eMt aHald.soeree eett aal.l. Olson et al.
0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0
RVcn
N
goL
account. We agree, and we actually already proposed
how to achieve this in supplementary material SM1 of
thetargetarticle(https://osf.io/rdhw3).
Alternativequantificationsofimpact
Beerdsen (2025) points out that in the legal field ci-
tation counts in scientific papers do not fully capture
impact, as references to studies in non-scientific docu-
ments,suchasthosefoundinlegaldatabases. Thepro-
posaltoweightreferencesinlegaldocumentsequallyto
citationsisperhapseventoomodest,andevenscientists
might agree that studies used repeatedly in legal docu-
mentsquicklybecomevaluableenoughtoreplicate,re-
gardless of scientific impact. The proposal by Beerdsen
provides a wonderful illustration of an easily quantifi-
ablemeasureofaspecifictypeofsocietalimpact,which we agree should be taken into account when relevant
andpossible.
Both Bekkers (2025) and Fillon and Chandrashekar
(2025) are concerned with biases in citations and sam- plesizes. Forexample,theypointoutthatcitationscan
be bought, and that citations are impacted by the pres-
tigeofauthors. Thesebiasesreducetheconnectionbe-
C
tweencitationcountandactualscientificimpact,which
is essential for the validity of RV . It is possible that
Cn
therearefieldswherecitationsdonotadequatelytrack
impact, and then another measure of impact should be used. Itisalsopossibletoexcludeoutliersduetoques-
tionablecitationpracticesinthein-depthmanualstage (step 3) of selecting a replication study (see figure 1).
The authors also suggest that replication value should
berelatedto"howafindingoraneffectofinterestmaps
Replication Target no yes
ontothecausalityschemeofthetheory". Weagreethat
effects central to a theory are more important than pe-
ripheral effects. If researchers find a way to determine
thecentralityofeffectstoatheory,andthisinformation
portant point that in some fields small sample sizes do iseasilyavailable,itcanbeincorporatedintoareplica-
nothavehighuncertainty,suchasinvisionscience. We tionvalueformula.
fully agree. When RV is computed across disciplines, Rainey (2025) similarly notes that citations should
Cn
the final ranking will not adequately reflect the uncer- not be the only measure of impact, because claims are
taintyinfindings,becausetoomanyaspectsofstudyde- importantforotherreasons,suchassocialorclinicalim-
signthatinfluenceuncertaintyareallowedtovary. The pact. We fully agree, and hope researchers take Beerd-
candidate set curated in step 1 must be constrained to sen (2025) as an example of how to discuss and con-
studiesforwhichsamplesizeplaysacomparablerolein cretizeothersourcesofimpact.
determining overall uncertainty. We noted how sample
sizefailstoadequatelycaptureuncertainty"inrepeated Alternativequantificationsofvalue
measures designs where the number of repeated sam-
Some proposals move beyond adjustments or mod-
ples per participant can matter more than the number
ifications of impact and uncertainty, and propose an
ofparticipantsperse",andwheneverthereisasubstan-
altogether different quantification of value. Feldman
tial number of such designs, researchers will need to
(2025) articulates the most extreme viewpoint possi-
rely on a measure of uncertainty that more adequately
ble: Every study that has been published is valuable
tracksthestandarderror. Theauthorsalsonotehowun-
to replicate, because if a study is valuable enough to
certaintyneedstotakepreviousreplicationstudiesinto
appear in the scientific literature, it is valuable enough
===== PAGE 6/8 =====
6
to replicate. Although we sympathise with this view- contribute to generalizability (e.g., replicating studies
point, we do not think it works in practice. First, some originally performed decades ago), that make theoreti-
journals publish articles only based on methodologi- calassumptionsmoreexplicit,contributetotheevalua-
cal quality, and explicitly informs researchers to not tionofmeasurement,orthatreigniteinterestinforgot-
judge whether a submission reaches a (vaguely spec- ten studies. All these aspects of replication studies are
ified) level of importance. For such papers, the con- valuable(althoughsomewouldrequireconceptual,and
sideration whether the study was valuable enough to not direct replications), but they are all also difficult to
perform is decoupled from study selection, and a repli- identifyinadvance. Therefore, inabsenceofworkthat
cation study does not automatically inherit an earlier showshowwecanidentifyreplicationstudiesthatscore
value judgment. It is noteworthy that for example highontheseattributes,theywillbedifficulttousesys-
PlosOne, whichonlyevaluatesnovelresearchbasedon tematicallyintheselectionofstudiesforreplication.
whether it is technically rigorous and meets the sci- Riesthuis et al. (2024) raise the important issue of
entific and ethical standards, requires authors to add beingabletointerprettheresultsofareplicationstudy,
a justification for why a replication study is worth- whichrequiresthatitisclearinadvancewhenareplica-
while to perform, and states that "Submissions that tionstudyfailedtoconfirmapreviouslyobservedeffect.
replicate or are derivative of existing work will likely Thisrequiresresearcherstospecifywhicheffectswould
be rejected if authors do not provide adequate justifi- notbeconsideredsupportforaprediction,forexample
cation" (https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/reviewer- byspecifyingasmallesteffectsizeofinterest. Thisvalue
guidelines). judgment is not unique to replication studies, and also
Feldmanarguesthateventhough"Itwouldbebestto applies to original studies. One can certainly question
prioritize which replications to run to maximize utility how useful it is to perform a replication study if it can
and impact", it will take years to reach a ratio of novel notdemonstratetheabsenceofameaningfuleffect. We
studiesversusreplicationstudieswhereweneedtostart do believe that this criteria is more suitable for the 4th
worryingaboutwhichreplicationstudiesshouldbeper- step in our proposal, where replication candidates are
formed. Weagree withthe sadreality thatit willlikely selectedbasedonamoreindepthevaluation.
take a long time before replication studies are com-
monplace, and we greatly appreciate the contribution Criticismoftheempiricaldatawepresent
Feldman has made to perform and publish high-quality
Pittelkow et al. (2025) claim that the validation
replication studies. We nevertheless disagree that sci-
dataset is subject to sampling bias because meta-
entists only need to worry about the value of replica-
analysesincludeeffectsthatweresecondarytotheorig-
tion studies after a certain ratio of novel to replication
inal publication, and citations could be unrelated to
studiesisreached. Webelievescientistsshouldwantto
these secondary effects. We completely agree that the
reach a healthy balance of novel and replication stud-
preliminary validation study we performed is not a se-
ies by performing the most important replication stud-
vere test, and perhaps even the least severe test that
ies first. Indeed, given that so few researchers choose
RV should have passed. As we wrote in Isager et
to perform and publish replication studies, it would be Cn
al.(2023): "Anyoperationalizationofreplicationvalue
a shame if these individuals choose to perform repli-
will require validation. At the very least, we should
cations that are deemed to have relatively little value
make sure that our assessment strategy will often indi-
by scientific peers, or that repeat an already relatively
cateahighreplicationvalueforclaimsthatweareintu-
certainclaim.
itively confident would be worth replicating, and a low
WefullyagreewithFeldmanthatourquestion’which
replicationvalueforclaimsweareintuitivelyconfident
replicationstudiesarevaluableenoughtodo’isasubset
wouldnotbeworthreplicating. Moreseverevalidation
ofamoreimportantquestion: Whichresearchisworth
studieswouldcertainlybedesirable,thoughwearenot
doing? This is in line with Rainey, who notes that it is
at present sure what such studies would look like." We
valuable to perform a replication study whenever one
still do not know what severe validation studies would
wants to build on previous work, and therefore "Ar-
looklike.
guments for the value of building upon a prior claim
Pittelkow and colleagues explore the consequences
are arguments for the importance of the prior claim it-
ofusingpredictedcitationcounts(buildingonFigure2
self." Feldman argues for broader indications of value,
ofourtargetmanuscript). Theyfindanevenmorepro-
suchasreplicationstudiesthatidentifyerrorsandinad-
nounceddifferenceinthereplicationvalueofreplicated
equatemethods(inlinewithRainey,whonotesstudies
andnon-replicatedstudies(basedonFigure7inourtar-
withlargesamplessizesareworthreplicatingifthede-
getmanuscript),and—notsurprisingly—differentabso-
sign or measures of the study were inadequate), that
lute values for the RV . If citation counts can be ac-
Cn
===== PAGE 7/8 =====
7
curately predicted, that would be extremely useful be- ConflictofInterestandFunding
yondquantifyingthevalueofreplicationstudies. How-
Theauthorsdeclarenoconflictsofinterest.
ever, itisnotyetclearwhetherthegammaparameteri-
zationproposedbyPittelkowetal. actuallypredictsfu-
AuthorContributions
ture citation count better than the raw average of past
yearly citations. This makes differences hard to inter- Theauthorsmadethefollowingcontributions. Peder
pret. Whatever the case, RV should always adopt the Mortvedt Isager: Investigation, Visualization, Writing -
Cn
bestpredictionalgorithmavailable. OriginalDraft,Writing-Review&Editing;AnnaE.van
Kamermans et al. (2025) provide a very interest- ’t Veer: Investigation, Visualization, Writing - Original
ing preliminary empirical overview of the motivations Draft,Writing-Review&Editing;DaniëlLakens: Inves-
that researchers provide when they publish replication tigation, Supervision, Visualization, Writing - Original
studies. Although uncertainty (i.e., replication crisis, Draft,Writing-Review&Editing.
methodological concerns, and conflicting results) and
impact (i.e., influential/fundamental) are mentioned, OpenSciencePractices
currentlyrewardstructurespushresearchmoretonovel
contributions, so it is not surprising that conceptual
replications are more popular, and generalizability and
extensionsareamoreimportantmotivationtoreplicate
a study. This ties in with a concern by Pittelkow and This article earned the Open Data and Open Code
colleagues who ask if RV is prescriptive or descrip- badge for making the data, and code openly available.
Cn
tive. We believe the answer may be ‘both’. RV is de- Ithasbeenverifiedthattheanalysisreproducedthere-
Cn
signedtohelpidentifywhichstudiesshouldbeselected sults presented in the article. The entire editorial pro-
to maximize the expected utility of replication. This cess, including the open reviews (published commen-
is clearly prescriptive. However, RV is only an esti- taries),ispublishedintheonlinesupplement.
Cn
mateofexpectedutilitygain;itisameasurementinstru-
ment. As such, it is clearly descriptive. Our proposal is References
basedondiscussionsbetweenpeersabouthowtoquan-
Bakker, B. N., Bomm, L., & Peterson, D. (2025). Com-
tify the value of replication studies, combined with de-
mentary on Isager et al. (2021) Reflections on
scriptive work which indicate researchers often report
the Replication Value (RV) and a Proposal for
being guided in their selection for a replication study
Revision. Meta-Psychology, 9. https://doi.org/
based on impact, uncertainty, and feasibility (Isager et
10.15626/MP.2024.4324
al., 2023). In our preliminary validation study we ex-
Beerdsen, E. (2025). Replication Value in the Court-
amined if our operationalization of impact and uncer-
room; a Commentary on Isager, van ’t Veer &
taintywasdescriptivelyrelatedtodecisionsresearchers
Lakens.Meta-Psychology,9.https://doi.org/10.
madeinpractice. Ifthisvalidationwouldhaverevealed
15626/MP.2024.4325
that researchers do not select replication studies based
Bekkers, R. (2025). Replication Value Increases With
on uncertainty and/or impact, this would have been
Transparency, Test Severity, and Societal Im-
surprising, and a reason to organize broader consen-
pact. Meta-Psychology, 9. https://doi.org/10.
sus meetings. In the end, every version of a replication
15626/MP.2024.4194
value formula is a tool for rational decision making for
Dai, H., Milkman, K. L., & Riis, J. (2015). Put Your
those researchers who agree that the formula correctly
Imperfections Behind You: Temporal Land-
specifiestheexpectedutilityofreplications.
marks Spur Goal Initiation When They Signal
New Beginnings. Psychological Science, 26(12),
AuthorContact
1927–1936. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 /
Peder Mortvedt Isager: https://orcid.org/0000- 0956797615605818
0002-6922-3590 Anna E. van ’t Veer: Feldman, G. (2025). The value of replications goes be-
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2733-1841 Daniël Lak- yond replicability and is associated with the
ens: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0247-239X value of the research it replicates: Commen-
Correspondence concerning this article should be tary on Isager et al. (2024). Meta-Psychology,
addressed to Peder Mortvedt Isager, Ullevålsveien 76, 9.https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2024.4326
0454Oslo,Norway. Email: pederisager@gmail.com
===== PAGE 8/8 =====
8
Field,S.M.,Hoekstra,R.,Bringmann,L.,&VanRaven- ucation Project (CREP). https://doi.org/10.
zwaaij,D.(2019).WhenandWhytoReplicate: 17605/OSF.IO/WFC6U
As Easy as 1, 2, 3? Collabra: Psychology, 5(1), Moshontz, H., Campbell, L., Ebersole, C. R., IJzerman,
46.https://doi.org/10.1525/collabra.218 H.,Urry,H.L.,Forscher,P.S.,Grahe,J.E.,Mc-
Fillon, A. A., & Chandrashekar, S. P. (2025). The Carthy, R. J., Musser, E. D., Protzko, J., Flake,
Replication Dilemma: Potential Challenges in J. K., Forero, D. A., Janssen, S. M., Keene, J.,
Measuring Replication Value - A Commentary Aczel,B.,Ansari,D.,Antfolk,J.,Baskin,E.,Ba-
on Isager, van’t Veer, & Lakens (2024). Meta- tres, C., ... Chartier, C. R. (2018). Psychologi-
Psychology, 9. https://doi.org/10.15626/MP. cal Science Accelerator: Advancing Psychology
2024.4312 through a Distributed Collaborative Network.
Francis, G. (2017). Equivalent statistics and data in- Advances in Methods and Practices in Psycho-
terpretation.BehaviorResearchMethods,49(4), logical Science. https://doi.org/10.1177/
1524–1538. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13428- 2515245918797607
016-0812-3 NWO.(2019).ReplicationStudies.RetrievedAugust28,
Hessels, L., van Drooge, L., Holtrop, T., & Costas, R. 2019, from https://web.archive.org/web/
(2022). Responsible metrics for societal value 20190601002622/https://www.nwo.nl/
of scientific research. Retrieved April 2, 2025, en/funding/our-funding-instruments/sgw/
from https://www.leidenmadtrics.nl/articles/ replication-studies/replication-studies.html
responsible-metrics-for-societal-value-of- Olson, K. R., Key, A. C., & Eaton, N. R. (2015). Gender
scientific-research Cognition in Transgender Children. Psychologi-
Isager, P. M., van Aert, R. C. M., Bahník, Š., Brandt, cal Science, 26(4), 467–474. https://doi.org/
M.J.,DeSoto,K.A.,Giner-Sorolla,R.,Krueger, 10.1177/0956797614568156
J. I., Perugini, M., Ropovik, I., van ’t Veer, Pittelkow, M.-M., Field, S. M., & Van Ravenzwaaij,
A. E., Vranka, M., & Lakens, D. (2023). De- D.(2025).ThinkingBeyondRVCN:Addressing
ciding what to replicate: A decision model for theComplexityofReplicationTargetSelection.
replication study selection under resource and Meta-Psychology,9.https://doi.org/10.15626/
knowledge constraints. Psychological Methods, MP.2024.4323
28(2), 438–451. https://doi.org/10.1037/ Pittelkow, M.-M., Hoekstra, R., Karsten, J., & van
met0000438 Ravenzwaaij,D.(2021).ReplicationTargetSe-
Isager, P. M., van ’t Veer, A. E., Freeman, Z., Marti- lection in Clinical Psychology: A Bayesian and
novici, A., Breemer, L., Van Ravenzwaaij, D., Qualitative Reevaluation. Clinical Psychology:
Liem,C.C.S.,Hoekstra,R.,&Rasti,S.(2024). Science and Practice, 28(2), 210–221. https://
Hackathonproceedingsfor:PerspectivesonSci- doi.org/10.1037/cps0000013
entific Error–Coordinating Quality Control in Rainey, C. (2025). Use and Misuse of a Fast Approxi-
Practice. https://doi.org/10.31222/osf.io/ mation: Not a Criticism, but a Caution. Meta-
94a6f Psychology, 9. https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.
Isager, P. M., van ’t Veer, A. E., & Lakens, D. (2025). 2024.4216
Replication value as a function of citation im- Riesthuis,P.,Mesquida,C.,&Cribbie,R.(2024).Statis-
pactandsamplesize.Meta-Psychology,9.https: tical (non)Significance (cid:44) (un)Successful Repli-
//doi.org/10.15626/MP.2022.3300 cation: The Importance of the Smallest Effect
Kamermans, K. L., Dudda, L., Daikoku, T., & Verheyen, SizeofInterest.https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.
S. (2025). The is-ought problem in deciding io/s3zfy
whattoreplicate:Whichmotivesguidecurrent Takashima,K.,&Yamada,Y.(2025).Valuingreplication
replication practices? [Preprint]. https://doi. value. Meta-Psychology, 9. https://doi.org/10.
org/10.31234/osf.io/6xdy2 15626/MP.2024.4210
McLaughlin,H.,Peng,C.,France,H.,McFall,J.,Baugh- van ’t Veer, A. E., Freeman, Z., Hoekstra, R., Is-
man, K., Hildebrandt, L., Wamba, T., Pazda, ager, P. M., Martinovici, A., Van Ravenzwaaij,
A., Levitan, C., Peck, T., Lazarevic, L., Van- D., & Rasti, S. (2025). Registered Verification
Benschoten, A., Wiggins, B. J., Christopher- Reports—Amodelforcontinualqualitycontrol
son, C. D., Grahe, J., Adetula, A., Chartier, by journals. https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.
C. R., IJzerman, H., Brandt, M., ... LePine, IO/CEH4R
S. (2013). Collaborative Replications and Ed-