Articles
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-019-0767-3
Deforming the metric of cognitive maps
distorts memory
Jacob L. S. Bellmund 1,2,3*, William de Cothi 4,5, Tom A. Ruiter 2,6, Matthias Nau 1,2,
Caswell Barry 5,7 and Christian F. Doeller 1,2,7*
Environmental boundaries anchor cognitive maps that support memory. However, trapezoidal boundary geometry distorts the
regular firing patterns of entorhinal grid cells, proposedly providing a metric for cognitive maps. Here we test the impact of
trapezoidal boundary geometry on human spatial memory using immersive virtual reality. Consistent with reduced regular-
ity of grid patterns in rodents and a grid-cell model based on the eigenvectors of the successor representation, human posi-
tional memory was degraded in a trapezoid environment compared with a square environment—an effect that was particularly
pronounced in the narrow part of the trapezoid. Congruent with changes in the spatial frequency of eigenvector grid patterns,
distance estimates between remembered positions were persistently biased, revealing distorted memory maps that explained
behaviour better than the objective maps. Our findings demonstrate that environmental geometry affects human spatial memory
in a similar manner to rodent grid-cell activity and, therefore, strengthen the putative link between grid cells and behaviour
along with their cognitive functions beyond navigation.
B
oundaries are essential for navigators moving through space, Thus, location is encoded by the conjunction of spatial phases
and boundary geometry serves as a strong cue for reorienta- across different modules—the population phase25,28—whereas the
tion1,2. When rodents and human children are disoriented distance and direction between points can be derived from the rela-
after learning the location of a hidden reward, they search for the tive difference in population phase25. With a regular underlying grid
reward equally often in geometrically equivalent corners of rectan- pattern, there should be a tight coupling between the distance sepa-
gular environments3–5. Consistent with this, human adults rely on rating positions and the change in grid population phase. Larger
boundary geometry for spatial updating, which is facilitated by the distances in space correspond to greater changes in the population
limited number of symmetry axes of the enclosure boundaries6. The phase of the grid.
learning of positions relative to a boundary, which recruits the hip- Environmental geometry strongly influences grid firing pat-
pocampal formation, is thought to occur incidentally7,8 and posi- terns in rodents10–12,29. Changes made to the geometry of a familiar
tions closer to a boundary are remembered more accurately than enclosure produce commensurate changes to the scale of grid pat-
those further away from it9. terns, resulting in differential rates of change in population phase
Here we examined the possibility that boundary geometry can for travel in the changed and unchanged dimension15,17. Similar
cause distortions in human spatial memory. We derive this hypoth- manipulations made while humans navigate in virtual reality (VR)
esis from the distortions induced by environmental geometry on the environments produce complementary deficits in path integra-
grid-cell firing patterns in rodents10–12. Grid cells, which were first tion30. Notably, in highly polarized enclosures such as trapezoids,
identified in the entorhinal cortex of freely moving rodents, typically grid patterns are highly distorted and less regular than in square
exhibit sixfold periodic (hexadirectional) spatial firing that extends control enclosures10. These changes are especially pronounced in
across the environment13. This pattern can be described in terms the narrow part of the trapezoidal enclosure with reduced sym-
of its scale, as well as its offset and orientation relative to the envi- metry, less regular fields and a change of grid orientation—changes
ronment13,14. Along the dorsoventral axis of the medial entorhinal that do not appear to attenuate with continued exposure10. Similarly,
cortex, grid cells that share similar spacing and orientations are orga- in a quadrilateral environment with one slanted wall, firing fields
nized in discrete modules15–17. Grid cells have been directly recorded of grid cells were consistently shifted away from the slanted wall,
in human patients undergoing presurgical screening18,19, and—in resulting in a local distortion of the grid11. Together, these findings
human functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) studies— indicate not only that environmental boundaries anchor spatial rep-
hexadirectional signals serve as a proxy measure for activity of the resentations, but also that the specific arrangement of environmen-
entorhinal grid system20. However, empirical evidence demonstrat- tal boundaries can distort spatial codes in the mammalian brain.
ing the behavioural relevance of grid cells remains scarce. However, research into the potential consequences of compromised
Theoretical work suggests that regular grid patterns provide a grid patterns for human spatial cognition is lacking.
compact code for self-localization and function as a metric of space, Here we investigated how environmental geometry—which is
supporting path integration and vector-based navigation13,14,21–27. known to distort grid-cell-based computations—influences human
1Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany. 2Kavli Institute for Systems Neuroscience, Centre for Neural Computation,
The Egil and Pauline Braathen and Fred Kavli Centre for Cortical Microcircuits, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway.
3Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University, Nijmegen, the Netherlands. 4Institute of Behavioural Neuroscience, University
College London, London, UK. 5Research Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University College London, London, UK. 6Amsterdam Brain and
Cognition, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 7These authors contributed equally: Caswell Barry, Christian F. Doeller.
*e-mail: bellmund@cbs.mpg.de; doeller@cbs.mpg.de
NATuRe HuMAN BeHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaturE HumaN BEHaviOur
spatial cognition. Degraded grid patterns in a trapezoid are hypoth- t-test, t = 64.52, P < 0.001, d = 16.44, 95% CI = 14.29–20.46). Thus,
58
esized to carry less precise positional information than regular grid distorted grid patterns indeed underlie reduced positional decoding
patterns, resulting in uncertainties about locations in space and the in the trapezoid.
distances between them10,11,28. We therefore investigated the effects Is human positional memory also degraded in a trapezoid?
of boundary geometry on human spatial memory. We captured the First, we compared raw positional-memory error—the displace-
effects of environmental geometry on grid patterns using the eigen- ment between the response and correct position—between the two
vectors of the successor representation (SR; see Methods), which environments. Consistent with the degradation of positional infor-
has been previously related to reinforcement learning and choice mation observed in simulated grid patterns, the participants made
behaviour31–35. The eigenvectors of the SR exhibit grid-like proper- larger errors in the trapezoid than the square (Fig. 2a; bootstrapped
ties in two-dimensional space, the regularity of which is degraded paired t-test, t = 2.71, P < 0.001, d = 0.45, 95% CI = 0.16–0.73; we
36
in a trapezoid32. We demonstrate that distorted eigenvector grid pat- analysed the behavioural data using bootstrap-based t-tests and
terns convey less-precise information about self-location in a trap- report bootstrapped confidence intervals of the effect size through-
ezoid and that this effect is most pronounced at the narrow end of out; see Methods). To ensure that this effect was not due to the fact
the trapezoid environment. We tested whether memory for object that the trapezoid allows larger errors owing to its elongated shape,
positions is impaired in a trapezoid compared with a square con- we calculated memory scores that accounted for differences in the
trol environment. Within the trapezoid, we expected worse mem- distribution of possible errors for each position37. We generated a
ory performance, particularly in the narrow part of the enclosure chance distribution of 1,000 random locations that uniformly cov-
compared with the broad part. Moreover, spatial computations per- ered the entire environment and quantified the distance of each
formed on the basis of distorted grid patterns are expected to exhibit random location to the correct positions, resulting in a specific dis-
systematic biases. SR grid patterns were, on average, stretched in the tribution of possible error distances for each position. For each trial,
trapezoid relative to the square and compressed in the narrow part we calculated the memory score as 1 − the proportion of distances
of the trapezoid compared with the broad part. We asked partici- from the chance distribution smaller than the replacement error.
pants to judge distances between remembered locations and con- This yielded a score ranging from 0 (low memory) to 1 (perfect
trasted their estimates of identical true distances as a function of memory) for each trial, taking into account the range of possible
environmental geometry. errors based on the correct position and environmental geometry
(the overall distribution of memory scores is provided in Extended
Results Data Fig. 4a). Importantly, memory scores were significantly lower
Positional memory. We used immersive VR to investigate the effects in the trapezoid compared with the square (Fig. 2b,c; bootstrapped
of environmental geometry on human spatial memory (Fig. 1a). paired t-test, t = −2.30, P < 0.001, d = −0.38, 95% CI = −0.67 to
36
Wearing a head-mounted display (HMD), the participants navi- −0.08), ensuring that decreased positional memory was not due to
gated different environments using a motion platform that trans- different distributions of possible errors as a result of the elongated
lated real-world rotations and steps into virtual movement (Fig. 1b). shape of the trapezoid.
The participants were familiarized with the VR setup in a circular In rodents, grid patterns recorded from a trapezoid are known
environment before learning object positions in a square and a trap- to be more strongly distorted in the narrow end of the environ-
ezoid with the order of environments counterbalanced across par- ment than its base10. Similarly, we found that decoding errors
ticipants. The environments were of equal surface area, and distinct derived from SR grid patterns were also larger in the narrow part
wall colours served as orientation cues. During the object-position of the trapezoid (Fig. 1h; two-sample t-test, t = 14.63, P < 0.001,
58
memory task, the participants learned the positions of six objects in d = 3.73, 95% CI = 3.12–4.82). To determine whether human spa-
each environment; the object positions were organized into two trip- tial memory differed within the trapezoid, we examined memory
lets with matched inter-object distances in both halves of an environ- errors and found, as expected, that errors were larger in the nar-
ment (Fig. 1c). The participants were tested on the positions of the row end (Fig. 2d; bootstrapped paired t-test, t = 2.75, P < 0.001,
31
objects after an initial learning phase by having to navigate to the d = 0.49, 95% CI = 0.19–0.82). To control for the expected difference
remembered position of a cued object in each trial (Fig. 1d). To probe in error distributions, we again calculated memory scores and con-
mnemonic distortions outside the encoding environment, the par- firmed a robust difference between the two ends of the environment
ticipants judged pairwise distances between object positions in VR (Fig. 2e; bootstrapped paired t-test, t = −1.59, P = 0.023, d = −0.28,
31
by walking the distance in the circular familiarization environment 95% CI = −0.61–0.06). The difference in positional-memory errors
and on a computer screen by adjusting a slider on a subjective scale. between the narrow and broad parts of the trapezoid was higher
Does the disruption of regular grid patterns (Fig. 1e,f and than the 5th percentile of a surrogate distribution of error differ-
Extended Data Fig. 1; two-sample t-test of grid similarity across ences obtained by comparing positional memory between the
environment halves, t = 10.81, P < 0.001, Cohen’s d = 2.14, 95% halves of the square, indicating a significant difference between the
98
confidence interval (CI): 1.83–2.61) result in less accurate posi- environments (Extended Data Fig. 4c; Z-statistic = 2.18, P = 0.015).
tional codes? To test this notion, we used a Bayesian decoder to Taken together, the profile of positional memory observed is in line
decode locations using synthetic spike trains sampled from a with our predictions derived from deformations of grid patterns
population of SR grid patterns (n = 50), which were derived from with degraded positional memory in the trapezoidal environment
the eigenvectors of successor representations from the square compared with the square environment and more impaired per-
and trapezoid environment. Decoding was performed using a formance in the narrow part of the trapezoid than the broad part.
simple maximum-likelihood approach assuming uniform priors36. Indeed, calculating the Bayes factor to quantify the likelihood of
Decoding errors—the displacement between the true and decoded observing differences in positional memory between environments
position—were larger in the trapezoid than in the square (Fig. 1g; and trapezoid halves on the basis of the decoding errors of the SR
two-sample t-test, t = 117.41, P < 0.001, d = 29.93, 95% CI = 26.06– grid model compared with a null model of no difference revealed
58
37.00), indicating that distorted grid patterns carry less positional strong evidence for the SR grid model (BF = 23.58; we report twice
10
information. To exclude the possibility that this reduction simply the natural logarithm of the Bayes factor throughout; see Methods).
reflected the change in environmental aspect ratio, we verified During our task, in the absence of other positional cues, object
that decoding accuracy for the smallest possible rectangular envi- locations had to be learned relative to the enclosure boundaries.
ronment that entirely encloses the trapezoid exceeds the decoding Can differences in boundary proximity explain the pattern of results
accuracy for the trapezoid itself (Extended Data Fig. 2; two-sample in line with more accurate memory for positions near boundaries9?
NATuRe HuMAN BeHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaturE HumaN BEHaviOur Articles
a
Training Memory task Time Memory task Time VR distance PC distance
VR setup geometry 1 estimates 1 geometry 2 estimates 2 estimates estimates
b c d
Start
Cue
Replace
Feedback
e
j
1.5
0
Owing to the specific geometry of the trapezoid, distances of object bootstrapped paired t-test of difference between square and trap-
positions to the closest boundary were smaller in the trapezoid than ezoid, t = −3.45, P < 0.001, d = −0.57, 95% CI = −0.96 to −0.26),
36
in the square (bootstrapped paired t-test, t = −10.09, P < 0.001, suggesting a differential relationship of boundary proximity and
36
d = −1.66, 95% CI = −2.23 to −1.30) and smaller in the narrow part positional memory in non-rectangular environments.
of the trapezoid compared with the broad part (bootstrapped paired Differences in positional memory in both environments were
t-test, t = −18.34, P < 0.001, d = −3.02, 95% CI = −4.05 to −2.44). not due to differential navigation behaviour. There were no statis-
36
Thus, the boundary proximity model predicts better memory in the tically significant differences in the excess path lengths of partici-
trapezoid and the narrow end of this environment—directly oppo- pants’ navigation paths from the start position of a given trial to
site to the effects that we predicted and observed. Congruent with the remembered location of the object in the trapezoid environ-
the beneficial role of boundary proximity, distances to the closest ment compared with the square environment or between the two
boundary were negatively correlated with memory scores in the parts of the trapezoid (Extended Data Fig. 5a,b; bootstrapped paired
square (Extended Data Fig. 4e; bootstrapped one-sample t-test, t-tests, square versus trapezoid: t = −0.95, P = 0.144, d = −0.16,
36
t = −4.42, P < 0.001, d = −0.73, 95% CI = −1.15 to −0.40). In the 95% CI = −0.48–0.18; broad versus narrow trapezoid: t = −0.11,
36 36
trapezoid, however, there was no statistically significant effect of P = 0.865, d = −0.02, 95% CI = −0.31–0.36). Furthermore, there
boundary proximity on memory scores (bootstrapped one-sam- were no statistically significant differences in walking speeds
ple t-test, t = −0.40, P = 0.524, d = −0.07, 95% CI = −0.39–0.27; between the two environments or the sub-parts of the trapezoid
36
ycneuqerF
i
1.5
0
ycneuqerF
f
1
0
ytiralimiS
h
1
0
rorrE
g
1.5
0
rorrE
(i) (ii) (iii) (iv) (v) (vi) (vii)
0 30
Fig. 1 | Task design and SR grid patterns. a, The experimental timeline. The participants were familiarized with the VR setup (i) before completing the
object-position memory task (ii and iv) followed by time estimates (iii and v) in the two environments. The participants subsequently estimated pairwise
distances between the positions learned in VR and on a computer screen (vi and vii). The headset and screen icons indicate whether individual tasks
took place in VR or on a computer screen, respectively. b, Schematic of the immersive VR setup with an HMD and a motion platform, which translated
physical steps and rotations into virtual movement. c, An example configuration of object positions (circles). Two triplets of objects were positioned in each
environment with one triplet in each half of each environment, yielding four triplets with matched distances between positions. d, To commence a test trial
in the object-position memory task, participants walked to a start position, which was marked by a pylon, where they were cued with the image of an object.
Subsequently, the participant navigated to the object’s remembered position, which they indicated by pressing a button, and received feedback. e, Example
eigenvector grid patterns of the successor representation for a trapezoid (left; Extended Data Fig. 1a) and a square (right; Extended Data Fig. 1b) environment.
f, SR grid patterns are distorted in the trapezoid, resulting in reduced correlation coefficients of spatial autocorrelations between the two trapezoid halves
compared with the halves of the square. g,h, Position decoding errors based on spikes sampled from SR grid patterns are larger in the trapezoid than in the
square (g) and larger in the narrow part of the trapezoid than the broad part (h), demonstrating that distorted grid patterns carry less positional information
(Extended Data Fig. 2). i,j, Mean radial frequencies of SR grid patterns are lower in the trapezoid than in the square (i) and higher in the narrow part of the
trapezoid than the broad part (j; Extended Data Fig. 3). For f–j data are mean ± s.e.m.; symbols indicate experimental conditions for which data is shown.
Individual data points reflect iterations (g and h) or SR grid patterns (f, i and j).
NATuRe HuMAN BeHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaturE HumaN BEHaviOur
1.0
0.5
(Extended Data Fig. 5c,d; bootstrapped paired t-tests, trapezoid significant difference in the circular variance around each trial’s aver-
versus square: t = −0.01, P = 0.973, d = 0.00, 95% CI = −0.33–0.34; age body direction between environments (Extended Data Fig. 6e;
36
broad versus narrow trapezoid: t = 1.15, P = 0.079, d = 0.19, 95% trapezoid versus square: bootstrapped paired t-test, t = 1.06,
36 36
CI = −0.14–0.51). There was no statistically significant relationship P = 0.118, d = 0.17, 95% CI = −0.16–0.46) or the trapezoid parts
between Euclidean distances from the start positions to the cor- (Extended Data Fig. 6g; narrow versus broad: bootstrapped paired
rect object positions and spatial-memory performance (Extended t-test, t = 1.14, P = 0.076, d = −0.19, 95% CI = −0.13–0.54), but
36
Data Fig. 5e,f; bootstrapped one-sample t-tests, square: t = 0.17, the circular variance of participants’ facing directions was greater
36
P = 0.764, d = 0.03; 95% CI = −0.32–0.35; trapezoid: t = 0.58, in the trapezoid than in the square (Extended Data Fig. 6f; boot-
36
P = 0.358, d = 0.10, 95% CI = −0.22–0.46; trapezoid broad: t = 1.37, strapped paired t-test, t = 2.57, P < 0.001, d = 0.42, 95% CI =
36 36
P = 0.177, d = 0.23, 95% CI = −0.10–0.65; trapezoid narrow: 0.13–0.73) and greater in the narrow part of the trapezoid than
t = −0.01, P = 0.987, d = 0.00, 95% CI = −0.36–0.32). the broad part (Extended Data Fig. 6h; bootstrapped paired t-test,
36
To investigate the navigation behaviour of the participants in t = 2.13, P < 0.001, d = 0.35, 95% CI = 0.04–0.69). This suggests that
36
more detail, we next examined their body and head orientation dur- the participants relied more on visual exploration of the environ-
ing the replacement period relative to the direction from start to ment, decoupled from body rotations and chosen trajectories in our
response position in each trial. Both body and head orientation of VR setup. Taken together, we observed no credible evidence of par-
participants were significantly clustered around the directions from ticipants being generally disoriented in the trapezoid or of funda-
the start to response positions in the square (v-tests, body: v = 36.84, mental differences in navigational strategies between environments.
P < 0.001; head: v = 36.68, P < 0.001) and in the trapezoid (v-tests, The object-position memory task was designed to probe memory
body: v = 36.89, P < 0.001; head: v = 36.68, P < 0.001), and there was for positions in the broad and narrow parts of the trapezoid rather
no statistically significant effect of environment on the distributions than to evenly sample the environment. Participants therefore more
of mean orientations (Extended Data Fig. 6a,b; Watson–Williams frequently faced towards the narrow or broad end of the trapezoid
tests, body: F = 0.02, P = 0.889; head: F = 0.14, P = 0.709). when navigating towards remembered positions in the respective
1,72 1,72
Similar results were obtained for the body and head orientations part of the environment (Extended Data Fig. 7a; v-tests, broad:
when comparing trials targeting objects in the broad and nar- v = 31.84, P < 0.001; narrow: v = 28.50, P < 0.001). Furthermore, the
row parts of the trapezoid (Extended Data Fig. 6c,d; v-test, body velocity of participants was higher along the long axis of the trap-
broad: v = 36.73, P < 0.001; v-test, body narrow: v = 36.73, P < 0.001; ezoid (Extended Data Fig. 7b; v-tests, broad: v = 27.03, P < 0.001;
Watson–Williams test, difference body: F = 1.53, P = 0.220; v-test, narrow: v = 13.51, P = 0.001). Do attentional resources and task
1,72
head broad: v = 36.54, P < 0.001; v-test, head narrow: v = 36.65, demands differ between test environments? This seems unlikely
P < 0.001; Watson–Williams test, difference head F = 0.05, as our design included a secondary task in which the participants
1,72
P = 0.830). We therefore do not think that the average facing direc- memorized colour changes of an extramaze cue and later esti-
tion of participants influences our key comparisons between the mated the durations between colour-change events (see Methods).
two environments or within the trapezoid. There was no statistically There were no statistically significant differences between square
erocs
yromeM
12 ***
Target Response
Chance distribution
0
)mv(
rorre
waR
a b c d
*** 10
0
)mv(
rorre
waR
*** 1.0
0.8
erocs
yromeM
e
*
1
0
Distance to target
evitalumuC ytilibaborp
Memory score = 1 – cumulative probability
Fig. 2 | Distorted positional memory in the trapezoid. a, Positional-memory errors in virtual metres (vm), measured as the Euclidean distance between
the correct and remembered position, were larger for object positions in the trapezoid than in the square environment. b, Similarly, memory scores were
lower in the trapezoid than in the square environment. The y axis was thresholded at the chance level of 0.5. c, Schematics of the expression of positional
memory using memory scores to control for differences in distributions of possible errors for two hypothetical trials. For both environments, a chance
distribution of positions uniformly covering the available space was generated (top, coloured dots). We quantified the cumulative probability of the
chance distribution as a function of distance to target object positions (bottom). Positional-memory performance of a given trial was then expressed as
1 − the cumulative probability at the error distance between the true and response position, resulting in memory scores ranging from 0 to 1, for which 0.5
represents chance level performance and 1 represents perfect performance. Conceptually, this corresponds to the proportion of the chance distribution
that is further away from the correct position than the remembered position (shaded areas). d, Raw positional-memory errors were larger in the narrow
part of the trapezoid compared with the broad part. Five participants were excluded owing to differences between broad and narrow part of more than
1.5× the interquartile range above or below the upper and lower quartile of differences, respectively. The full dataset is provided in Extended Data
Fig. 4b. e, Similarly, memory scores were lower in the narrow part of the trapezoid than the broad part. The y axis was thresholded to illustrate the
difference between conditions. For a, b, d and e, data are mean ± s.e.m. The grey circles indicate individual participant data with lines connecting data
points from the same participant. Note that graphs in b and e do not start at 0. *P < 0.05, *** P < 0.001.
NATuRe HuMAN BeHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaturE HumaN BEHaviOur Articles
a c d e f
Walk distance in VR
25
b
Close Far
0
and trapezoid (Extended Data Fig. 10) in mean estimation errors presentation and response context. If, for example, a distance was
(bootstrapped paired t-test, t = −0.10, P = 0.873 d = −0.02, 95% encoded with a population of grid patterns that had been compressed
36
CI = −0.37–0.31) and absolute estimation errors (bootstrapped (increased frequency) then attempts to recapitulate that distance with
paired t-test, t = −0.32, P = 0.629, d = −0.05, 95% CI = −0.37–0.29) unbiased grid patterns would result in an overestimation in Euclidean
36
or the error variability (bootstrapped paired t-test, t = −0.81, space. To determine whether successor-based grid patterns were sys-
36
P = 0.205, d = −0.13, 95% CI = −0.46–0.19). tematically distorted in either the square or trapezoid environment,
we applied a Fourier approach. Specifically, an analysis of the spatial
Mnemonic distortions outside the environment. We next addres- frequency of the SR grid rate maps revealed a sparser packing of grid
s ed whether computations based on spatial memories that are dis- fields in the trapezoid than the square (Fig. 1i, Extended Data Fig. 3a;
torted through environmental geometry are systematically biased two-sample t-test, t = 3.98, P < 0.001, d = 0.79, 95% CI = 0.39–1.25;
98
outside the learning environment. We therefore asked participants see Methods). Thus, grid phase changed more slowly as a function of
to estimate distances between the positions of object pairs in two distance in the trapezoid, which might result in underestimations of
modalities, after the object-position memory tasks (Fig. 3a,b). In distances relative to the square28.
the VR version of the distance-estimation task, the participants Taking advantage of our design in which participants learned
reported distances by walking the respective distance between two a triplet of object positions in each half of an environment with
remembered object positions in a circular enclosure, which was dif- matched inter-object distances, we compared distance estimates
ferent from the original square and trapezoidal environments. In between environments. In line with stretched SR grid patterns,
the desktop version of this task, the participants indicated these dis- distances were judged to be shorter in the trapezoid than in the
tances on a subjective scale using a computer mouse (see Methods). square in both the VR (Fig. 3c; bootstrapped paired t-test, t = 1.44,
36
The participants successfully completed both versions of the task P = 0.025, d = 0.24, 95% CI = −0.08–0.61) and the desktop (Fig. 3d;
(Extended Data Fig. 8a,b; bootstrapped paired t-test of long versus bootstrapped paired t-test, t = 1.49, P = 0.027, d = 0.24, 95%
36
short distances in VR version, t = 11.00, P < 0.001, d = 1.81, 95% CI = −0.07–0.56) version of the task. This effect was highly reli-
36
CI = 1.38–2.53; mean ± s.d. of Spearman correlations between true able between the two versions of the task (Extended Data Fig. 8c;
and estimated distances in desktop version, r = 0.67 ± 0.19), dem- Spearman r = 0.79, P < 0.001, 95% CI of correlation coefficient:
onstrating the ability to compute never-experienced distances from 0.61–0.88). Next, we tested for a difference between distance esti-
pairs of remembered positions. Comparison of the distances walked mates for the two parts of the trapezoid. Consistent with higher
in the VR version of the task to true Euclidean distances across all frequencies of the successor-based grid patterns in the narrow part
of the trials revealed an overestimation bias (bootstrapped paired of the trapezoid compared with the broad part (Fig. 1j, Extended
t-test, t = 5.78, P < 0.001, d = 0.95, 95% CI = 0.60–1.47). Data Fig. 3b; two-sample t-test, t = 3.90, P < 0.001, d = 0.78, 95%
36 98
How could distorted grid patterns during encoding bias later CI = 0.39–1.21), the participants estimated that the same distances
distance estimates? The entorhinal grid system is thought to be a were longer in the narrow part of the trapezoid than in the broad
central component of the neural substrate that supports vector- part (Fig. 3e,f; VR: bootstrapped paired t-test, t = 2.09, P = 0.002,
36
based navigation, which enables the calculation of navigational vec- d = 0.34, 95% CI = 0.03–0.68; desktop: bootstrapped paired t-test,
tors by comparing the grid population phases of positions22,25,27,38,39. t = 3.46, P < 0.001, d = 0.57, 95% CI = 0.22–1.05). Again, the differ-
36
In such a system, the difference in grid population phase between ence between remembered distances was highly correlated across
locations is expected to be proportional to the Euclidean displace- the two modalities (Extended Data Fig. 8d; Spearman r = 0.70,
ment between them25,28. Thus, for a participant to make accurate P < 0.001, 95% CI of correlation coefficient: 0.36–0.89). We cal-
distance judgements, the relationship between the Euclidean dis- culated surrogate distributions of distance differences between
tance and grid phase distance must be held constant in both the the two halves of the square to contrast the two environments.
)mv(
ecnatsid
egarevA
0.6
0
).u.a(
ecnatsid
egarevA
25
0
)mv(
ecnatsid
egarevA
0.6
**
0
).u.a(
ecnatsid
egarevA
* * ***
Judge distance on scale
Fig. 3 | Distortion of distance estimates. a, The participants were cued to estimate and walk distances between the remembered positions of object pairs
in a circular virtual environment. b, In the desktop version of the task, the participants adjusted a slider to estimate the distance between object pairs on a
subjective scale from close together to far apart. c,d, Taking advantage of matched distances between object positions, estimated distances were averaged
and compared between environments. Distances were estimated to be shorter in the trapezoid than in the square in both the VR (c) and desktop (d)
version of the task, in line with the lower radial frequencies of the SR grid patterns in the trapezoid (Fig. 1i, Extended Data Fig. 3a). e,f, Identical distances
were estimated to be longer in the narrow part of the trapezoid than in the broad part for judgements made in VR (e) and on a computer screen (f),
consistent with the more tightly packed SR grid patterns in the narrow part of the trapezoid (Fig. 1j, Extended Data Fig. 3b). For c–f, data are mean ± s.e.m.
The grey circles indicate individual participant data. **P < 0.01.
NATuRe HuMAN BeHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaturE HumaN BEHaviOur
In both versions of the task, the distance difference of the trapezoid scores using the reconstructed positions led to higher scores com-
halves differed significantly from the surrogate distributions of dis- pared with the true positions (Fig. 4d; bootstrapped paired t-test,
tance differences obtained from the square halves (Extended Data t = 3.09, P < 0.001, d = 0.51, 95% CI = 0.18–0.95), providing direct
36
Fig. 8e,f; VR: Z = 4.05, P < 0.001; desktop: Z = 3.68, P < 0.001). These evidence that positional memory is used to compute distances
findings demonstrate that—across two versions of the task with very between objects and that distorting the spatial map also distorts dis-
different response formats—distance estimates for identical dis- tance estimates. This effect was also found to be significant when
tances are systematically biased in a manner that is consistent with we excluded trials that targeted objects for which the reconstructed
the spatial frequencies of distorted SR grid patterns in the trapezoid. position lay outside the environment (bootstrapped paired t-test,
We assessed the likelihood of observing longer distance estimates t = 1.42, P = 0.023, d = 0.23, 95% CI = −0.08–0.64). The increase
36
in the square and in the narrow end of the trapezoid, given differ- in memory scores could be explained if, for each position, recon-
ences in spatial frequency of the SR grid patterns. Again, the Bayes structed positions reflect remembered positions in the trapezoid.
factor strongly favoured the SR grid model over the null model To quantify this, we calculated the error vectors between the true
(VR: BF = 15.31; desktop: BF = 18.68). and remembered positions in the object-position memory task and
10 10
compared these to the error vectors of the reconstructed positions.
Reconstruction of remembered locations. What is the structure We observed a strong relationship between the two sets of error
of deformed memory maps? To reconstruct remembered object vectors as indicated by a significant correlation of their average
positions from estimated inter-object distances, we applied mul- lengths (Fig. 4e; Pearson r = 0.62, P < 0.001, 95% CI of correlation
tidimensional scaling (MDS) to the data obtained in the desktop coefficient: 0.33–0.79) and a clustering of their orientations (Fig. 4f;
version of the task (Fig. 4a). We extracted coordinates along two angular difference of vectors significantly clustered around 0,
dimensions (Extended Data Fig. 9a), which we mapped onto the v-test, v = 13.77, P = 0.001). These findings show that positions
true coordinates of the trapezoid using Procrustes analysis to match
the two configurations of the coordinates (Fig. 4a, Extended Data
Fig. 9b; see Methods). We quantified the deviance between the true
and reconstructed positions after Procrustes analysis and compared
this Procrustes distance to a surrogate distribution of distances that
were obtained by shuffling object-position assignments to assess
the statistical significance of the reconstruction accuracy (Fig. 4b).
The observed Procrustes distances were significantly lower than the
5th percentiles of the surrogate distributions (Fig. 4c; bootstrapped
paired t-test, t = −8.48, P < 0.001, d = −1.39, 95% CI = −2.26 to
36
−0.89), reflecting a close match between true and reconstructed
positions. Importantly, recalculating the above-described memory
0.3
0
–0.4
elffuhs
seulav
ecnatsid
–
atad
ecnatsiD
*** 0.015
0
–0.010
esaercni
erocs
yromeM
Distance Procrustes
MDS
estimates analysis
High 0.4
Low 0
–0.4
–0.6 0 0.4
b c d
18 ***
0
0 1
Procrustes distance
e
f
selpmas
delffuhs
fo
egatnecreP
a
Critical distance shuffle
Distance data
12
6
0
0 6 12
Reconstruction error (vm)
)mv(
rorre
tnemecalpeR
Percentage rank 1 Percentage rank 21 Percentage rank 41 Percentage rank 61 Percentage rank 81
Fig. 4 | Reconstruction of remembered positions. a, Top: using MDS,
d = 0.012 d = 0.040 d = 0.086 d = 0.111 d = 0.245
coordinates along two underlying dimensions were extracted from
pairwise distance estimates. The resulting coordinates were mapped to
the original object positions in the trapezoid using Procrustes analysis (see
Methods). The colour bar indicates estimated distances. Data are shown
for a randomly selected participant. Bottom: the five participants chosen to
show reconstruction accuracy across the sample on the basis of the spread
of Procrustes distances (data shown for participants at percentile ranks
1, 21, 41, 61 and 81, from left to right). The coloured circles indicate correct
positions and the crosses the respective reconstructed positions. b, The
Procrustes distance quantifies the deviation between the true positions
and the reconstructed positions as the normalized sum of squared error
distances. The mean across participants is indicated by a dashed vertical
line. For each participant, a surrogate distribution of Procrustes distances
was obtained by fitting the coordinates from MDS to coordinate sets with
shuffled object identities (solid line). The dotted vertical line indicates
the averaged critical Procrustes distance, defined as the 5th percentile
of the respective surrogate distributions. The shaded areas indicate
s.e.m. across participants. c, The Procrustes distances from fitting to true
coordinates were significantly smaller than the critical distances of the
surrogate distributions. d, Memory scores quantifying positional memory 0°
within the environment were significantly higher when calculated with
0.5
respect to the reconstructed object positions rather than the true object
positions. e, The average error vector lengths from the object-position 0.25
memory task correlate across participants with error vector lengths of
the positions reconstructed from distance estimates. The circles show 270° 90°
individual participant data, the solid line indicates the least squares line
and the dashed lines and shaded region indicate bootstrapped confidence
intervals. f, The angular differences in orientation between the two sets of
error vectors cluster around 0°, indicating that errors were shifted in the
same direction. For c and d, data are mean ± s.e.m. The grey circles indicate 180°
individual participant data.
NATuRe HuMAN BeHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaturE HumaN BEHaviOur Articles
reconstructed on the basis of distance estimates were shifted in additional orientation cues. A limited number of symmetry axes
the same direction as remembered positions and that the magni- was suggested to facilitate the maintenance of the orientation of a
tude of this shift corresponded to the size of the errors in the object- person in angular environments, in contrast to circular environ-
position memory task. ments6. Consistent with this, human participants successfully rely
on trapezoidal boundary geometry for heading retrieval43,44. In our
Discussion task, wall textures provided additional unambiguous non-geometric
Here we used immersive VR to demonstrate that environmental cues for orientation in both environments, making it unlikely that
geometry can distort human spatial memory. Our data show that participants were disoriented in either the square or the trapezoid
positional memory is impaired in a trapezoid environment com- environments5,44. This supports our interpretation that the effects
pared with a square environment and that the deficits are most pro- reflect differences in positional memory rather than being driven
nounced in the narrow end of the trapezoid environment. These by disorientation or differences in navigation behaviour. Learning
findings are consistent with environmentally induced distortions positions relative to environmental boundaries recruits the hip-
observed in rodent entorhinal grid patterns. Equally, they closely pocampal formation and is thought to occur incidentally7,8. Recent
mirror predictions drawn from a model grid-cell system derived evidence suggests that positions near a boundary are remembered
from the eigenvectors of the SR. Importantly, mnemonic distor- more accurately than positions in the centre of a rectangular enclo-
tions persisted outside the environment—participants estimated sure9. Although we replicate the finding that boundary proximity is
identical distances to be different between the square and trapezoid beneficial for positional memory in the square, this cannot explain
environments as well as between the narrow and broad parts of the the pattern of results we observed. Positions in the trapezoid were
trapezoid, underscoring an effect of environmental geometry dur- closer to the nearest boundary than in the square and, within the
ing encoding on subsequent memory, in line with spatial frequen- trapezoid, positions in the narrow part were closer to a boundary
cies of SR grid patterns. Moreover, remembered positions that were than in the broad part. Our findings suggest that boundaries can
reconstructed from these distance estimates directly reflected posi- also distort human spatial memory, in line with grid pattern distor-
tional memory during the learning task. tions through environmental geometry.
Our findings demonstrate that environmental geometry has a Previous studies suggested that changing environmental
strong impact on human spatial memory. We predicted this influ- boundaries might influence human spatial cognition in ways that
ence from rodent data in which the sixfold symmetry of grid firing are consistent with the findings from studies of rodent place45 and
is distorted in a trapezoidal enclosure, with the most pronounced grid cells13. Focusing on path integration, which is one of the core
distortions in the narrow part of the enclosure10. We show degraded functions assumed for grid cells13,14,21, biases in human naviga-
positional memory as a function of environmental geometry, in line tion have been reported to follow predictions derived from grid-
with larger position decoding errors based on the eigenvector grid cell firing30. In particular, the experimental design in Chen et al.30
patterns of the SR, as well as with impaired positional decoding from built on the observation that rodent grid patterns rescale to match
simulated grid cells with locally distorted firing patterns11. Together changes made to the geometry of already familiar enclosures15.
with evidence for impaired path integration with disrupted grid- Expansions and compressions of boundaries relative to preceding
cell firing in rodents40 and increased path integration errors in older trials resulted in under- and overshoots of the return path in a path
adults with weaker hexadirectional signals measured with fMRI41, integration task, when the path included a component along the
previous studies support the interpretation that the integrity of the manipulated boundary dimension30. This illustrates how, through
grid pattern is beneficial for human spatial memory. The strength environmental change, altering the rate of change in grid-cell
of hexadirectional signals and the directional coherence of the ori- population phase in relation to distance travelled can introduce
entation of these signals across voxels in the entorhinal cortex are biases in human navigation28,30. As described above, translating
associated with memory performance across participants who are this idea to the memory-based estimation of distances between
learning object positions in circular enclosures20,42. Our findings locations might explain the diverging judgements of identical
dovetail with this notion as they demonstrate that environmental distances observed in our data. Expansions and compressions of
geometry, which is known to compromise grid patterns in rodents, virtual environments have further been demonstrated to impact
influences spatial cognition in a within-subject design. spatial memory in humans and, under conditions of environmen-
We further demonstrate that distortions persist beyond the tal change, positional memory follows models of place cells and
encoding environment. The grid-cell population phase is thought to boundary proximity46,47. Whereas the studies described above indi-
provide a mechanism to encode spatial positions and calculate vec- cate how boundary manipulations in familiar environments influ-
tors between locations25. As such, distortions of the grid pattern can ence spatial behaviour, we built on work showing that distorted
decouple the rate of change in population phase from distance in grid patterns persist in static trapezoid environments even with
the environment28. Two positions separated by a given distance will prolonged experience10. Our findings suggest that distortions of
be encoded more similarly when grid patterns are of lower rather the spatial metric of the brain can result in mnemonic distortions
than higher spatial frequency. When estimating distances between under constant boundary conditions within a specific environ-
positions, more-similar grid population phases will result in shorter ment and even outside of this encoding environment.
distance estimates22,25,27,38,39. Consistent with the lower spatial fre- We opted for a purely behavioural experiment; however, our
quencies of SR grid patterns, the participants estimated identical hypotheses, experimental design and analysis directly built on find-
distances to be shorter in the trapezoid than in the square. Within ings from electrophysiological recordings of grid cells in rodents10.
the trapezoid, SR grid patterns had a higher spatial frequency in We used highly immersive VR technology to enhance the impact of
the narrow end and, consistent with this, participants estimated dis- environmental geometry on spatial cognition and engage proprio-
tances to be greater in the narrow part of the trapezoid compared ceptive, vestibular and motor systems during the task. At present,
with the broad part. immersive VR does not allow the concurrent recording of neu-
Our results show that human spatial memory was distorted in a ral data. The contribution of locomotor cues to the experience of
trapezoidal environment, suggesting that boundary geometry can navigation in general has been emphasized previously48 and recent
distort mnemonic representations. Previous studies have investi- studies in rodents have used gain manipulations in VR to empha-
gated the role of trapezoidal boundary geometry for spatial updating size the contributions of locomotor cues to grid-cell firing specifi-
and reorientation. Evidence suggests that trapezoid room geom- cally49,50. Having established the impact of environmental geometry
etry can be used successfully for spatial updating in the absence of on human spatial cognition, an exciting question for future research
NATuRe HuMAN BeHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaturE HumaN BEHaviOur
would be to combine manipulations of environmental geometry which subsets of feature combinations are impossible might distort
with neuroimaging techniques such as fMRI to study the deforma- how grid cells map these spaces in a similar way as environmental
tions of the cognitive map that we describe here in the brain. To do geometry distorts grid-cell firing patterns, resulting in biased rep-
so, an important measure could be the hexadirectional signal that resentations similar to the distortions of spatial memory observed
can be observed in the human entorhinal cortex20. Beyond fMRI, an in this study.
exciting future avenue is created by the development of new magne- In conclusion, our data show distortions of human spatial mem-
toencephalography systems, which might enable the combination of ory that are consistent with the changes induced in rodent grid-cell
immersive VR with recordings of neural data51. activity by the geometry of highly polarized enclosures. These dis-
As large parts of human indoor navigation take place in rectangu- tortions persist outside the environment, indicating that environ-
lar rooms, the novelty of a trapezoidal enclosure in our task might be mental geometry has an enduring impact on memory. In line with
considered to be a factor that contributed to impaired performance the proposed roles for grid cells in navigation and mapping feature
compared with the square. However, such an effect of unfamiliar- dimensions beyond navigable space, these findings suggest that
ity with polarized environments would not predict the observed environmental geometry might be able to distort the metric of cog-
within-environment differences in performance. Furthermore, we nitive representations.
did not observe statistically significant differences in the walking
speeds of participants between environments or in the directness Methods
of their paths from the start to the remembered object positions. Participants. We recruited 53 participants between the age of 18 and 30 from the
Thus, none of our control measures provided credible evidence for Norwegian University of Science and Technology. All of the participants provided
written informed consent before participation, and all of the research procedures
fundamental differences in navigational performance between the
were approved by the regional ethics committee (REC North, 2017/153). The
environments by themselves. Moreover, we observed no credible participants were compensated for their time at a rate of kr100 per hour. The
evidence that the environmental manipulation affected the detec- sample size was determined on the basis of a power calculation assuming a small
tion and encoding of colour-change events, arguing against an effect to medium effect (d = 0.4) of environmental geometry on human spatial cognition,
of increased task demand in the trapezoid environment as sufficient and resulting in a sample size of 52 to achieve a statistical power of 80% (α = 0.05,
two-tailed test). A total of 39 participants (mean age 23.8 ± 2.5 years, 36% female)
attentional resources were available for this secondary task.
completed the experiment (14 incomplete datasets due to technical difficulties with
Importantly, the effects that we observed in positional memory the VR setup or motion sickness). Two participants were excluded owing to poor
persisted outside the environment as demonstrated by the differ- memory performance, which was defined as average replacement errors of more
ential estimates for matched distances between positions within than 1.5× the interquartile range larger than the upper quartile of average errors in
the sample. Thus, 37 participants entered the analyses.
the different parts of the trapezoid. These distortions were highly
reliable across response modalities, demonstrating a general, task-
Overview. We designed our experiment to test distortions of spatial memory as a
invariant mnemonic effect. Our findings agree with asymmetric
function of environmental geometry. An overview of the experimental structure is
distance judgements between landmarks and non-landmarks as provided in Fig. 1a. The participants were first familiarized with the VR setup
well as overestimations of distances as a function of intermedi- (Fig. 1a, (i)) before beginning the object-position memory task in the first
ary boundaries52–57. Beyond boundaries separating positions, our environment. The object-position memory task (Fig. 1a, ii and iv) was performed in
a trapezoidal or square environment for 20 min each, and the order of environments
findings demonstrate that distance estimates can be influenced
was counterbalanced across participants. After navigating an environment, the
through the geometric arrangement of boundaries. The response
participants were prompted to estimate the durations between occasional colour-
profiles observed in the VR version of the task revealed a general change events encountered in that environment (Fig. 1a, iii and v). In the final
tendency to overestimate distances between positions, consistent two tasks, the participants were asked to estimate the distances between pairs of
with previous studies that report overestimations of navigated dis- objects in VR and on a computer screen (Fig. 1a, vi and vii), respectively. The
design of each task and the corresponding analyses are described in detail in the
tances58 and spatial scale in map drawings59. We used the distances
sections below. All of the analyses were performed using MATLAB (release 2017a,
that were estimated on a subjective scale in the desktop version of MathWorks) and statistical tests (two-tailed unless stated otherwise; α = 0.05) were
the task to reconstruct remembered positions. Accounting for the performed using resampling procedures as implemented in EEGLAB68. Specifically,
distortions in the memory of the participants by using these recon- test statistics were compared against a surrogate distribution obtained from 10,000
structed positions to recompute memory scores yielded increased bootstrap samples respecting within-participant dependencies. Respecting the
dependent nature of our data, Cohen’s d was calculated as the mean difference
performance scores. This illustrates the close match between posi-
divided by the s.d. of the difference scores (compare with equation 6 in ref. 69)
tions reconstructed from distance estimates and positional memory and the 95% CIs of this effect size were bootstrapped (10,000 iterations) using the
within the environment, and demonstrates that—consistent with Measures of Effect Size Toolbox70. Circular statistics were implemented using the
the formation of cognitive maps60—distances that were never MATLAB-based Circular Statistics Toolbox71. Data collection and analysis were not
directly experienced in the task were computed from remembered performed blind to the conditions of the experiments.
positions. Grid cells have been suggested to support this kind of
Virtual reality. Aiming to maximize the feeling of immersion and, therefore,
vector computation25,27. This is further in line with evidence for
the impact of environmental features, we used state-of-the-art VR technology
the involvement of the entorhinal grid system in imagination61,62 consisting of an HMD (Oculus Rift CV1) and a motion platform (Cyberith
and theoretical accounts that propose a role for spatially tuned cells Virtualizer). The participants wore low-friction overshoes and were strapped into
in memory63–65. a harness attached to the motion platform’s ring system, allowing free rotations. To
navigate the virtual environments, the participants were instructed to lean slightly
Environmental geometry systematically biased memory-based
into the ring construction to slide the front foot backwards across the sensors of
computations outside the trapezoid environment, thereby linking
the low-friction base plate of the motion platform while taking a step forward
our findings to a growing body of literature that implicates grid- with the back foot (Supplementary Video 1), generating translational movement
cell computations in cognitive functions beyond navigation66. in the current forward direction determined by the orientation of the participant
For example, grid-like hexadirectional signals were also observed in the ring system72. Head movements were tracked in three dimensions using
the HMD’s tracking system and the virtual environments were displayed to both
during trajectories through an abstract feature space, which was
eyes separately at a resolution of 1,080 × 1,200 px and a refresh rate of 90 Hz. The
spanned by the dimensions of neck and leg length of stick figure virtual environments were created and presented using the Unreal Engine (v.4.13.2,
birds67. Collectively, these findings indicate a role of the entorhinal Epic Games, 2017) and the eye height of the participants was set to 1.80 vm.
grid system in mapping cognitive spaces66. As proposed for navi- The participants were familiarized with the VR setup in a circular environment
gable space13,14,21,25,26, the regular firing patterns of grid cells might (45.74 vm in diameter), which consisted of a grass floor that was curtailed by a
wall (height 3.75 vm). A set of trees that were spread around the outside of the
provide a metric for these spaces, enabling the efficient encoding
environment served as cues for orientation. During familiarization, the participants
of specific stimuli located at different positions within a space. practiced walking and turning by navigating the circular environment to collect
Speculatively, correlated feature dimensions or feature spaces in coins that appeared at random positions in the environment. The participants were
NATuRe HuMAN BeHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaturE HumaN BEHaviOur Articles
instructed to walk towards the coins and collect them through button presses on a of the environment10. We used a bootstrap-based t-test to test whether positional-
handheld controller. Moreover, this familiarization period served as a practice for memory errors differed between the narrow and broad parts of the trapezoid
the time-estimation task (see below). (Fig. 2d). Outlier participants were excluded on the basis of our standard criterion
of values more than 1.5× the interquartile range above or below the upper or lower
Object-position memory task. The participants performed an object-position quartile, respectively (the full dataset is provided in Extended Data Fig. 4b).
memory task, during which they iteratively learned the positions of six objects Distributions of possible errors can differ also for positions within the same
in a trapezoidal environment (36 vm × 76 vm × 8 vm × 76 vm); the lengths of the environment. We therefore also tested whether memory scores differed between
sides were proportional to the enclosure that rodents explored in a previous study the two parts of the trapezoid (Fig. 2e).
that reported distortions of grid-cell firing patterns10. To establish a behavioural As the rotationally symmetrical geometry of the square does not predefine
baseline, the participants also performed this task in a square control environment how to calculate the difference in positional memory, we created a surrogate
(40.27 vm × 40.27 vm) with an equal surface area. To enforce spatial learning distribution by shuffling which half of the environment was to serve as the
on the basis of environmental geometry, there were no distal cues outside the subtrahend and minuend for the error difference across participants. For each
environment. To facilitate orientation, each wall was presented in a unique colour. permutation, we calculated the error difference for objects located in the two
Both environments had a grass floor, and a blue sky with moving clouds was visible halves of the square. The positional-memory error difference observed in the
(Fig. 1b). The participants performed the task for 20 min in each environment, trapezoid was smaller than the 5th percentile (one-tailed test) of the surrogate
and the order was counterbalanced across participants. In each environment, the distribution obtained from 10,000 permutations (Extended Data Fig. 4c). The
participants learned the positions of six everyday objects, which were presented as shape of the surrogate distribution did not differ statistically from normality
three-dimensional models. The assignment of objects to arenas and positions was (Kolmogorov–Smirnov test, D = 0.01, P = 0.277); we therefore used the inverse of
randomized across participants. the normal cumulative distribution function to convert the P value reflecting the
In each trial of an initial learning phase, the participants navigated to a start number of occurrences of smaller memory ratios in the surrogate distribution
position, which was indicated by a traffic cone. An object was then shown at its into a Z-statistic. To visualize response behaviour in the two parts of the trapezoid,
predefined position in the environment and the participants were instructed to we collapsed across all trials from all of the participants for objects located in
navigate to the object, collect it by button press and memorize its position. Each the broad and narrow parts of the arena. Response positions were centred on the
object was shown once and the order of objects was randomized. In the subsequent respective true positions and divided into 50 × 50 square bins with a side length of
test phase (Fig. 1b), the participants again navigated to start positions. On arrival 0.6 vm. The resulting histogram was smoothed using a Gaussian kernel with an s.d.
at the start position, a picture of one of the objects was shown as a cue for 3 s in of 0.5 vm and plotted as a heat map (Extended Data Fig. 4d). To test the influence
front of the participant, prompting the participants to navigate to where they of the distance to the nearest boundary on positional memory, we calculated
remembered this object was in the environment. The participants indicated the the Pearson correlation between the Euclidean distance to the closest boundary
remembered position by button press after arrival and received feedback about and the memory scores across all of the trials from an environment for each
their accuracy in the form of one of five smiley faces. The object then appeared participant. We tested the resulting correlation coefficients against 0 and between
at its correct position and the participants collected it before the beginning of the the environments using bootstrap-based t-tests. Negative correlation coefficients
next trial. The participants completed 30.54 ± 6.71 and 30.38 ± 8.09 (mean ± s.d.) indicate better memory closer to the boundary.
test trials in the square and trapezoid environments, respectively, and there was no
statistically significant difference between environments in the number of trials Parameters of navigation. To assess whether differences in navigation behaviour
(bootstrapped paired t-test, t 36 = 0.18, P = 0.759). might underlie the observed differences in positional memory, we analysed
The order of trials was randomized for mini-blocks of six trials so that, within navigational performance in the replacement phase of each trial, in which
a mini-block, each object was sampled once and no two consecutive trials sampled participants navigated to the remembered position of a cued object. For each
the same objects. A triplet of object positions (Fig. 1c) was randomly generated for trial, we calculated the Euclidean distance between the start position and the
each participant with a minimum distance of 11 vm between object positions and response location, and subtracted it from the length of the path walked by the
a minimum of at least 3 vm to the nearest boundary. Positions were constrained participant. This excess path length measures the directness of the paths taken,
so that the connection between two objects was parallel to the long axis of the potentially reflecting the degree of certainty about the trajectory as increased
trapezoid or one of the walls of the square. The third object was placed at an uncertainty might lead to more turns and longer paths. We contrasted averaged
angle ranging from 90° to 120° relative to the first two with the same distance to excess path lengths between the two environments and the broad and narrow
one of the objects as between the first two. Such a triplet of positions was placed parts of the trapezoid (Extended Data Fig. 5a,b). Similarly, we contrasted average
in both the narrow and broad parts of the trapezoid, defined on the basis of the walking speeds during the replacement phase between the environments and trials
midpoint of its long axis and the left and right parts of the square. Placing triplets targeting objects from the two trapezoid parts (Extended Data Fig. 5c,d).
of objects with matched distances in each part of the environment enabled direct We also assessed whether the distance from a trial’s start position was related to
comparisons of remembered distances between environments and their sub- the accuracy of object-position memory in a consistent way across subjects.
parts (see the ‘Distance-estimation tasks’ section). As cues were only shown after For each participant, we calculated the Spearman correlation coefficient between
participants arrived at the start position of a given trial, the participants never the distances from start to true object positions and positional memory as defined
walked the direct path between two objects. There were no statistically significant by the Euclidean distances between true and remembered object positions.
relationships between the distance from start positions to target object positions The resulting coefficients were tested against 0 for all of the trials in the square and
(mean ± s.d., square: 18.66 ± 4.65 vm; trapezoid: 19.92 ± 8.50 vm; trapezoid the trapezoid environments separately (Extended Data Fig. 5e) or for trials analysing
broad: 21.10 ± 10.95 vm; trapezoid narrow: 18.73 ± 4.67 vm) and spatial memory objects in the narrow and broad parts of the trapezoid (Extended Data Fig. 5f).
performance (Extended Data Fig. 5e,f). Next, we assessed the rotations that participants made during the replacement
phase of the trial. To achieve this, we centred the rotation of the body, as measured
Positional memory. Raw positional-memory errors were quantified as the by the orientation of the motion platform’s ring construction, and the orientation
Euclidean distance between the correct position of an object in the environment of the participant’s head, as tracked by the HMD, on the direction from start to
and the position remembered by the participant. To limit the influence of response position. We averaged orientation values for trials within the square and
outlier trials, we excluded trials with errors larger than 1.5× the interquartile trapezoid environments, or the broad and narrow parts of the trapezoid, and tested
distance above the upper quartile of errors for each participant (mean ± s.e.m. for clustering around 0° using v-tests and differences in averaged orientation
number of trials excluded per participant = 3.35 ± 0.26) from all further analyses. values between conditions using Watson–Williams tests71 (Extended Data Fig. 6,
Average positional-memory errors were compared across environments using top). Furthermore, we quantified the circular variance of centred orientation
a bootstrap-based paired t-test (Fig. 2a). To account for the fact that, despite values and contrasted it across conditions (Extended Data Fig. 6, bottom). None of
the equal area, larger errors are possible in the trapezoid compared with the these measures suggested that navigation behaviour alone had influenced the key
square control environment, we subsequently quantified performance using conclusions of the paper.
memory scores. Specifically, we generated a distribution of 1,000 random Furthermore, we tested the sampling of directions separately for trials targeting
locations uniformly covering each environment and, for each trial, quantified the objects in the narrow and broad parts of the trapezoid. For each of 36 angular bins
proportion of locations that were further away from the correct object position with a width of 10°, we computed the proportion of time points during which
than the position indicated by the participant. Importantly, calculating memory participants’ bodies faced the direction of that bin. We averaged these proportions
scores on the basis of the distribution of possible errors for each target position across participants for the polar histogram in Extended Data Fig. 7a. To test
yields a measure that is comparable across positions and environments37 with whether angular sampling was biased towards the long and short base of the
a chance level of 0.5 for random performance and scores closer to 1 for high trapezoid, we calculated the angular mean for each participant and used v-tests to
performance. To test the hypothesis of degraded spatial memory in the trapezoid, test for a clustering around 180° and 0°, respectively. We next quantified average
memory scores were compared across environments using a bootstrap-based movement velocity for each direction bin (Extended Data Fig. 7b). We weighted
paired t-test (Fig. 2b). directions by average velocity to compute a circular mean for each participant.
Next, we aimed to test the more specific hypothesis of increased degradation Again, we tested using v-tests whether the resulting circular means clustered
of positional memory in the narrow part of the trapezoid compared with the broad around 180° and 0° for trials in which target objects were located in the broad and
part, derived from the larger distortions of firing patterns of grid cells in this part narrow parts of the environment, respectively.
NATuRe HuMAN BeHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaturE HumaN BEHaviOur
Distance-estimation tasks. After completing the time-estimation task To match the coordinates that resulted from MDS to the original positions in
following the second object-position memory task in the second environment, the virtual environment, we used Procrustes analysis, which enabled translation,
the participants estimated distances between pairs of object positions in two scaling, reflection and rotation (an application of the combination of MDS and
modalities: on a computer screen and by walking the actual distances in VR. Procrustes analysis to fMRI data was described previously74). The goodness of
fit, the Procrustes distance, was quantified by the normalized sum of squared
Virtual reality. The participants were placed in the same circular virtual arena as errors between the reconstructed and true coordinates, and was compared
the familiarization session. Each trial began with an arrow pointing to the middle with Procrustes distances that resulted from the Procrustes analyses of the
of the arena, with the arrow appearing at a random location on the arena floor. MDS coordinates and sets of coordinates in which the assignment of object
After the participants positioned themselves on the base of the arrow, images of identity to position was shuffled, yielding a surrogate distribution from all 720
two objects were presented in front of them for 3 s (Fig. 3a). The participants were possible permutations. Specifically, we tested on the group level whether the fits
instructed to walk the distance that they remembered the objects to be apart on the between reconstructed coordinates and true coordinates were better than the fits
basis of the object-position memory task while following the direction indicated by constituting the 5th percentile (reflecting the threshold for statistical significance at
the arrow. When the participants terminated a trial by button press, a checkmark α = 0.05) of each participant’s surrogate distribution (Fig. 4b,c). The reconstructed
was presented to indicate the successful registration of the response and the next coordinates are shown as heat maps (Extended Data Fig. 9b) following the same
trial began. Owing to time constraints, this task was restricted to distances between procedure as described above.
objects within a triplet, resulting in 12 trials making up a block. The trial order To test whether the reconstructed positions indeed reflected participants’
within blocks was randomized with the constraint that trials with objects from the memory in the object-position memory task, we recalculated the memory scores
two environments alternated. The participants completed two blocks with a short as described above but with the coordinates resulting from the Procrustes analysis
break in between. instead of the true object positions as goal positions (Fig. 4d). To rule out that
As only the distances within a triplet of positions were tested during this the effect was driven by objects for which positions were reconstructed to be
task, participants’ averaged estimates for the long and short distances were remembered outside of the environment, we excluded all of the affected trials from
compared using a bootstrap-based paired t-test as an indicator of successful task the memory score calculation in an additional control analysis. To describe the
performance (Extended Data Fig. 8a). To test whether distance estimates for the overlap between positions reconstructed from distance estimates and performance
same distances differed between environments or the narrow and broad in the object-position memory task, we calculated error vectors on the basis of
parts of the trapezoid, we took advantage of the fact that true distances were the true object positions for both the reconstructed positions and the response
matched across position triplets and, therefore, across environment parts. positions from the object-position memory task. Specifically, we tested whether
The distance estimates for the two triplets within an environment were averaged error vectors were of a similar length and had a similar orientation to demonstrate
and contrasted between the square and trapezoid using bootstrap-based that positions were shifted by a similar distance and in a similar direction. We
t-tests (Fig. 3c). Similarly, response distances within a triplet were averaged quantified the match between average error vectors of response and reconstructed
and compared between the narrow and the broad parts of the trapezoid using positions by correlating their lengths using Pearson correlation (Fig. 4e). We
bootstrap-based t-tests (Fig. 3e). As for the difference in positional memory, we further analysed the similarity in orientation of these error vectors by averaging
created a surrogate distribution to compare the difference in distance estimation the angular differences between vectors from the correct to the respective response
observed between the trapezoid halves and the square by shuffling across and reconstructed positions for each participant and testing the resulting circular
participants which half of the square was to serve as the minuend and subtrahend means for a clustering around 0° using a v-test (Fig. 4f).
for the distance difference in each of 10,000 permutations. The distance difference
observed in the trapezoid was more extreme than the 2.5th and 97.5th percentiles Time-estimation task. To probe whether attentional demands differed between
(two-tailed test) of this surrogate distribution (Extended Data Fig. 8e). The environments, we included a secondary task while participants performed the
shape of the surrogate distribution did not differ statistically from normality object-position memory task. If attentional demand differed across environments,
(Kolmogorov–Smirnov test, D = 0.01, P = 0.200). we would expect to see differences in the performance of the secondary task. In the
sky above each arena, a ring was presented that changed colour four times during
Computer monitor. Afterwards, the participants were instructed to estimate the object-position memory task per environment. The ring remained in a
distances between object pairs on a desktop computer setup. Images of objects on given colour for an interval between 2 min and 6 min and the participants
a white background, as well as an adjustable horizontal bar with the labels ‘close indicated colour changes by button presses and were instructed to remember the
together’ on the left and ‘far apart’ on the right were presented on a computer order of colours and the duration of the presentation of each colour. Although
screen (Fig. 3c). Again, participants were instructed to estimate how far objects different colours were presented in the two environments, the intervals between
were apart during the object-location memory task. Here, they indicated their colour changes were constant across environments, allowing for a comparison of
response by adjusting the horizontal bar using a computer mouse, after which a temporal memory between square and trapezoid environments.
grey screen was shown for 500 ms. All of the possible combinations of distances After completing the object-position memory task in an environment, the
were analysed, that is, including comparisons across triplets, yielding subjective participants were placed in front of a computer screen to estimate the time
distances between all pairs of object positions in an environment. Each of the 15 between colour changes before continuing with the next part of the experiment
combinations of object pairs per environment was probed twice, resulting in a total (Fig. 1a). On a white screen, two pairs of consecutive colours were shown and
of 60 trials. The trial order was randomized with the constraint that each possible the participants indicated the time interval that they remembered between the
pair of objects was sampled before any object combination was sampled for the two colour changes in minutes and seconds, for example, how much time passed
second time. Each object was shown once on the left and once on the right side of between the ring changing colour from blue to yellow and changing from yellow
the screen in the two trials sampling a given object pair. This distance-estimation to green. The participants were cued to estimate the time between all six possible
task, as well as the time-estimation task, was presented using the Psychophysics combinations of colour changes per environment. To ensure full understanding of
Toolbox73 for MATLAB (release 2016a). General performance in this task was this task, the participants estimated intervals between colour changes occurring at
assessed by calculating Spearman correlations between the estimated distances random times every 30 s to 120 s during the familiarization phase before the object-
and the respective true distances (Extended Data Fig. 8b). Furthermore, the position memory task. Overall performance in this task was quantified using
distance estimates were contrasted between environments and between the narrow Spearman correlations between the correct and estimated time intervals before
and broad parts of the trapezoid as described above. The surrogate distribution specifically comparing average estimation errors, absolute estimation errors and
obtained for comparison to the square did not differ statistically from normality the s.d. of estimation errors across environments (Extended Data Fig. 10).
(Kolmogorov–Smirnov test, D = 0.01, P = 0.167).
Successor representation grid patterns. Following Stachenfeld et al.32, simulated
Reconstructing remembered positions. To reconstruct the positions of grid cells were generated using the first 50 non-constant eigenvectors of the SR
remembered objects in the trapezoid from distance estimates, MDS was applied matrix under a uniform random-walk policy for a square (90 × 90cm) and a
to the distance estimates that were obtained in the desktop version of the task, as trapezoid (length 187 cm, parallel walls 90 cm and 20 cm, based on Krupic et al.10).
distances were estimated between all pairs of positions only in the desktop version Eigenvectors were thresholded at zero and scaled to a peak firing rate of 30 Hz.
of the task. The estimated distances were normalized to a range from 0 to 1 and To assess the distortion of SR grid fields within the trapezoidal environment, we
averaged across the two repetitions of each object pair and subjected to MDS to divided the square and trapezoid environments into halves across the longest axis
recover coordinates that reflected this distance structure using metric stress as the and computed the spatial autocorrelation of the SR grid rate maps on each half.
cost function and a random initial configuration of points. Our approach assumed Grid similarity was then calculated by taking the Pearson correlation between
that two dimensions underlie the object location memory formed during the the autocorrelations from each half of the environment (Fig. 1f). As the shortest
navigation task. To assess whether this assumption holds, we compared the model dimension of the trapezoid was 20 spatial bins, a circular window of radius 40
deviance of general linear models predicting the distances between true positions spatial bins was used to compare the autocorrelations ensuring the window for
from the positions recovered from MDS for different numbers of dimensions. comparison never went off the autocorrelation map.
As expected, unexplained variance was substantially decreased when using two The decoding analysis sampled each spatial bin (1 cm2) of the environment 30
instead of one dimension, but no clear improvement resulted from a larger number times. On each occasion, for each of the 50 cells, spikes were randomly generated
of dimensions (Extended Data Fig. 9). for a 100 ms time window according to a Poisson process with rate parameters
NATuRe HuMAN BeHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaturE HumaN BEHaviOur Articles
equal to the SR grids’ firing rates in that bin. The locations were then decoded 14. Moser, E. I., Moser, M.-B. & McNaughton, B. L. Spatial representation in the
using the maximum likelihood estimate of all 50 SR grid spike counts, and hippocampal formation: a history. Nat. Neurosci. 20, 1448–1464 (2017).
errors were calculated as the Euclidean distance between the true and decoded 15. Barry, C., Hayman, R., Burgess, N. & Jeffery, K. J. Experience-dependent
locations36,75 (Fig. 1g,h). Decoding errors were normalized so that errors in the rescaling of entorhinal grids. Nat. Neurosci. 10, 682–684 (2007).
square environment and broad part of the trapezoid had a mean of 1 for the 16. Brun, V. H. et al. Progressive increase in grid scale from dorsal to ventral
comparison between environments and trapezoid halves, respectively. medial entorhinal cortex. Hippocampus 18, 1200–1212 (2008).
To analyse differences in the spatial frequencies of the SR grids, we 17. Stensola, H. et al. The entorhinal grid map is discretized. Nature 492,
calculated the two-dimensional fast Fourier transform (FFT) for each rate map 72–78 (2012).
and reparametrized the FFT into polar coordinates. Power spectra were then 18. Jacobs, J. et al. Direct recordings of grid-like neuronal activity in human
considered solely as a function of radial frequency by averaging across the spatial navigation. Nat. Neurosci. 16, 1188–1190 (2013).
angular component of the FFT (Extended Data Fig. 3). Finally, we calculated the 19. Nadasdy, Z. et al. Context-dependent spatially periodic activity in the human
mean radial frequency of each SR grid and compared these across and within entorhinal cortex. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 114, E3516–E3525 (2017).
environments (Fig. 1i,j). Statistical significance of all SR grid pattern analyses was 20. Doeller, C. F., Barry, C. & Burgess, N. Evidence for grid cells in a human
assessed using standard two-sample t-tests. The bias-corrected difference between memory network. Nature 463, 657–661 (2010).
means divided by the pooled s.d. served as the effect size and is reported with 21. McNaughton, B. L., Battaglia, F. P., Jensen, O., Moser, E. I. & Moser, M.-B.
bootstrapped 95% confidence intervals70. Path integration and the neural basis of the ‘cognitive map’. Nat. Rev.
Likelihood analyses were performed separately for both the positional-memory Neurosci. 7, 663–678 (2006).
and distance-estimation tasks. For each task, the proportional differences in 22. Fiete, I. R., Burak, Y. & Brookings, T. What grid cells convey about rat
participants’ responses from the square-trapezoid and within-trapezoid contrasts location. J. Neurosci. 28, 6858–6871 (2008).
were compared to the distribution of proportional differences expected by the 23. Burak, Y. & Fiete, I. R. Accurate path integration in continuous attractor
SR model. The same was performed for a null model using the same distribution network models of grid cells. PLoS Comput. Biol. 5, e1000291 (2009).
of proportional differences as the SR, but with a shifted mean to predict no overall 24. Mathis, A., Herz, A. V. M. & Stemmler, M. Optimal population codes
difference in the square-trapezoid and within-trapezoid contrasts. Likelihoods for space: grid cells outperform place cells. Neural Comput. 24,
from the square–trapezoid and within-trapezoid contrasts were combined within 2280–2317 (2012).
tasks to give the likelihood of the human responses given each of the models for 25. Bush, D., Barry, C., Manson, D. & Burgess, N. Using grid cells for navigation.
both the positional memory and distance-estimation tasks. The Bayes factor BF 10 Neuron 87, 507–520 (2015).
was calculated as the ratio between the two model likelihoods. We report twice 26. Herz, A. V., Mathis, A. & Stemmler, M. Periodic population codes: from a
the natural logarithm of the Bayes factor (2ln(BF 10)) as it has a similar scale to single circular variable to higher dimensions, multiple nested scales, and
familiar likelihood ratio test statistics76. According to the conventions by Kass and conceptual spaces. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 46, 99–108 (2017).
Raftery76, 2ln(BF 10) > 10 constitutes very strong evidence for the alternative over 27. Banino, A. et al. Vector-based navigation using grid-like representations in
the null model. artificial agents. Nature 557, 429–433 (2018).
28. Carpenter, F. & Barry, C. Distorted grids as a spatial label and metric.
Reporting Summary. Further information on research design is available in the Trends Cogn. Sci. 20, 164–167 (2016).
Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article. 29. Sun, C. et al. Distinct speed dependence of entorhinal island and ocean
cells, including respective grid cells. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 112,
Data availability 9466–9471 (2015).
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the 30. Chen, X., He, Q., Kelly, J. W., Fiete, I. R. & McNamara, T. P. Bias in human
corresponding authors on reasonable request. path integration Is predicted by properties of grid cells. Curr. Biol. 25,
1771–1776 (2015).
Code availability 31. Dayan, P. Improving generalization for temporal difference learning: the
successor representation. Neural Comput. 5, 613–624 (1993).
The custom code that supports the findings of this study is available from the
32. Stachenfeld, K. L., Botvinick, M. M. & Gershman, S. J. The hippocampus as a
corresponding authors on reasonable request.
predictive map. Nat. Neurosci. 20, 1643–1653 (2017).
33. Momennejad, I. et al. The successor representation in human reinforcement
Received: 6 August 2018; Accepted: 4 October 2019;
learning. Nat. Hum. Behav. 1, 680 (2017).
Published: xx xx xxxx 34. Russek, E. M., Momennejad, I., Botvinick, M. M., Gershman, S. J. & Daw, N. D.
Predictive representations can link model-based reinforcement learning to
References model-free mechanisms. PLoS Comput. Biol. 13, e1005768 (2017).
1. Cheng, K. & Newcombe, N. S. Is there a geometric module for spatial 35. Gershman, S. J. The successor representation: its computational logic and
orientation? Squaring theory and evidence. Psychon. Bull. Rev. 12, neural substrates. J. Neurosci. 38, 7193–7200 (2018).
1–23 (2005). 36. Towse, B. W., Barry, C., Bush, D. & Burgess, N. Optimal configurations of
2. Julian, J. B., Keinath, A. T., Marchette, S. A. & Epstein, R. A. The spatial scale for grid cell firing under noise and uncertainty. Proc. R. Soc. B
neurocognitive basis of spatial reorientation. Curr. Biol. 28, 369, 20130290 (2014).
R1059–R1073 (2018). 37. Jacobs, J. et al. Direct electrical stimulation of the human entorhinal region
3. Cheng, K. A purely geometric module in the rat’s spatial representation. and hippocampus impairs memory. Neuron 92, 983–990 (2016).
Cognition 23, 149–178 (1986). 38. Kubie, J. L. & Fenton, A. A. Linear look-ahead in conjunctive cells: an
4. Margules, J. & Gallistel, C. R. Heading in the rat: determination by entorhinal mechanism for vector-based navigation. Front. Neural Circuits 6,
environmental shape. Anim. Learn. Behav. 16, 404–410 (1988). 20 (2012).
5. Hermer, L. & Spelke, E. S. A geometric process for spatial reorientation in 39. Erdem, U. M. & Hasselmo, M. A goal-directed spatial navigation model using
young children. Nature 370, 57–59 (1994). forward trajectory planning based on grid cells: forward linear look-ahead
6. Kelly, J. W., McNamara, T. P., Bodenheimer, B., Carr, T. H. & Rieser, J. J. The trajectory model. Eur. J. Neurosci. 35, 916–931 (2012).
shape of human navigation: how environmental geometry is used in 40. Gil, M. et al. Impaired path integration in mice with disrupted grid cell firing.
maintenance of spatial orientation. Cognition 109, 281–286 (2008). Nat. Neurosci. 21, 81–91 (2018).
7. Doeller, C. F. & Burgess, N. Distinct error-correcting and incidental learning 41. Stangl, M. et al. Compromised grid-cell-like representations in old age as a
of location relative to landmarks and boundaries. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA key mechanism to explain age-related navigational deficits. Curr. Biol. 28,
105, 5909–5914 (2008). 1108–1115 (2018).
8. Doeller, C. F., King, Ja & Burgess, N. Parallel striatal and hippocampal 42. Kunz, L. et al. Reduced grid-cell–like representations in adults at genetic risk
systems for landmarks and boundaries in spatial memory. Proc. Natl Acad. for Alzheimer’s disease. Science 350, 430–433 (2015).
Sci. USA 105, 5915–5920 (2008). 43. Sturz, B. R., Gurley, T. & Bodily, K. D. Orientation in trapezoid-shaped
9. Lee, S. A. et al. Electrophysiological signatures of spatial boundaries in the enclosures: implications for theoretical accounts of geometry learning.
human subiculum. J. Neurosci. 38, 3265–3272 (2018). J. Exp. Psychol. 37, 246–253 (2011).
10. Krupic, J., Bauza, M., Burton, S., Barry, C. & O’Keefe, J. Grid cell symmetry is 44. Twyman, A. D., Holden, M. P. & Newcombe, N. S. First direct evidence
shaped by environmental geometry. Nature 518, 232–235 (2015). of cue integration in reorientation: a new paradigm. Cogn. Sci. 42,
11. Krupic, J., Bauza, M., Burton, S. & O’Keefe, J. Local transformations of the 923–936 (2018).
hippocampal cognitive map. Science 359, 1143–1146 (2018). 45. O’Keefe, J. & Dostrovsky, J. The hippocampus as a spatial map. Preliminary
12. Stensola, T., Stensola, H., Moser, M.-B. & Moser, E. I. Shearing-induced evidence from unit activity in the freely-moving rat. Brain Res. 34,
asymmetry in entorhinal grid cells. Nature 518, 207–212 (2015). 171–175 (1971).
13. Hafting, T., Fyhn, M., Molden, S., Moser, M.-B. & Moser, E. I. Microstructure 46. Hartley, T., Trinkler, I. & Burgess, N. Geometric determinants of human
of a spatial map in the entorhinal cortex. Nature 436, 801–806 (2005). spatial memory. Cognition 94, 39–75 (2004).
NATuRe HuMAN BeHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaturE HumaN BEHaviOur
47. Schuck, N. W., Doeller, C. F., Polk, T. A., Lindenberger, U. & Li, S.-C. Human 69. Lakens, D. Calculating and reporting effect sizes to facilitate cumulative science:
aging alters the neural computation and representation of space. NeuroImage a practical primer for t-tests and ANOVAs. Front. Psychol. 4, 863 (2013).
117, 141–150 (2015). 70. Hentschke, H. & Stüttgen, M. C. Computation of measures of effect size for
48. Taube, J. S., Valerio, S. & Yoder, R. M. Is navigation in virtual reality with neuroscience data sets. Eur. J. Neurosci. 34, 1887–1894 (2011).
fMRI really navigation? J. Cogn. Neurosci. 25, 1008–1019 (2013). 71. Berens, P. CircStat: A MATLAB toolbox for circular statistics. J. Stat. Softw.
49. Campbell, M. G. et al. Principles governing the integration of landmark and 31, 10 (2009).
self-motion cues in entorhinal cortical codes for navigation. Nat. Neurosci. 72. Cakmak, T. & Hager, H. Cyberith virtualizer: a locomotion device for virtual
21, 1096–1106 (2018). reality. In Proc. ACM SIGGRAPH 2014 Emerging Technologies https://doi.
50. Chen, G., Lu, Y., King, J. A., Cacucci, F. & Burgess, N. Differential influences org/10.1145/2614066.2614105 (ACM, 2014).
of environment and self-motion on place and grid cell firing. Nat. Commun. 73. Brainard, D. H. The Psychophysics Toolbox. Spatial Vision 10, 433–436 (1997).
10, 630 (2019). 74. Bellmund, J. L. S., Deuker, L. & Doeller, C. F. Mapping sequence structure in
51. Boto, E. et al. Moving magnetoencephalography towards real-world the human lateral entorhinal cortex. eLife 8, e45333 (2019).
applications with a wearable system. Nature 555, 657–661 (2018). 75. Stemmler, M., Mathis, A. & Herz, A. V. M. Connecting multiple spatial scales
52. Cadwallader, M. Problems in cognitive distance: implications for cognitive to decode the population activity of grid cells. Sci. Adv. 1, e1500816 (2015).
mapping. Environ. Behav. 11, 559–576 (1979). 76. Kass, R. E. & Raftery, A. E. Bayes factors. J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 90, 773–795 (1995).
53. Sadalla, E. K., Burroughs, W. J. & Staplin, L. J. Reference points in spatial
cognition. J. Exp. Psychol. 6, 516–528 (1980). Acknowledgements
54. Thorndyke, P. W. Distance estimation from cognitive maps. Cogn. Psychol. 13,
We thank J. N. Pereira for pilot work that led to the final experimental design. The
526–550 (1981).
research of C.F.D. is supported by the Max Planck Society, the European Research
55. McNamara, T. P. Mental representations of spatial relations. Cogn. Psychol. 18,
Council (ERC-CoG GEOCOG 724836), the Kavli Foundation, the Centre of Excellence
87–121 (1986).
scheme of the Research Council of Norway—Centre for Neural Computation (223262),
56. McNamara, T. P. & Diwadkar, V. A. Symmetry and asymmetry of human
The Egil and Pauline Braathen and Fred Kavli Centre for Cortical Microcircuits, the
spatial memory. Cogn. Psychol. 34, 160–190 (1997).
National Infrastructure scheme of the Research Council of Norway—NORBRAIN and
57. Newcombe, N., Huttenlocher, J., Sandberg, E., Lie, E. & Johnson, S. What do
the Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research (NWO-Vidi 452-12-009; NWO-
misestimations and asymmetries in spatial judgement indicate about spatial
Gravitation 024-001-006; NWO-MaGW 406-14-114; NWO-MaGW 406-15-291). C.B.
representation? J. Exp. Psychol. 25, 986–996 (1999).
and W.C. are supported by a Wellcome Senior Research Fellowship (212281/Z/18/Z). The
58. Brunec, I. K., Javadi, A.-H., Zisch, F. E. L. & Spiers, H. J. Contracted time and
funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish or
expanded space: the impact of circumnavigation on judgements of space and
preparation of the manuscript.
time. Cognition 166, 425–432 (2017).
59. Jafarpour, A. & Spiers, H. Familiarity expands space and contracts time.
Author contributions
Hippocampus 27, 12–16 (2017).
60. O’Keefe, J. & Nadel, L. The Hippocampus as a Cognitive Map J.L.S.B., C.B. and C.F.D. conceived the experiment. J.L.S.B., T.A.R., M.N. and C.F.D.
(Clarendon Press, 1978). designed the experiment. T.A.R. collected the data. J.L.S.B. analysed the data and
61. Bellmund, J. L. S., Deuker, L., Navarro Schröder, T. & Doeller, C. F. Grid-cell wrote the manuscript with input from M.N., C.B. and C.F.D. W.C. performed the
representations in mental simulation. eLife 5, e17089 (2016). model analysis under supervision of C.B. All of the authors discussed the results and
62. Horner, A. J., Bisby, J. A., Zotow, E., Bush, D. & Burgess, N. Grid-like contributed to the final manuscript.
processing of imagined navigation. Curr. Biol. 26, 842–847 (2016).
63. Byrne, P., Becker, S. & Burgess, N. Remembering the past and imagining the Competing interests
future: a neural model of spatial memory and imagery. Psychol. Rev. 114, The authors declare no competing interests.
340–375 (2007).
64. Buckner, R. L. The role of the hippocampus in prediction and imagination.
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 61, 27–48 (2010). Additional information
65. Hasselmo, M. E. How We Remember: Brain Mechanisms of Episodic Memory Extended data is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-019-0767-3.
(MIT Press, 2011).
Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/
66. Bellmund, J. L. S., Gärdenfors, P., Moser, E. I. & Doeller, C. F. Navigating
s41562-019-0767-3.
cognition: spatial codes for human thinking. Science 362,
eaat6766 (2018). Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to J.L.S.B. or C.F.D.
67. Constantinescu, A. O., O’Reilly, J. X. & Behrens, T. E. J. Organizing Peer review information Primary Handling Editor: Marike Schiffer.
conceptual knowledge in humans with a gridlike code. Science 352,
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
1464–1468 (2016).
68. Delorme, A. & Makeig, S. EEGLAB: an open source toolbox for analysis of Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
single-trial EEG dynamics including independent component analysis. published maps and institutional affiliations.
J. of Neurosci. Methods 134, 9–21 (2004). © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2019
NATuRe HuMAN BeHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaturE HumaN BEHaviOur Articles
Extended Data Fig. 1 | Successor representation eigenvectors. A,B. The first 50 eigenvectors of the successor representation from a trapezoid and a
square environment were used for analysis.
NATuRe HuMAN BeHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaturE HumaN BEHaviOur
Extended Data Fig. 2 | Position decoding based on the smallest rectangle enclosing the trapezoid. A. To demonstrate that worse position decoding
in the trapezoid is due to the distorted eigenvector grid patterns and not the elongated shape of the environment we analyzed the eigenvectors of the
smallest rectangle enclosing the trapezoid. We repeated the position decoding on the area of the trapezoid based on the SR grid patterns from the smallest
rectangle. B. Position decoding errors were larger when the analysis was based on the distorted grid patterns of the trapezoid rather than the regular grid
patterns generated on the smallest rectangle enclosing the trapezoid (two-sample t-test: t(58)=64.52, p<0.001, d=16.44, 95%-CI: 14.29; 20.46).
C. The 50 eigenvector grid patterns used in this analysis.
NATuRe HuMAN BeHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaturE HumaN BEHaviOur Articles
Extended Data Fig. 3 | Spatial frequencies of eigenvector grid patterns. A,B. Radial power spectra based on two-dimensional FFT averaged across the 50
SR grid patterns. Average spatial frequencies were higher in the square than the trapezoid (A) and higher in the narrow compared to the broad part of the
trapezoid (B). Dotted lines indicate mean radial frequencies.
NATuRe HuMAN BeHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaturE HumaN BEHaviOur
Extended Data Fig. 4 | Positional memory. A. Distribution of average memory scores across participants. Grey area indicates normal kernel density
estimate, solid white line shows median and dashed white lines show upper and lower quartile of distribution. Black circles show memory scores of
individual participants. B. Positional memory error difference between the two parts of the trapezoid. Higher values indicate larger errors in the narrow
part of the trapezoid. Data points more than 1.5 times the interquartile range above or below the upper or lower quartile were excluded as outliers
(grey dots) for the main analysis, but comparable results are obtained without outlier exclusion (t(36)=1.50, p=0.020, d=0.25, 95%-CI: -0.06; 0.50).
Boxplot represents median as well as upper and lower quartile of distribution, whiskers show most extreme value within 1.5 times the interquartile range
from the upper and lower quartile respectively. C. The positional memory error difference observed between the trapezoid parts (dashed line represents
mean difference across participants) was significantly lower than the critical value (5th percentile, dotted line) of a shuffle distribution (blue) obtained
from computing error difference between the square halves across 10000 iterations. D. Heatmaps showing response locations for all trials across all
participants for objects in the broad (top) and narrow (bottom) part of the trapezoid. Dotted lines show correct location in x- and y-dimension with their
intersection representing the true position. e. Relationships between the distance to the closest boundary and the memory score were quantified using
Pearson correlation. Correlation coefficients were consistently negative in the square, indicating better memory for positions closer to the wall.
No statistically significant difference from zero was observed for correlation coefficients in the trapezoid and correlations differed between environments.
* p<0.05 *** p<0.001.
NATuRe HuMAN BeHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaturE HumaN BEHaviOur Articles
Extended Data Fig. 5 | Navigation performance does not differ between environments. A,B. There were no statistically significant differences in the
excess path lengths of the trajectories from start to response positions between (A) square and trapezoid or (B) the two parts of the trapezoid.
C,D. There were no statistically significant differences in walking speed between (C) square and trapezoid or (D) the two parts of the trapezoid. e,F. There
was no statistically significant difference from zero in Spearman correlation coefficients between the Euclidean distance from the start positions to the
correct object positions and replacement errors (e) in the square or trapezoid or (F) for objects located in the broad and narrow part of the trapezoid
separately. Bars show mean±SEM and grey circles indicate individual subject data with lines connecting data points from the same participant.
NATuRe HuMAN BeHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaturE HumaN BEHaviOur
Extended Data Fig. 6 | Head and body orientation during navigation. A,B. Circular means in degrees of (A) body and (B) head rotations centered on each
trial’s direction from start to response position. Means were significantly clustered around 0° for both square and trapezoid and there was no statistically
significant difference between them. C,D. Circular means of (C) body and (D) head rotations centered on each trial’s direction from start to response
position. Means were significantly clustered around 0° for trials with target object positions in the broad and narrow part of the trapezoid, respectively,
and there was no statistically significant difference between them. e. There was no statistically significant difference in the circular variance of body
rotations over trials averaged for each participant between square and trapezoid. F. The circular variance of head rotations over trials averaged for each
participant was larger in the trapezoid than in the square. G. There was no statistically significant difference in the circular variance of body rotations over
trials averaged for each participant between navigation periods for target objects located in the broad or narrow portion of the trapezoid. H. The circular
variance of head rotations over trials averaged for each participant was smaller when cued object position were in the broad compared to the narrow part
of the trapezoid. *** p<0.001.
NATuRe HuMAN BeHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaturE HumaN BEHaviOur Articles
Extended Data Fig. 7 | Angular and velocity sampling. A. Average angular sampling for 10° bins during navigation from a trial’s start position to the
remembered object location. Radial axis shows proportion of time points facing in a directional bin. For trial’s targeting objects in the broad part of the
trapezoid, participants mostly faced towards the long base of the trapezoid (180°), whereas they more frequently faced towards the short base (0°) when
targeting objects in the narrow part of the environment. B. Average movement speed (radial axis vm/s) for 10° directional bins for trials targeting objects
in the broad and narrow part of the trapezoid. Navigation speed was higher along the long axis of the environment as indicated by higher movement
speeds towards 0° and 180° for trials where participants targeted objects in the narrow and broad part of the trapezoid, respectively. In A and B, colored
lines and shaded area show mean and SEM, respectively.
NATuRe HuMAN BeHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaturE HumaN BEHaviOur
Extended Data Fig. 8 | Distance estimates. A. Long distances (i.e. the base of the isosceles triangle formed by a triplet of positions) were estimated to be
longer than the shorter distances (i.e. the legs of the isosceles triangle). Only within-triplet distances were estimated in VR. Bars show mean±SEM
and grey circles indicate individual subject data with lines connecting data points from the same participant. B. Grey area indicates distribution of
Spearman correlation (mean±SD r=0.69±0.19) coefficients between correct and estimated distances based on normal kernel density estimate. Solid
white line shows median and dashed white lines show upper and lower quartile. Black circles show correlation coefficients of individual participants.
C. The difference between distance estimates for identical distances in the square and the trapezoid was highly correlated between the computer screen
and the VR version of the task. D. Significant correlation of distance difference between the two parts of the trapezoid obtained from distance estimates on
the computer screen and in VR. Circles in C and D denote individual participant data; solid line shows least squares line; dashed lines and shaded region
highlight bootstrapped confidence intervals. e,F. The distance difference observed between the trapezoid parts (dashed line) was more extreme than the
critical values (dotted line) of the shuffle distribution (blue) obtained from computing the distance difference between the square halves across 10000
iterations for the distance estimates in VR (e) and on the PC (F).
NATuRe HuMAN BeHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaturE HumaN BEHaviOur Articles
Extended Data Fig. 9 | Two dimensions underlie distance estimates. A. Model deviance of GLMs using pairwise Euclidean distances of coordinates
obtained from MDS to predict estimated distances for different numbers of dimensions (solid line shows mean model deviance across participants,
shaded area indicates SEM). In line with our a priori assumption that two dimensions underlie the distance estimates, model deviance sharply drops
when using two rather than one dimension and there is no substantial benefit from including three or more dimensions. B. Heatmaps showing positions
reconstructed using multi-dimensional scaling and Procrustes transform for objects in the broad (top) and narrow (bottom) part of the trapezoid. Dotted
lines show correct position in x- and y-dimension with their intersection representing the true position.
NATuRe HuMAN BeHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaturE HumaN BEHaviOur
Extended Data Fig. 10 | No statistically significant differences in time estimates between environments. A. Grey area indicates distribution of Spearman
correlation coefficients (mean±SD r=0.77±0.23) between true and estimated times based on normal kernel density estimate. Solid white line shows
median and dashed white lines show upper and lower quartile. Black circles show correlation coefficients of individual participants. B-D. There were no
statistically significant differences between the two environments for (B) averaged time estimation errors, (C) averaged absolute time estimation errors or
(D) the variability of time estimates as measured by their standard deviation. Bars show mean±SEM and grey circles indicate individual subject data with
lines connecting data points from the same participant.
NATuRe HuMAN BeHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
1
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Corresponding author(s): Jacob L.S. Bellmund, Christian F. Doeller
Last updated by author(s): Oct 28, 2019
Reporting Summary
Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency
in reporting. For further information on Nature Research policies, see Authors & Referees and the Editorial Policy Checklist.
Statistics
For all statistical analyses, confirm that the following items are present in the figure legend, table legend, main text, or Methods section.
n/a Confirmed
The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
A statement on whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided
Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.
A description of all covariates tested
A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
A full description of the statistical parameters including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient)
AND variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)
For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted
Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.
For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated
Our web collection on statistics for biologists contains articles on many of the points above.
Software and code
Policy information about availability of computer code
Data collection Unreal Engine (v.4.13.2, Epic Games Inc., 2017)Psychophysics Toolbox for Matlab (Release 2016a, The MathWorks, Inc.)
Data analysis Matlab (Release 2017a, The MathWorks, Inc.) including the Circular Statistics Toolbox (http://www.jstatsoft.org/v31/i10/), EEGLAB and
custom code.
For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors/reviewers.
We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Research guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.
Data
Policy information about availability of data
All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable:
- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets
- A list of figures that have associated raw data
- A description of any restrictions on data availability
The data that supports the findings of this study are available from the corresponding authors upon request.
Field-specific reporting
Please select the one below that is the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.
Life sciences Behavioural & social sciences Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences
2
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/documents/nr-reporting-summary-flat.pdf
Life sciences study design
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
Sample size Sample size was based on a power calculation assuming a small to medium effect (d=0.4) of environmental geometry on human spatial
cognition, resulting in a sample size of 52 to achieve a statistical power of 80% (∝=0.05, two-tailed test).
Data exclusions 14 incomplete datasets due to technical difficulties with the VR setup or motion sickness.2 participants were excluded due to poor memory
performance defined as average replacement errors more than 1.5 times the interquartile range larger than the upper quartile of average
errors in the sample.
Replication One behavioral study was conducted and replication was not attempted.
Randomization Participants were not grouped and hence no randomization was performed. The order of environments was counter-balanced across
participants and object positions were randomized for each participant following the constraints described in the methods section.
Blinding Participants were not grouped and hence no blinding procedure was performed.
Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods
We require information from authors about some types of materials, experimental systems and methods used in many studies. Here, indicate whether each material,
system or method listed is relevant to your study. If you are not sure if a list item applies to your research, read the appropriate section before selecting a response.
Materials & experimental systems Methods
n/a Involved in the study n/a Involved in the study
Antibodies ChIP-seq
Eukaryotic cell lines Flow cytometry
Palaeontology MRI-based neuroimaging
Animals and other organisms
Human research participants
Clinical data
Human research participants
Policy information about studies involving human research participants
Population characteristics Healthy young adults (mean age 23.8±2.5 years, 36% female)
Recruitment Participants were recruited via online platforms and posters on the university campus.
Ethics oversight Regionale komiteer for medisinsk og helsefaglig forskningsetikk (REK, https://helseforskning.etikkom.no/).
For details of the specific project see:
https://helseforskning.etikkom.no/prosjekterirek/prosjektregister/prosjekt?p_document_id=809788&p_parent_id=816439
Note that full information on the approval of the study protocol must also be provided in the manuscript.