Meta-Psychology, 2020, vol 4, MP.2018.894, Open data: N/A Edited by: Åse Innes-Ker
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2018.894 Open materials: N/A Reviewed by: D. Meyer, M. Olson.
Article type: Original Article Open and reproducible analysis: N/A Analysis reproduced by: N/A
Published under the CC-BY4.0 license Open reviews and editorial process: Yes All supplementary files can be accessed at the OSF project
Preregistration: N/A page: https://osf.io/gdmb9/
Two Questions to Foster Critical Thinking in the Field of Psychology:
Are There Any Reasons to Expect a Different Outcome, and What Are
the Consequences If We Don’t Find What We Were Looking For?
Peter Holtz
Leibniz-Institut für Wissensmedien IWM, Tübingen, Germany
There are many factors that contribute to the present crisis of confidence in psychology,
among them epistemological causes: Under pressure to ‘publish or perish’ and to ‘get
visible or vanish’ in order to survive in an increasingly globalized academic job market,
psychologists may often be too eager to find their hypotheses confirmed by empirical
data. They may also not pay enough attention to alternative theories and consequently
often miss opportunities to learn from their failures to obtain the expected results in
their studies. In this paper, I propose to start asking two questions physicist John Platt
had proposed in 1964 on a regular basis in the field of psychology as a means of fostering
critical thinking or to encourage a critical approach to the growth of scientific
knowledge: Are there reasons to expect a different outcome, and what consequence is it
going to have if the study does not yield the expected results? I explore what potential
these two questions have for ensuring epistemological progress by asking them with re-
spect to social-priming research, which is one of the research programmes that have
recently been criticized in the course of the ‘reproducibility debate’.
Keywords: Epistemology, philosophy of science, critical rationalism, falsificationism,
strong inference, social priming, replicability, reproducibility, crisis of confidence.
In this paper I will argue that the reasons for the the researcher to consider empirical outcomes that
present ‘crisis’ in psychology can be attributed in are contrary to expectations. I will argue that these
part to epistemological deficiencies: Psychologists two questions can and should be asked with regard
are too eager to find their theories corroborated by to any empirical study, and that the field of psychol-
empirical evidence, they do not consider competing ogy would benefit from asking them on a regular ba-
theories often enough, and they often do not pay sis. If researchers were to do so, critical thinking or
enough attention to the inferences that can be a “critical approach” (Popper, 1962, p. 51) to the
drawn from not finding the expected results. How- growth of knowledge could become over time one of
ever, scores of philosophers (e.g., Dewey, the mainstays of research in psychology along with,
1903/2004; Popper, 1934/1959) and scientists (e.g. among others, methodological rigor, honesty, and
Feynman, 1974) have argued that as scientists, and as transparency. The usefulness of these two questions
human beings in general, we can learn most of all is explored by asking them with respect to one of the
from our mistakes. As a remedy to psychologists’ ap- fields of research that among many others has come
parently overly optimistic approach to scientific re- under scrutiny in the ensuing reproducibility debate
search, I will introduce two questions that physicist (e.g., Pashler & Wagenmakers, 2012): Research on so-
John Platt (1964) once proposed as a means of accel- cial priming (e.g., Bargh, Chen, & Burrows, 1996;
erating progress in science. The questions are re- Bargh & Chartrand, 1999).
lated to possible alternative theories and provoke
Holtz
2
The Present ‘Crisis of Confidence’ in Psychology publications was still, of course, a statistical one: The
way null-hypothesis tests are used in psychology
The problem is epistemology, not statistics does not put theories in “grave danger of refutation”
(1978, p. 806). In contrast to the hard sciences such
Much has been written and said about the “crisis
as physics, the theories or conjectures (if we want to
of confidence” (Pashler & Wagenmakers, 2012) in
use the term theory only for substantial and elabo-
psychology since the ominous years 2011 and 2012
rated systems of knowledge) in soft sciences such as
when Diederik Stapel’s academic fraud was discov-
psychology most often do not yield point predic-
ered, when Daryl Bem was able to publish a paper
tions in the sense that they predict a certain meas-
supposedly ‘proving’ human’s precognitive abilities
urable numerical outcome (see also Meehl, 1967). In
in the JPSP (Bem, 2011; see also Wagenmakers, Wet-
psychology, conjectures usually posit only that a
zels, Borsboom, & van der Maas, 2011), and when
given factor has some measurable influence on out-
doubts were cast on the reproducibility of social
come variables. As a consequence—the aforemen-
priming effects (Doyen, Klein, Pichon, &
tioned questionable research practices notwith-
Cleeremans, 2012). Consequently, initiatives such as
standing—even a random conjecture has in principle
the Open Science Collaboration (Open Science Col-
a 50% chance of being ‘verified’ in an empirical study
laboration, 2015) and the Many Labs Project (Klein et
given infinite sample sizes (unlimited statistical
al., 2014) set out to further investigate the degree to
power): With increasing numbers of participants,
which psychological studies can be replicated.
the null-hypothesis is more and more likely to be re-
A closely related problem is the apparently fre-
jected; when the number of participants converges
quent use of questionable research practices (QRPs;
towards infinity, the question is just whether the (al-
Fanelli, 2009; Leslie, Loewenstein, & Prelec, 2012;
most certainly significant) effect goes in the right di-
Martinson, Anderson, De Vries, 2005) such as p-
rection or not.
hacking (making a statistically non-significant result
These and other considerations prompted Meehl
appear significant; Simmons, Nelson, & Simonsohn,
to the conclusion that the established use of statis-
2011) or HARKing (making up hypothesis after the re-
tics in psychology leads to an overly optimistic ap-
sults are known while pretending that they had been
praisal of the truth status of psychological conjec-
formulated in advance; e.g. Kerr, 1998) in the field of
tures, while at the same time not enough attention
psychology. Taken together, these practices may
is paid to potential alternative explanations. As a
make the current practice of significance testing in
consequence, the growth of scientific knowledge in
psychology more or less obsolete: With enough per-
the field of psychology is not as fast or steady as it
severance, p-hacking, and HARKing, researchers
could be: By (more or less) only confirming what
can create empirical evidence in favor of more or
everyone believes to be true anyway, psychologists
less any theoretical assumption (Simmons, Nelson,
miss out on many opportunities to improve their
& Simonsohn, 2011; Gelman & Loken, 2013). As a con-
theories as a consequence of research findings con-
sequence, a reader of scientific publications in the
tradicting their assumptions. Similar arguments
field of psychology apparently cannot assume with
have been brought forward by a number of other au-
reasonable certainty that the reported research
thors before (e.g., Pettigrew, 1991; Meehl, 1990, 1997)
findings are ‘true’ in the sense that they could be
and after (e.g., Earp & Trafimow, 2015; Holtz & Mon-
replicated by independent researchers.
nerjahn, 2017) the emergence of the current crisis in
A number of authors have proposed statistical
psychology.
and methodological solutions to these problems
One of the reasons for the apparent unwanted
such as using Bayesian instead of frequentist statis-
optimism with regard to empirical confirmation of
tics (e.g., Marsman et al., 2017; Wagenmakers et al.,
one’s theory may be related to the strong publica-
2017) or using stricter thresholds in null-hypothesis
tion pressure that emerged over the course of the
tests (Benjamin et al., 2017). However, several other
“academic capitalism” which developed in the 20th
authors (e.g., Holtz & Monnerjahn, 2017, Strack, 2017)
century (Münch, 2014): Scientists increasingly have
reiterated Paul Meehl’s statement from 1997 that
to publish or perish and to get visible or vanish (Doyle
“The problem is epistemology, not statistics” (p.
& Cuthill, 2015; Holtz, Deutschmann, & Dobewall,
394). Meehl’s point of departure here and in other
TWO QUESTIONS TO FOSTER CRITICAL THINKING 3
2017) as means of surviving in the academic job mar- problematic after he attacked a widespread com-
ket and of getting tenured positions. More than 90% mon sense assumption: Human beings don’t have
of the publications in the field of psychology present precognitive abilities. But how can we change such
evidence in favor of a theory (Fanelli, 2011; Sterling, salesman-like attitudes?
Rosenbaum, & Weinkam, 1995; Yong, 2012). Alterna-
tive hypotheses and competing theories are only Changing the hearts and minds of researchers
considered in a small number of cases (e.g., 21.6%
The focus of the paper presented here will be on
and 11.4% respectively of 236 JPSP articles which
questions about if and how unwanted optimism in
were published between 1982 and 2005, according
looking for confirmations of theories and finding
to Uchino, Thoman, and Byerly, 2010). Scientists
these theories too easily corroborated in empirical
more often than not build their careers around a
studies can be addressed in and of itself. I am not
certain ‘pet theory’ and their writings are mostly
going to discuss the specific statistical solutions
read and in turn cited by other scientists from the
Meehl and others have proposed for these problems.
same research community. Such communities are
Without denying the importance of the related sta-
built upon the assumption that a given theory is
tistical debates, I believe that a change for the better
‘true’ or at least useful in explaining relevant phe-
is not only needed in terms of methodology, but also
nomena. Hence, being overly optimistic with regard
in terms of the general mindset that guides psy-
to one’s pet theory can be a means of ensuring fund-
chologists in conducting their research.
ing, publications, and hence survival in a highly com-
Ioannidis (2005) wrote in his seminal article on
petitive academic world (for an extensive analysis
‘false positives’ in science: “Diminishing bias through
see Billig, 2013).
enhanced research standards and curtailing of prej-
This attitude of using empirical research as a
udices may also help. However, this may require a
sales angle for a theory to be tendered in the aca-
change in scientific mentality that might be difficult
demic market of ideas (and often enough in non-ac-
to achieve” (p. 0701). Apart from statistical recom-
ademic markets as well, such as consulting) was re-
mendations such as larger sample sizes and power
cently expressed in a very straightforward way by
analysis, Ioannidis also proposed to have research-
Daryl Bem in an interview with Slate magazine (Eng-
ers pre-register their intended studies whenever
ber, 2017): “If you looked at all my past experiments,
possible. This suggestion has been echoed by a
they were always rhetorical devices. I gathered data
number of scholars from the field of psychology
to show how my point would be made. I used data as
(e.g., Lindsay, Simons, & Lilienfeld, 2016; van’t Veer &
a point of persuasion, and I never really worried
Giner-Sonolla, 2016), and several journals have im-
about, ‘Will this replicate or will this not?’”. Whereas
plemented some form of a pre-registration policy
I believe that demanding ‘impartiality’ and ‘objectiv-
since then (see e.g., Chambers, Feredoes, Muthuku-
ity’ from researchers is illusory (see e.g., Holtz &
marasway, & Etchells, 2014; Jonas & Cesario, 2016).
Monnerjahn, 2017; Holtz & Odağ, 2018), I think nev-
Apart from pre-registration, in their manifesto
ertheless that the drawbacks of such a salesman-like
for reproducible science, Munafo and colleagues
approach to science are fairly obvious. Such an atti-
(2017) propose the ‘blinding’ of researchers as a
tude is particularly detrimental when there are no
means of protecting against cognitive biases (p. 2),
serious alternative theories regarding the phenom-
for example in the form of not telling those who an-
ena to be explained. Without competing theories,
alyze the data which data points represent the ex-
there is no competition on the market of ideas and
perimental condition. They suggest further
no ‘checks and balances’ by scientists holding differ-
measures, such as educating researchers about ef-
ent views, which, according to philosopher Karl
fects of questionable research practices and defin-
Popper (e.g., 1972) for example, are urgently needed
ing guidelines for making data collection and analy-
to keep researchers’ optimism with regard to their
sis processes more transparent. Researchers should
theories at bay. It should be noted that Bem’s habit
also be given incentive by funding agencies and pub-
of using data to show his point—which he likely em-
lishers for following these open science recommen-
ployed during most of his prodigious 50 plus-year
dations.
career in social psychology—was only regarded as
Holtz
4
I will argue in the next paragraphs in favor of possibilities that remain and so on. (p. 347)
making use of two simple questions that physicist
John Platt formulated in an article in 1964 as a means Of course, this idea is not new. Actually, the concept
of ensuring and accelerating progress in science in of “strong inference” by means of comparing com-
general. These two questions sum up in an easily un- peting theories had already been introduced by the
derstandable and accessible way the central ‘man- geologist Chamberlin in 1890, and the idea of an ex-
tra’ of competing approaches in current epistemol- perimentum crucis as a means of testing competing
ogy: Scientific progress can only be defined as an theories per se extends at least back to Bacon’s
advancement beyond existing knowledge, and we “Novum Organon Scientiarum” in the 17th century
can learn most of all from our mistakes. I will call (Bacon, 1620). It must also be noted that Platt’s ac-
such an approach to the growth of (scientific) counts of the history of strong inference and its use
knowledge critical thinking or a “critical approach” in modern science has been criticized for historical
(Popper, 1962, p.51). The advantage of my proposal is inaccuracies and for over-simplifying the issues that
that it can be implemented easily with any kind of are related to devising crucial experiments (e.g.,
study. Many of the aforementioned methodological O’Donohue & Buchanan, 2001). So why should we re-
and statistical measures more or less follow directly turn to his article, which was written over 50 years
from paying more attention to competing theories ago by a perhaps overly enthusiastic physicist, as a
and the falsification of results. Hence, I propose first potential partial remedy for the current crisis in
to tackle the ‘hearts and minds’ of researchers by in- psychology?
troducing a simple behavior pattern which will pre- Platt’s analysis of the problems in many scientific
pare the ground for the methodological suggestions fields corresponds to my (of course limited) experi-
mentioned above for improving the reproducibility ence in the field of psychology: Scientists—when
of psychological science. I believe that if only a small they are asked what science ideally should be like—
group of researchers would start asking these two usually know that they are supposed to be critical,
questions on a regular basis, there is a good chance employ rigorous tests of their theories, and compare
that critical thinking could become just as common- theories whenever possible. However, in our daily
place as preregistration and replicability research lives as scientists, our minds are occupied with
have become over the last years. other things: For example, we have to rapidly publish
our findings—lots of them—to keep our careers go-
ing, and we have lots of other everyday duties to ful-
Platt’s ‘Two Questions’
fill that may prevent us from employing the scien-
tific rigor that we know is needed. As Platt puts it:
Platt’s (1964) main point of departure was that,
How many of us write down our alternatives and
from his perspective, progress (at least during the
crucial experiments every day, focusing on the
1960s) apparently happened faster and more stead-
exclusion of a hypothesis? We may write our sci-
ily in certain branches of science such as high-en-
entific papers so that it looks as if we had steps 1,
ergy physics and molecular biology than in others.
2, and 3 in mind all along. But in between, we do
He attributed these differences to the frequent use
busywork. We become “method-oriented” rather
of strong inference in these disciplines. According to
than “problem-oriented.” We say we prefer to
him, strong inference entails the following steps:
“feel our way” toward generalizations. We fail to
1) Devising alternative hypotheses;
teach our students how to sharpen up their in-
2) Devising a crucial experiment (or several of
ductive inferences. (p. 348; emphasis as in the
them), with alternative possible outcomes,
original)
each of which will, as nearly as possible, ex-
However, the strongest part of Platt’s paper is in my
clude one or more of the hypotheses;
opinion his description of “aids” (p. 352) for the im-
3) Carrying out the experiment so as to get a
plementation of strong inference in the daily scien-
clean results;
tific practice. How can we—in the middle of our eve-
1') Recycling the procedure, making subhypothe-
ryday struggles—enforce a critical mindset upon
ses or sequential hypotheses to refine the
ourselves, our students, and our colleagues? Platt
proposes two simple questions that can and should
TWO QUESTIONS TO FOSTER CRITICAL THINKING 5
be asked about any scientific studies as means of setting up studies that once and for all could clarify
employing a “yardstick” (p. 352) for the study’s effec- which theory is right and which is wrong is probably
tiveness: naive in ignoring underdetermination, or the
[Question 1:] But sir, what experiment could dis- ‘Quine-Duhem Thesis’ (Harding, 1976): Research
prove your hypothesis?”; or, on hearing a scien- findings are not only influenced by the theoretical
tific experiment described, mechanisms that we want to test, but also by innu-
[Question 2:] But sir, what hypothesis does your merable so-called auxiliary hypotheses, ranging
experiment disprove? from rather trivial assumptions such as ‘our meas-
This goes straight to the heart of the matter. It urement instrument worked’ to serious hitherto un-
forces everyone to refocus on the central ques- known alternative explanations. For example, in
tion of whether there is or is not a testable scien- 1906, physicist Pierre Duhem mathematically
tific step forward. (p. 352) proved for a subfield of physics (Newton’s law of uni-
He continues: versal mutual gravitation) that the number of such
If such a question were asked aloud, many a sup- auxiliary hypotheses is necessarily infinite. Subse-
posedly great scientist would sputter and turn quently, philosopher W. V. O. Quine (1951) general-
livid and would want to throw the questioner out, ized Duhem’s argument to more or less everything
as a hostile witness! Such a man is less than he that can be known to human beings. The experimen-
appears, for he is obviously not accustomed to tum crucis idea also becomes critical whenever a
think in terms of alternative hypotheses and cru- theory does better at explaining certain phenomena
cial experiments for himself; and one might also in certain areas while a competing one offers better
wonder about the state of science in the field he explanations in other areas.
is in. But who knows?—the question might edu- However, Platt’s two questions also make lots of
cate him, and his field too! (p. 352) sense for those who are aware of the limits of em-
In the next section, I will discuss the epistemological piricism. For example, critical rationalists in the tra-
importance of these two questions as well as criti- dition of Karl Popper assume that no empirical
cism of the empiricist ‘success formula’ that Platt method whatsoever can clarify theoretical ques-
had presented in his paper. tions once and for all. All that empirical methods can
do is to discover inconsistencies between theoreti-
The Epistemological Importance of Platt’s “Two cal predictions and empirical results (falsification).
Questions” They can thus point towards ways in which theories
can be improved. Over time, employing such a criti-
First, it should be noted that to Platt, these two
cal mindset towards theories and working on ways
questions are in fact just one question. Following the
of improving them lead to a growth of knowledge in
empiricist tradition, Platt believed in the experi-
an evolutionary sense (Popper, 1972): Theories are
mentum crucis as the driving factor behind scien-
continuously replaced with better theories, and this
tific progress. In this sense, asking what kind of evi-
process refines our understanding of the world, alt-
dence could go against one’s theory is always the
hough we will never know with certainty whether or
same as asking for evidence that would support an-
not our theories are true in a metaphysical sense.
other theory, because the effectiveness of an exper-
Consequently, even without considering a com-
imentum crucis depends on the possibility of iden-
peting theory, just asking for empirical results that
tifying relevant competing theories as well as decid-
would go against a researcher’s expectations can in
ing which one is ‘wrong’ and which one is ‘right’.
itself be an important part of the research process:
Probably like every ‘Baconian’ ever since the 17th
Scientific progress is possible to the critical ration-
century, Platt may be oversimplifying matters here:
alist only through discovery of such inconsistencies.
First of all, it is not always possible to identify all of
For the second step, the replacement of theories
the relevant competing theories. Actually, in some
with ‘better’ theories, comparing and critically eval-
areas of science, we may be faced with the fact that
uating theories is pivotal for obvious reasons.
we have entered uncharted territory insofar as there
Hence, Platt’s ‘question’ can be put to use in critical
is at that point no theory yet that could explain the
rationalism only after making ‘two questions’ of the
phenomena in question. Furthermore, the idea of
one.
Holtz
6
In the next paragraph, I will formulate a more p. 167). It may be followed up by the question “And
generalized version of these questions that is partic- what consequences is it going to have if you get re-
ularly suited for use in all branches of psychology. sults that go against your expectations?”.
My objective here is again to facilitate the asking of In the following paragraphs I will attempt to
these questions on a regular basis as a means of demonstrate the usefulness of these two questions
making critical thinking or a critical approach with their follow-up questions for the field of psy-
“mainstream” in the field of psychology. I believe chology by asking them not about a single study, but
that without the ballast of a formalized empiricism, about what could maybe be called a research pro-
Platt’s two questions can be even stronger tools to gramme (Lakatos, 1978) in social psychology: Re-
foster critical thinking in the field of psychology. search on Social Priming (e.g., Bargh, Chen, & Bur-
rows, 1996; Bargh & Chartrand, 1999). I think a very
The two questions revisited
similar argument could be made for other research
programmes such as ego depletion research (in the
The way Platt formulated his questions may scare
tradition of Baumeister, Bratslavsky, Muraven, &
off some psychologists through the use of strong
terms such as ‘disprove’ and by explicitly mentioning Tice, 1998; for a critical perspective see e.g. Carter &
‘experiments’ as the method of choice. Because I be- McCull0ugh, 2014) or power posing research (in the
lieve that the same epistemological principles guide tradition of Carney, Cuddy, & Yap. 2010; for a critical
qualitative as well as quantitative research traditions perspective see e.g. Ranehill et al., 2015).
in psychology (see Holtz & Odağ, 2018), I would like It is important to keep in mind that I do not want
to introduce a more generalized wording of Platt’s to propagate the idea of strong inference in the
two questions that in my opinion is better suited for sense of Platt (1964). I just want to use his two ques-
use in a multifaceted field such as psychology. tions to explore in the form of a thought experiment
New wording for the first question should ad- how psychology would benefit from more critical
dress the identification of possible competing theo- thinking or a critical approach.
ries, for example in the following form: “Are there
any reasons to expect a different outcome than the
The Case of Social Priming
one you expect?” If then reasons are provided to ex-
pect a different outcome, the follow-up sub-ques-
The rise and fall of social priming research
tion should be: “To what extent can our study pro-
vide arguments in favor or against the competing as- In psychology, the word priming usually desig-
sumptions?” If this question is answered in the neg- nates effects of exposure to a stimulus (such as a
ative, one should think about ways to refine the word, a bodily sensation, or an observation) on a
study. subject’s responses in a situation subsequent to the
The second question is meant to make the re- stimulus exposure. Early research on priming fo-
searcher aware that science is not only about find- cused primarily on how reading certain words had
ing confirmations of one’s beliefs, but rather about an effect on the perception and processing of sub-
critically testing them. The researcher must remain sequent associated and/or semantically related
aware that more often than not, inconsistencies be- words (e.g., Meyer & Schvaneveldt, 1971; Meyer &
tween predictions and expectations drive scientific Schvaneveldt, 1976; Neely, 1977). The term social
progress: “Which outcomes would clearly contra- priming is most often used as an umbrella term for
dict your assumptions?” or another way to word it different kinds of priming in the form of unconscious
would be, “Which outcomes could cast doubt on activation of social categories (such as old, polite,
confidence in your underlying assumptions?”. This rude, …), resulting in behavioral tendencies that are
question first of all has the purpose of making the based on those respective schemes, role concepts,
researcher aware of possible discrepancies between or stereotypes (e.g., Molden, 2014). The term social
predictions and observations. This results in the priming has been used by, among others, Daniel
critical mindset that in critical rationalism is of the Kahneman in his concerned open letter (2012) to the
two driving forces behind scientific progress (the “students of social priming”. Kahneman had previ-
other one is “intuition or imagination”; Popper 1979, ously devoted a part of his best-selling book “Think-
ing, Fast and Slow” (2011) to social priming research.
TWO QUESTIONS TO FOSTER CRITICAL THINKING 7
In a seminal study that paved the way for a large reasons to expect a different outcome, and [Ques-
number of other publications with variations on the tion 2] what could some consequences of unex-
putative underlying phenomenon of social priming, pected findings be?
Bargh, Chen, and Burrows (1996) found, among
other results, behaviors that allegedly stemmed Are there reasons to expect a different outcome?
from social priming: Participants in laboratory ex-
In their 1996 paper, Bargh and colleagues argue
periments were more likely to interrupt a conversa-
(p. 230-231) that whereas it is widely accepted that
tion between an experimenter and a confederate
attitudes, emotions, and self-concepts can be af-
when, prior to the conversation, they had solved
fected in an unconscious way by means of activating
verbal problems (so called ‘scrambled-sentence
schemes and scripts and the like, “behavioral re-
tasks’) which included words that were related to
sponses to the social environment are [usually be-
rudeness (e.g., bold, aggressively, rude, …) than
lieved to be] under conscious control” (p. 230). They
when the problems included words that were re-
continue by quoting two authors (Fiske, 1989;
lated to politeness or were ‘neutral’ in this regard. In
Devine, 1989) who acknowledged that behavior may
another experiment, participants walked down a
be affected by automatic processes, for example, in
hallway significantly more slowly when they had
the form of the unconscious activation of stereo-
previously solved problems which included words
types; however, Fiske and Devine both made the
that were related to old age (e.g., old, Florida, grey,
claim that human beings can still consciously decide
…) than when the problems included neutral words
to overcome such behavioral tendencies and decide
or words that were associated with youth.
not to act in accordance with their prejudice. Social
Although the paper by Bargh and colleagues
priming research makes the contrary claim that be-
(1996) has been quoted literally thousands of times,
havioral responses to automatic cognitive processes
according to Doyen, Klein, Pichon, & Cleeremans
are neither mediated by attitudes and emotions nor
(2012), only two partially successful replication stud-
can they be overruled through higher cognitive in-
ies were published between the years 1996 and 2012
stances because they happen unconsciously.
(Aarts & Dijksterhuis, 2002; Cesario, Plaks, & Higgins,
But who would doubt that such cases of uncon-
2006). In a first experiment of their own, Doyen and
scious behavior affected by priming exist? Bargh and
colleagues were unable to replicate the primed el-
colleagues seem to assume according to the afore-
der-walking experiment of Bargh and colleagues
mentioned quote that some imagined opponent
(1996); in a second study, they succeeded at produc-
would maintain that there are none, and that there
ing similar effects as those in the original study—but
cannot be any cases in which behavior is affected in
only if the experimenter was aware of the hypothe-
an unconscious and automatized way through
sis and not if s/he was ‘blind’ towards the expected
scheme activation and the like. In formal logic, such
outcome. After initial discussions regarding differ-
a statement could have the form of the implication
ences between the setups of the experiments and
A=>B (read: ‘if A, then B’ or ‘whenever A is the case,
after what some commentators perceived to be at-
B is going to be the case as well’) with A being a be-
tacks by Bargh and colleagues against the quality
havioral response and B being some degree of con-
and credibility of Doyen and colleagues’ paper
scious control. In this case, in accordance with the
(Yong, 2012), the controversy regarding the replica-
so-called modus tollens, a singular observation of A
bility of social priming effects continues until today
and non-B would make the A=>B clause false. But are
(e.g., Weingarten, Chen, McAdams, Yi, Hepler, & Al-
there really opponents who completely rule out the
barracin, 2016; Schimmack, Heene, & Kesavan, 2017;
possibility that there can be a behavioral response
see also Daniel Kahneman’s related comment as re-
without conscious control?
ported in McCook, 2018).
At least Fiske (1989) and Devine (1989), the two
In the following paragraphs, I will ask Platt’s two
authors whom Bargh and colleagues (1996) quote as
questions with a view to the social priming research
proponents of a conscious cognitive behavioral con-
programme (Lakatos, 1978) as a whole, and I will dis-
trol mechanism (p. 231), would probably not sub-
cuss potential consequences: [Question 1] Are there
scribe to any statement positing the impossibility of
unconscious effects on behavior in a radical form. To
Holtz
8
me, it rather seems that unconscious mechanisms tions and deliberate choices but by mental pro-
have been one of the defining features of psychology cesses that are put into motion by features of the
as a discipline from the days of the psychoanalysts environment and that operate outside of con-
and the gestalt theorists to modern social psychol- scious awareness and guidance—is a difficult one
ogy. for people to accept. (p. 462)
But let us imagine such a radical opponent, for
This is of course a more provocative thesis that will
example, in the form of a stubborn economic ration-
most definitely meet opposition among at least a few
alist or a theologist who steadfastly believes in hu-
psychologists and other social scientists arguing in
man beings’ free will, and who refuses to
favor of a more humanistic image of a human being
acknowledge the possibility that some of our behav-
as an at least partly rational being that is able to defy
ior is the consequence of automatized and uncon-
its more animalistic tendencies. The statement in its
scious psychic processes: Is there any chance that
strong form also bears relevance for ethical and ju-
such a person could be convinced through studies
risdictional debates: Is a human being really respon-
such as the ‘primed elder-walking experiment’?
sible for her actions if ‘most’ of her life is ‘deter-
Probably not. One reason is that the experiments by
mined’ by environmental forces operating ‘outside
Bargh and colleagues were statistically ‘underpow-
of conscious awareness and guidance’?
ered’ (Schimmack, Heene, & Kesavan, 2017;
But do Bargh and colleagues’ findings here and
Weingarten, Chen, McAdams, Yi, Hepler, & Albarra-
elsewhere support this far-reaching conclusion? No.
cin, 2016). This means that given the average effect
The fact that it is possible to create an experiment
size, the sample sizes in the experiments (ranging
in which unconscious factors affect behavior does
from 30 to 34) were not sufficient to ensure signifi-
not allow for generalized conclusions about the im-
cant results with reasonable certainty (e.g., >80%). A
portance of these processes in everyday life or to
mean-spirited opponent would immediately pick on
the percentage of everyday decisions that are af-
this deficiency. Furthermore, the description of the
fected or even determined (sic) by uncontrollable
procedure follows the conventions of the day, but a
unconscious forces. This is all of course assuming
hostile adversary would maybe point out that the in-
that social priming experiments are in fact replica-
formation is not sufficient to enable exact replica-
ble.
tion of the study in question (see e.g. Stark, 2018). A
Thus, it seems that Bargh and colleagues are first
steadfast opponent would also point out that the
creating a strawman by making the untenable claim
study was not pre-registered, and that neither the
that behavior is always under conscious control.
data nor analysis procedures were made public. Fur-
Then they use their findings to propagate a much
thermore, Bargh and his colleagues would have to
more far-reaching theory of the conditio humana as
state how many other experiments conducted by
a miserable being that, evoking Freud, is not even
them failed to yield reliable results in a predicted di-
master in its own house.
rection and so were relegated to the ‘file drawer’, ra-
Of course, research questions regarding the de-
ther than being published explicitly along their ‘suc-
gree to which behavior is under conscious control
cessful’ experiments. An opponent could also point
are valuable. But in this case, just creating an exper-
to the artificiality of such psychological laboratory
iment that does (or does not) show that unconscious
experiments and demand evidence from studies us-
effects are possible is not enough. Different kinds of
ing more ‘natural’ behavior data (McGuire, 1973 &
studies comparing behavioral reactions systemati-
2004). All in all, to convince such an opponent, the
cally in different scenarios (in the sense of the afore-
design as well as the reporting standards would
mentioned strong inference) would be needed to al-
probably have to be much stricter.
low for this kind of generalization (see also McGuire,
In a later publication, Bargh and Chartrand (1999)
1973 & 2004). Such studies would also have to be ad-
presented a stronger version of their thesis based on
equately powered in terms of the number of subjects
the studies in the 1996 paper and a few related stud-
to allow for these kinds of conclusions.
ies:
Our thesis here—that most of a person's everyday
life is determined not by their conscious inten-
TWO QUESTIONS TO FOSTER CRITICAL THINKING 9
What if you don’t find what you expected? that there may be unconscious effects of automa-
tized cognition on behavior, and the experimental
Is there a possible research outcome that would
setup of the studies does not really allow for any
eventually cause Bargh and colleagues to abandon
generalization in the sense of estimating the degree
their idea of unconscious automatized effects on
to which everyday behavior is affected by conscious
behavior? Does the strawman mentioned earlier
and unconscious processes. The small sample sizes,
have any theoretical chance at all to defeat his op-
the relatively loose research protocol (no preregis-
ponents? I don’t think so. One reason is that it is all
tration), and the relatively sparse information about
but impossible statistically to clearly demonstrate
the procedures—which were however absolutely in
the absence of any effect (e.g., Cohen, 1994).
line with the conventions of the day—are factors
Of course, the case is different for the stronger
that also limit the study’s capacity to convince a
statement that such unconscious effects determine
stubborn opponent of potential priming effects of
most of our daily lives. But here as well, the question
their existence. In order to provide empirical evi-
of whether or not it is possible to demonstrate un-
dence supporting the stronger thesis that ‘most’ of
conscious effects in an experiment seems to be by
our behavior is ‘determined’ by unconscious pro-
and large irrelevant. Obviously, there are a large
cesses, a wider range of studies systematically com-
number of studies showing the rather trivial fact
paring conscious and unconscious influences and
that conscious processes can ‘override’ automatic
aiming at discovering the limits of the respective un-
behavior tendencies (e.g., in Devine, 1989, men-
derlying assumptions would be more helpful than
tioned beforehand). But for estimating the relevance
just repeating experiments that show that some un-
of any findings for everyday processes, a more com-
conscious automatized effect can be elicited. But
prehensive approach would again be needed.
why have variations of exactly these studies then
So what is the theoretical consequence of Bargh
become so popular?
and colleagues’ studies being replicable or not?
One reason may be related to the naive positiv-
Would any imaginable outcome of a large-scale rep-
istic idea that obtaining the expected result in a
lication study have an effect on our understanding
thoroughly controlled scientific experiment ‘proves’
of the world and human nature? Maybe a failure to
the existence of the phenomenon in question. This
replicate Bargh and colleagues’ findings could be
claim has been by and large discredited in philoso-
used as an argument that, after all, it is not so easy
phy, for example, because of the aforementioned is-
to manipulate human beings’ minds. But actually the
sues with underdetermination (Quine, 1951). Even
relevance of this argument could be more related to
given a reproducible stable effect, someone could
the large degree of publicity that Bargh and col-
come along at any time with a better explanation of
leagues’ studies received than to the empirical evi-
the observed phenomena in question and show
dence per se. In itself, the fact that an experiment
hitherto unknown evidence falsifying the original
‘does not work’ (does not yield the expected results)
assumptions (e.g., Popper, 1962).
does of course not rule out the fact that another ex-
Thinking about social priming’s popularity, I am
periment could be designed that would ‘work’, fi-
also reminded of Newell’s (1973) brilliant analysis of
nally demonstrating the intended effect.
the issues in psychological research in the 1970s. He
argued that psychologists too often study complex
Newell’s (1973) infinite yes-or-no game and the
questions by means of reducing them to a yes or no
question why social priming research has become
type question. Examples would be the nature vs.
so popular
nurture debate or the debate over conscious vs. un-
Applying Platt’s two questions to classical social conscious information processing already ongoing
priming studies seems to indicate that Bargh and at that time (Newell lists 24 such yes or no questions
colleagues’ studies present little relevant empirical on p. 288). The true answer to all these questions is
evidence with regard to the most relevant question most likely one starting with “it all depends”, and an-
as to what extent human beings can consciously swering them in a productive way would actually re-
control their behavior. As I have explained, no psy- quire complex theories, elaborated research de-
chologist would seriously rule out the possibility signs, and strong inference (as outlined in Platt,
1964). However, asking complex questions in a yes or
Holtz
10
no fashion and only counting confirmations of the put as much emphasis on developing critical think-
respective theories sets the stage for an infinite ing as they put on teaching thorough methodologi-
game: Apparent opponents produce an endless cal knowledge. For those of us who work on scien-
chain of evidence in favor of their own stance re- tific textbooks and who convey scientific knowledge
garding such a yes or no question without ‘hurting’ to the wider public, I think that the question should
each other and without necessarily producing any- be asked whether a salesman-like attitude of (over-
thing resembling a growth of knowledge. The right ) selling the benefits of scientific research is really a
question to ask here in order to achieve progress way to sustain worthwhile scientific activity.
would be “to what extent is your research poten- Platt’s Two Questions indeed can and should be
tially able to convince an opponent of your point of asked with regard to any scientific study in the field
view?” Hopefully productive discussions would then of psychology, and I hope that I have provided some
be facilitated among proponents of different views. arguments for my cause. At least I have the impres-
sion that the scientific output throughout my scien-
tific career might have been more relevant and in-
Conclusion
teresting if I had asked these questions about my
own work on a regular basis. Of course, asking the
Science is not about finding your assumptions
questions does not entail having or prescribing an
confirmed and finding ways to sell your ideas to an
answer. I am aware that my discussion of social
audience. Instead, it is (or should be) about critically
priming research is to some degree provocative and
examining your beliefs and correcting them when-
will evoke criticism from those who are more knowl-
ever they do not correspond with empirical obser-
edgeable in this area of psychology than I am. Maybe
vations, and about being willing to give them up
they can convince me that these questions can or
whenever there is a better explanation for the phe-
should be answered differently for social priming
nomena in question. This is what I call critical think-
research.
ing or a critical approach to the growth of scientific
The most critical part of this paper is probably
knowledge. I assume that most psychologists would
not the question whether Platt’s two questions
agree with these statements. Still, the question is to
should be asked on a regular basis—I suppose there
what extent scientists also (can) act according to
will not be much opposition to this thesis. Instead, it
these principles in a globalized capitalist academic
is my claim that these questions have not been asked
market where productivity and public attention de-
often enough in psychology so far. Still, I hope that I
termine a scientist’s career. It should be the task of
could at least make the point that the methodologi-
scientific organizations such as scientific associa-
cal recommendations that are meant to counter the
tions editing prestigious journals to help scientists
current crisis (e.g., Benjamin et al., 2017; Munafo et
to act in accordance with what they know would be
al., 2017) follow immediately from a more critical ap-
the right thing to do. Reward structures should be
proach to scientific research.
established that reward good scientific practices,
Eventually, critical thinking could become just as
such as taking into account alternative explanations,
‘mainstream’ as preregistration and large-scale rep-
exploring the limits of one’s assumptions, and being
lication studies have become over the last several
open to report also unexpected results (e.g., Munafo
years. And in the end ‘market forces’ could them-
et al., 2017). Just as large-scale replication projects,
selves contribute to a critical culture in psychology
preregistration, and open science have been popu-
once a critical degree of popularity has been
larized by small groups of researchers continuing to
reached: As soon as scientists have to demonstrate
make their point, I hope that critical thinking could
their ability to think critically in order to, for exam-
become a mainstay of psychology as well, if enough
ple, obtain a tenured position, a significant incentive
researchers begin to ask Platt’s two questions on a
will have been created. Consequently, scientists may
regular basis.
then have to document, for example, how many hy-
In view of the most recent crisis in psychology, I
potheses they have falsified or the number of occa-
think it is also fair to demand from those who are
sions on which an empirical finding had made them
active in teaching scientific methods to students to
revise the theory to be tested. Falsifications of null-
hypotheses would only count here whenever they
TWO QUESTIONS TO FOSTER CRITICAL THINKING 11
constitute a critical test of the theory to be tested in their valuable feedback and their help during the re-
the sense that other researchers would be willing to view process!
defend the null-hypothesis, as is the case, for exam-
ple, in para-psychology. Here, most scientists hold
Open Science Practices
the view that psy-phenomena do not exist and falsi-
fying this hypothesis (of course, in a reproducible
This is a conceptual article without data, materi-
and replicable way) would be a substantial advance-
als or analysis that could have been preregistered.
ment of scientific knowledge. In the previously dis-
The entire editorial process, including the open re-
cussed example of social priming, the case is differ-
views, are published in the online supplement.
ent and—as I argued in the previous paragraphs—a
rejection of the null-hypothesis may not mean much
References
from an epistemological point of view.
I would consider it an ideal outcome of this paper
Aarts, H., & Dijksterhuis, A. (2002). Category activa-
if there were a kind of movement in the direction of
tion effects in judgment and behaviour: The
simply asking these two questions on a regular basis
moderating role of perceived comparability.
and studying the reactions. I would expect some re-
British Journal of Social Psychology, 41(1), 123-
spondents to indeed turn ‘livid’, whereas I hope that
138.
others would start heading towards more critical
Bacon, F. (1620). New Organon. Available from:
thinking. Social media could perhaps facilitate the
http://www.constitution.org/ba-
exchange of experiences with reactions to these
con/nov_org.htm; last retrieved June 2018.
questions.
Bargh, J. A., Chen, M., & Burrows, L. (1996). Automa-
ticity of social behavior: Direct effects of trait
Author Contact construct and stereotype activation on action.
Journal of personality and social psychology,
Dr. Peter Holtz. Schleichstr. 6, 72074 Tübingen, 71(2), 230.
Germany; p.holtz@iwm-tuebingen.de. Orcid: Bargh, J. A., & Chartrand, T. L. (1999). The unbeara-
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7539-6992. ble automaticity of being. American psycholo-
gist, 54(7), 462.
Baumeister, R. F.; Bratslavsky, E.; Muraven, M.; Tice,
Conflict of Interest and Funding
D. M. (1998). Ego depletion: Is the active self a
limited resource?. Journal of personality and
I have no conflict of interest to declare. My re-
social psychology, 74(5), 1252–1265.
search is funded since 2018 by the Leibniz Associa-
Bem, D. J. (2011). Feeling the future: experimental
tion, Germany (Leibniz Competition 2018, funding
evidence for anomalous retroactive influences
line "Collaborative Excellence", project SALIENT
on cognition and affect. Journal of personality
[K68/2017]).
and social psychology, 100(3), 407-425.
Benjamin, D. J., Berger, J. O., Johannesson, M.,
Author Contributions Nosek, B. A., Wagenmakers, E. J., Berk, R., ... &
Cesarini, D. (2018). Redefine statistical signifi-
I am the sole author of this article. cance. Nature human behaviour, 2(1), 6.
Billig, M. (2013). Learn to write badly: How to suc-
Acknowledgements ceed in the social sciences. Cambridge: Cam-
Several in-text comments by David E. Meyer on bridge University Press.
the first version of this article were integrated into Carney, D. R., Cuddy, A. J., & Yap, A. J. (2010). Power
this revised version of the original manuscript. I posing: Brief nonverbal displays affect neuro-
would like to thank Professor Meyer for his invalua- endocrine levels and risk tolerance. Psychologi-
ble contribution to the paper! cal science, 21(10), 1363-1368.
I also want to thank reviewer Michael Olson and Carter, E. C., & McCullough, M. E. (2014). Publica-
the editors Åse Innes-Ker and Rickard Carlsson for tion bias and the limited strength model of
Holtz
12
self-control: has the evidence for ego depletion and prejudice. In J. S. Uleman & J. A. Bargh
been overestimated?. Frontiers in psychology, 5, (Eds.): Unintended thought. New York: Guilford
823. Press, 253-283.
Cesario, J., Plaks, J. E., & Higgins, E. T. (2006). Auto- Gelman, A., & Loken, E. (2013). The garden of forking
matic social behavior as motivated preparation paths: Why multiple comparisons can be a prob-
to interact. Journal of personality and social lem, even when there is no “fishing expedition”
psychology, 90(6), 893. or “p-hacking” and the research hypothesis was
Chambers, C. D., Feredoes, E., Muthukumaras- posited ahead of time. Department of Statistics,
wamy, S. D., & Etchells, P. (2014). Instead of" Columbia University. Online document availa-
playing the game" it is time to change the rules: ble at: http://www.stat.columbia.edu/~gel-
Registered Reports at AIMS Neuroscience and man/research/unpublished/p_hacking.pdf;
beyond. AIMS Neuroscience, 1(1), 4-17. last retrieved June 2018.
Cohen, J. (1994). The earth is round (p<. 05). Ameri- Gilbert, D. T., King, G., Pettigrew, S., & Wilson, T. D.
can psychologist, 49(12), 997. (2016). Comment on “Estimating the reproduci-
Chamberlin, T. C. (1890). The method of multiple bility of psychological science”. Science,
working hypotheses. Science, 15(366), 92-96. 351(6277), 1037-1037.
Devine, P. G. (1989). Stereotypes and prejudice: Harding, S. (Ed.). (1976). Can theories be refuted?:
Their automatic and controlled components. Essays on the Duhem-Quine thesis (Vol. 81).
Journal of personality and social psychology, 56, New York: Springer.
5-18. Holtz, P., Deutschmann, E., & Dobewall, H. (2017).
Dewey, J. (1903/2004). Democracy and education. Cross-cultural psychology and the rise of aca-
Mineola, NY: Dover. demic capitalism: Linguistic changes in CCR
Doyen, S., Klein, O., Pichon, C. L., & Cleeremans, A. and JCCP articles, 1970-2014. Journal of cross-
(2012). Behavioral priming: it's all in the mind, cultural psychology, 48(9), 1410-1431.
but whose mind?. PloS one, 7(1), e29081. Holtz, P., & Monnerjahn, P. (2017). Falsificationism is
Duhem, P. (1954/1906). The Aim and structure of not just ‘potential’ falsifiability, but requires
physical theory (Transl. P. P. Wiener). Prince- ‘actual’ falsification: Social psychology, critical
ton, NJ: Princeton University Press. rationalism, and progress in science. Journal
Earp, B. D., & Trafimow, D. (2015). Replication, falsi- for the theory of social behaviour, 47, 348-362.
fication, and the crisis of confidence in social Holtz, P., & Odağ, Ö. (2018). Popper was not a posi-
psychology. Frontiers in psychology, 6, 621. tivist: Why critical rationalism could be an
Engber, D. (2017). Daryl Bem proved ESP is real: epistemology for qualitative as well as quanti-
Which means science is broken. Slate. Online tative social scientific research. Qualitative re-
document available from search in psychology, Advance online publica-
https://slate.com/health-and-sci- tion. Online document available from:
ence/2017/06/daryl-bem-proved-esp-is- https://doi.org/10.1080/14780887.2018.144762
real-showed-science-is-broken.html; last re- 2; last retrieved May 2020.
trieved May 2020. John, L. K., Loewenstein, G., & Prelec, D. (2012).
Fanelli, D. (2009). How many scientists fabricate Measuring the prevalence of questionable re-
and falsify research? A systematic review and search practices with incentives for truth tell-
meta-analysis of survey data. PloS one, 4(5), ing. Psychological science, 23(5), 524-532.
e5738. Jonas, K. J., & Cesario, J. (2016). How can preregis-
Fanelli, D. (2011). Negative results are disappearing tration contribute to research in our field?.
from most disciplines and countries. Scien- Comprehensive Results in Social Psychology, 1, 1-
tometrics, 90(3), 891-904. 7.
Feynman, R. P. (1974). Cargo cult science. Engineer- Kahneman, D. (2012). A proposal to deal with ques-
ing and Science, 37(7), 10-13. tions about priming effects. Online document
Fiske, S. T. (1989). Examining the role of intent: To- available from: https://www.na-
ward understanding its role in stereotyping ture.com/polopoly_fs/7.6716.1349271308!/sup
TWO QUESTIONS TO FOSTER CRITICAL THINKING 13
pinfoFile/Kahneman%20Letter.pdf; last re- Meehl, P. E. (1997). The Problem Is epistemology,
trieved June 2018. not statistics: Replace significance tests by
Klein, R.A., Ratliff, K.A., Vianello, M., Adams Jr, R.B., confidence intervals and quantify accuracy of
Bahník, Š., Bernstein, M.J., Bocian, K., Brandt, risky numerical predictions. In: L. L. Harlow, S.
M.J., Brooks, B., Brumbaugh, C.C, & Cemalcilar, A. Mulaik, & J. H. Steiger (eds): What If There
Z. (2014). Investigating variation in replicability: Were No Significance Tests?. London:
A “many labs” replication project. Social psy- Routledge, 393-425.
chology, 45(3), 142-152. Meyer, D. E., & Schvaneveldt, R. W. (1971). Facilita-
Lakatos, I. (1978). The methodology of scientific re- tion in recognizing pairs of words: evidence of
search programmes. Cambridge, UK: Cam- a dependence between retrieval operations.
bridge University Press. Journal of experimental psychology, 90(2), 227.
Lindsay, D. S., Simons, D. J., & Lilienfeld, S. O. Meyer, D. E., & Schvaneveldt, R. W. (1976). Meaning,
(2016). Research preregistration 101. APS ob- memory structure, and mental processes. Sci-
server, 29(10). Online document available from ence, 192(4234), 27-33.
https://www.psychologicalscience.org/ob- Münch, R. (2014). Academic capitalism: Universities
server/research-preregistration-101; last re- in the global struggle for excellence. London:
trieved June 2018. Routledge.
Marsman, M., Schönbrodt, F. D., Morey, R. D., Yao, Munafò, M.R., Nosek, B.A., Bishop, D.V., Button, K.S.,
Y., Gelman, A., & Wagenmakers, E. J. (2017). A Chambers, C.D., du Sert, N.P., Simonsohn, U.,
Bayesian bird's eye view of ‘Replications of im- Wagenmakers, E.J., Ware, J.J.. & Ioannidis, J. P.
portant results in social psychology’. Royal So- (2017). A manifesto for reproducible science.
ciety open science, 4(1), 160426. Nature human behaviour, 1, 0021.
Martinson, B. C., Anderson, M. S., & De Vries, R. Neely, J. H. (1977). Semantic priming and retrieval
(2005). Scientists behaving badly. Nature, from lexical memory: Roles of inhibitionless
435(7043), 737. spreading activation and limited-capacity at-
McCook, A. (2018). “I placed too much faith in un- tention. Journal of experimental psychology:
derpowered studies:” Nobel Prize winner admits general, 106(3), 226.
mistakes. Online document available from Newell, A. (1973). You can't play 20 questions with
https://retraction- nature and win: Projective comments on the
watch.com/2017/02/20/placed-much-faith- papers of this symposium. In W. G. Chase (ed.):
underpowered-studies-nobel-prize-winner- Visual Information Processing. New York: Aca-
admits-mistakes/; last retrieved June 2018. demic Press, 283-308.
McGuire, W. J. (1973). The yin and yang of progress Molden, D. C. (2014). Understanding priming effects
in social psychology: Seven koan. Journal of in social psychology: What is “social priming”
personality and social psychology, 26(3), 446. and how does it occur?. Social cognition,
McGuire, W. J. (2004). A perspectivist approach to 32(Supplement), 1-11.
theory construction. Personality and social psy- O'Donohue, W., & Buchanan, J. A. (2001). The weak-
chology review, 8(2), 173-182. nesses of strong inference. Behavior and phi-
Meehl, P. E. (1967). Theory-testing in psychology losophy, 29, 1-20.
and physics: A methodological paradox. Philos- Open Science Collaboration. (2015). Estimating the
ophy of science, 34, 103-115. reproducibility of psychological science. Sci-
Meehl, P. E. (1978). Theoretical risks and tabular as- ence, 349(6251), aac4716.
terisks: Sir Karl, Sir Ronald, and the slow pro- Pashler, H., & Wagenmakers, E. J. (2012). Editors’ in-
gress of soft psychology. Journal of consulting troduction to the special section on replicabil-
and clinical psychology, 46(4), 806-834. ity in psychological science a crisis of confi-
Meehl, P. E. (1990). Appraising and amending theo- dence?. Perspectives on psychological science,
ries: the strategy of Lakatosian defense and 7(6), 528-530.
two principles that warrant it. Psychological in- Pettigrew, T. F. (1991). Toward unity and bold the-
quiry, 1(2), 108-141. ory: Popperian suggestions for two persistent
Holtz
14
problems of social psychology. In C. W. decision to publish and vice versa. The ameri-
Stephan, W. G. Stephan, & T. Pettigrew (eds.): can statistician, 49(1), 108-112.
The future of social psychology. New York: Strack, F. (2017). From Data to Truth in Psychologi-
Springer, 13-27. cal Science. A Personal Perspective. Frontiers
Platt, J. R. (1964). Strong inference. Science, in psychology, 8, 702.
146(3642), 347-353. Stroebe, W., & Strack, F. (2014). The alleged crisis
Popper, K. R. (1934/1959). The logic of scientific dis- and the illusion of exact replication. Perspec-
covery. London: Routledge (German original tives on Psychological Science, 9(1), 59-71.
1934). Uchino, B. N., Thoman, D., & Byerly, S. (2010). Infer-
Popper, K. R. (1962). Conjectures and refutations: ence patterns in theoretical social psychology:
The growth of scientific knowledge. Basic Books: Looking back as we move forward. Social and
New York & London. personality psychology compass, 4(6), 417-427.
Popper, K. (1972). Objective knowledge: An rvolu- van't Veer, A. E., & Giner-Sorolla, R. (2016). Pre-reg-
tionary approach. Oxford: Oxford University istration in social psychology—A discussion and
Press, 246-284. suggested template. Journal of experimental so-
Popper, K. R. (1979). Three worlds. Ann Arbor, MI: cial psychology, 67, 2-12.
University of Michigan Press. Wagenmakers, E. J., Wetzels, R., Borsboom, D., &
Ranehill, E., Dreber, A., Johannesson, M., Leiberg, S., Van Der Maas, H. L. (2011). Why psychologists
Sul, S., & Weber, R. A. (2015). Assessing the ro- must change the way they analyze their data:
bustness of power posing: No effect on hor- the case of psi: comment on Bem (2011). Journal
mones and risk tolerance in a large sample of of personality and social psychology, 100(3), 426-
men and women. Psychological science, 26(5), 432.
653-656. Weingarten, E., Chen, Q., McAdams, M., Yi, J., Hep-
Quine, W. V. O. (1951). Two dogmas of empiricism. ler, J., & Albarracín, D. (2016). From primed
The philosophical review, 60(1), 20–43. concepts to action: A meta-analysis of the be-
Schimmack, U., Heene, M., & Kesavan, K. (2017). Re- havioral effects of incidentally presented
construction of a train wreck: How priming re- words. Psychological bulletin, 142(5), 472.
search went off the rails. Replicability-Index: Wagenmakers, E. J., Verhagen, A. J., Ly, A., Matzke,
Improving the Replicability of Empirical Re- D., Steingroever, H., Rouder, J. N., & Morey, R.
search. Online document available from D. (2017). The need for Bayesian hypothesis
https://replicationindex.word- testing in psychological science. In S. O. Lilien-
press.com/2017/02/02/reconstruction-of-a- feld & I. D. Waldman (Eds.): Psychological sci-
train-wreck-how-priming-research-went-of- ence under scrutiny: Recent challenges and pro-
the-rails/; last retrieved June 2018. posed solutions. New York: Wiley, 123-138.
Shrout, P. E., & Rodgers, J. L. (2018). Psychology, Yong, E. (2012). Bad copy. Nature, 485(7398), 298.
science, and knowledge construction: Broad-
ening perspectives from the replication crisis.
Annual review of psychology, 69, 487-510.
Simmons, J. P., Nelson, L. D., & Simonsohn, U. (2011).
False-positive psychology: Undisclosed flexibil-
ity in data collection and analysis allows pre-
senting anything as significant. Psychological
science, 22(11), 1359-1366.
Stark, P. B. (2018). Before reproducibility must come
preproducibility. Nature, 557(7707), 613.
Sterling, T. D., Rosenbaum, W. L., & Weinkam, J. J.
(1995). Publication decisions revisited: The ef-
fect of the outcome of statistical tests on the