Articles
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-020-00975-9
Children punish third parties to satisfy both
consequentialist and retributive motives
Julia Marshall 1 ✉, Daniel A. Yudkin 1,2 and Molly J. Crockett 1 ✉
Adults punish moral transgressions to satisfy both retributive motives (such as wanting antisocial others to receive their ‘just
deserts’) and consequentialist motives (such as teaching transgressors that their behaviour is inappropriate). Here, we investi-
gated whether retributive and consequentialist motives for punishment are present in children approximately between the ages
of five and seven. In two preregistered studies (N = 251), children were given the opportunity to punish a transgressor at a cost
to themselves. Punishment either exclusively satisfied retributive motives by only inflicting harm on the transgressor, or addi-
tionally satisfied consequentialist motives by teaching the transgressor a lesson. We found that children punished when doing
so satisfied only retributive motives, and punished considerably more when doing so also satisfied consequentialist motives.
Together, these findings provide evidence for the presence of both retributive and consequentialist motives in young children.
P
unishment is considered a hallmark of our moral psycho- tires one day after work, or the harried server who makes a rude
logical repertoire1. Across cultures, people believe that those customer’s food unbearably spicy before bringing it out from the
perceived as violating rules, laws, or norms should be pun- kitchen. Such ‘non-communicative’ punishment cannot satisfy con-
ished with negative sanctions, through monetary fines, physical sequentialist motives because the transgressor does not know why
or emotional pain, or even death, depending on the severity of the they suffer misfortune, and such knowledge is a prerequisite for
transgression2,3. Individuals are motivated to impose such negative learning a lesson. However, non-communicative punishment still
sanctions on transgressors even at a personal cost, both in direct satisfies retributive motives because the punisher knows that their
retaliation for being harmed via ‘second-party punishment’4 and in actions cause the transgressor to suffer (Fig. 1). Thus, while retribu-
response to merely witnessing a transgression via ‘third-party pun- tive punishment merely involves inflicting harm, consequentialist
ishment’5,6. Researchers have argued that such costly punishment punishment additionally involves communicating to the transgres-
behaviour may play a vital role in sustaining cooperation by deter- sor that they have violated a norm (otherwise, the transgressor
ring antisocial behaviour7–9. would never have the opportunity to learn).
Philosophical theories of justice highlight two possible proxi- Research has shown that adults are willing to engage in both com-
mate motives for costly punishment behaviour3. On one hand, municative and non-communicative punishment13–19. The observa-
people may be motivated by retributive concerns10, such as wanting tion of non-communicative punishment in adults provides evidence
antisocial others to suffer as a form of ‘just desert’. On the other that at least some punishment is likely to be motivated by pure ret-
hand, people may be motivated by consequentialist concerns11, ribution. Interestingly though, adults are more willing to engage in
such as wanting to deter future harms by teaching the transgressor communicative than non-communicative punishment15,16. Because
a lesson. In practice, punishment typically satisfies both motives. both types of punishment inflict damage on the transgressor, the
If a colleague publicly ridicules a co-worker for stealing someone increased demand for communicative punishment is thought to
else’s lunch from the breakroom, it will satisfy a retributive motive result from its additional ability to satisfy consequentialist motives.
(because the thief will suffer by being publicly ridiculed) as well as a Consistent with this, the strength of self-reported consequentialist
consequentialist motive (because the thief, as well as other observ- motives—for example, a desire for the transgressor learn a lesson—
ers, will learn that stealing food is wrong). Thus, it is typically very is positively correlated with the increased engagement in communi-
challenging to directly infer motives for punishment from observ- cative relative to non-communicative punishment15.
ing punishment behaviour alone. Importantly, little to no work has investigated punishment
Importantly, experimental studies can test for the presence of motives from a developmental perspective. We know from previous
both consequentialist and retributive motives by manipulating research that toddlers are willing to punish antisocial individuals
whether punishment is ‘communicative’ or not—that is, whether in third-party contexts20 and that children around the age of four
the punishment is delivered alongside an explicit communication will tattle on their antisocial peers21–23. Additional research has dem-
that a norm has been violated12. Communicative punishment sat- onstrated that children, even across cultures24, will go as far to sacri-
isfies both retributive and consequentialist motives (Fig. 1): it sat- fice their own personal resources, such as stickers, candies, or time
isfies retributive motives by inflicting damage on the transgressor, playing on a slide, to punish a transgressor who had acted unfairly
and it satisfies consequentialist motives by communicating that the or unkindly25–28. We also know that children, when they punish,
damage is inflicted because they violated a norm, thereby poten- tend to care about restoring justice to victims29,30. For example, chil-
tially teaching the transgressor a lesson. Though most real-world dren will remove a resource from a thief and return it to the vic-
punishment is communicative, occasionally it is not—consider the tim rather than keep it for themselves. But it remains unclear why
disgruntled employee who surreptitiously slashes their evil boss’s young children are willing to punish at all in the first place: do
1Department of Psychology, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA. 2Social and Behavioral Science Initiative, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA,
USA. ✉e-mail: julia.marshall@yale.edu; molly.crockett@yale.edu
NAture HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles Nature HumaN BeHaviour
Consequentialist
motives
Concerned with deterring future
transgressors
Non-communicative Communicative
punishment punishment
Imposes harm on the Imposes harm on the
transgressor transgressor
and
communicates that a
norm has been violated
Retributive
motives
Concerned with ensuring that
transgressors suffer
Fig. 1 | Communicative versus non-communicative punishment. A visual explanation of how consequentialist and retributive motives map onto
communicative and non-communicative punishment.
children, like adults15,18, punish for both consequentialist and decided to put the iPad in the locked box, they were further
retributive reasons? asked how long the other child should be restricted from play-
The present work directly addresses this question by test- ing. See Open Science Framework (OSF) for the full script: https://
ing young children’s propensities for both communicative and osf.io/ht7j6/. All conditions involved harming the antisocial
non-communicative punishment. One possibility is that young (or neutral) other by preventing them from playing on the iPad;
children are ‘naive retributivists’, punishing indiscriminately this was required to ensure that both conditions involved puni-
regardless of whether punishment can communicate that a norm tive behaviour3. Importantly though, the consequences of pun-
has been violated. Such a finding would suggest that consequen- ishment were described differently across conditions to isolate
tialist motives develop in later childhood and adolescence, perhaps consequentialist motives from retributive ones15,18 (Fig. 2). In the
through observing and experiencing lesson-learning via punish- non-communicative condition, the participants were told that, if
ment. Alternatively, it is possible that children are ‘naive consequen- they decided to lock up the iPad, the antisocial child would not be
tialists’, punishing exclusively when it communicates that a norm told why they could not play on the iPad, and thus they could not
has been violated. This observation would imply that retributive learn a lesson. In the communicative condition, the participants
motives develop later, perhaps through repeatedly experiencing were instructed that, if they decided to punish, the antisocial child
schadenfreude when observing a transgressor suffer and associat- would be told why they could not play with the iPad and conse-
ing those positive emotions with punishment behaviour. Finally, it quently would learn a lesson.
is possible that young children are ‘naive pluralists’, with both conse- To rule out the possibility that punishment in the non-
quentialist and retributive motives present from a young age, result- communicative condition was merely the result of a preference for
ing in a pattern of punishment behaviour similar to that observed locking up iPads—in which people punish others merely to inflict
in adults15. Such a finding would suggest that both consequentialist damage on them rather than in response to a transgression—we
and retributive motives develop early in life. included a baseline control condition in which the character merely
To distinguish between these possibilities, in an initial study, we held, rather than tore up, the drawing. In this condition, the partic-
assigned children ranging from four to seven years old (N = 113) to ipants were told that, if they punished, the neutral child would not
one of three experimental conditions in a costly third-party punish- know why they could not play on the iPad. In all conditions, the par-
ment paradigm (Fig. 2). In two conditions, the participants watched ticipants were told that, if punished, the antisocial (or neutral) other
a video depicting an antisocial child who ripped up another child’s would feel sad because they would not be allowed to play on the iPad.
artwork; in the third condition, the participants watched a video We verified that the participants understood that the punished
depicting a neutral child who simply looked at another child’s art- child would know why they were punished in the communicative
work. Manipulation checks verified that the participants considered condition, and that they would not know why they were punished
the antisocial other meaner than the neutral actor and reported in the non-communicative and baseline control conditions. We did
that the antisocial other elicited more negative and less positive so because we wanted to ensure that children believed that their
emotions compared with the neutral actor (see the Supplementary decision about whether to punish carried real social consequences.
Information for the details). After watching the video, the par- Specifically, we confirmed that children believed that the trans-
ticipants were given the opportunity to punish the antisocial (or gressor would know why they could not play with the iPad if they
neutral) child by giving up a valued resource: time playing on an were punished, whether the transgressor would be sad if they could
iPad. Manipulation checks here too verified that the participants not play with the iPad, and whether the transgressor would learn
enjoyed playing on the iPad and wanted to play more, confirming a lesson about ripping up drawings if they could not play with the
that the punishment in this paradigm was costly for the participants iPad (see Methods for the exact language for the comprehension
(Supplementary Information). checks and Supplementary Information for the full details). We also
Children were then given the option to place the iPad in a confirmed that the participants believed punishment would make
locked box. Doing so would prevent the other child from play- the punished child equally sad across conditions (Supplementary
ing on the iPad, but it also meant that the participants would lose Information). Those who did not exhibit an understanding of the
access to the iPad themselves (thereby ensuring that selecting contingencies of the boxes were excluded from the main analyses
the locked box was costly to the participants). If the participants (N = 22). Furthermore, the participants made their punishment
NAture HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Nature HumaN BeHaviour Articles
Baseline control condition Non-communicative condition Communicative condition
Neutral child Antisocial child Antisocial child
“Jessica will know that she can’t play with “Jessica will know that she can’t play with the “Jessica will know that she can’t play with the
the iPad, but she will not know why...” iPad, but she will not know it’s because she iPad, and she will know it’s because she
ripped up the drawing...” ripped up the drawing...”
Fig. 2 | visualizations of the communicative, non-communicative, and baseline control conditions. The child actor was not always female. Across
participants, we used either a female (as depicted here) or a male child actor (not depicted here; counterbalanced across participants). See OSF for the
verbatim scripts per condition. Permission to use the participant images was obtained by the first author.
decisions in private, and the experimenter’s identity changed after see the Supplementary Information for the full information. We
the participants made their decisions to minimize task demands found an identical pattern of results when analysing children’s judge-
and reduce the possibility that participants punish because of repu- ments regarding how long the antisocial other should be restricted
tational concerns31. We preregistered our methods at aspredicted. from playing on the iPad (Supplementary Information). These find-
org (communicative and non-communicative conditions, https:// ings provide initial evidence that young children are naive pluralists:
aspredicted.org/mz2pc.pdf; baseline control condition, https:// they punish both because they want to inflict emotional damage on
aspredicted.org/ct965.pdf). the transgressor and because they care about the transgressor learn-
ing a lesson and thereby potentially reforming their behaviour.
results Beyond assessing the presence of each motive in young chil-
In our first study, we found an effect of condition on the partici- dren, the additive nature of the experimental design also allowed
pants’ punishment decisions (χ2(2, N = 113) = 26.71, P < 0.001, us to examine the comparative strength of consequentialist motives
R2 = 0.269). The effect of condition remained when including par- compared with purely retributive motives. That is, one can infer the
ticipants who were excluded for failing the comprehension checks strength of solely consequentialist motives by subtracting the per-
(P = 0.007). The participants in the communicative condition centage of participants who punished in the non-communicative
were more likely to punish (mean (M) = 0.78, s.e.m. = 0.07) than condition from the percentage of participants who punished in the
the participants in the non-communicative condition (M = 0.39, communicative one. Doing so reveals that the participants punished
s.e.m. = 0.08, χ2(1, N = 75) = 10.91, P = 0.001, odds ratio (OR) = 5.56, 39% more (OR = 5.56, 95% CI (2.01, 15.38)) in the communicative
95% confidence interval (CI) (2.01, 15.38)), as illustrated in Fig. 3. condition than in the non-communicative condition. Furthermore,
Furthermore, the participants in the communicative condition were one can calculate the strength of solely retributive motives by sub-
more likely to punish than the participants in the baseline control tracting the percentage of participants who punished in the baseline
condition (M = 0.13, s.e.m. = 0.06, χ2(1, N = 75) = 25.86, P < 0.001, control from the percentage of participants who punished in the
OR = 23.93, 95% CI (7.04, 81.34)). Finally, the participants in the non-communicative condition. Doing so reveals that the partici-
non-communicative condition were more likely to punish than the pants punished 26% more (OR = 4.30, 95% CI (1.37, 13.51)) in the
participants in the baseline control condition (χ2(1, N = 76) = 6.26, non-communicative condition than in the baseline control condi-
P = 0.012, OR = 4.30, 95% CI (1.37, 13.51)). Condition did not inter- tion. Because the effect size CIs of the consequentialist effect and
act with children’s continuous age (χ2(2, N = 113) = 1.70, P = 0.427); the retributive effect overlap, the data suggest that the strength of
NAture HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles Nature HumaN BeHaviour
condition (M = 0.33, s.e.m. = 0.07, χ2(1, N = 92) = 5.21, P = 0.022,
OR = 2.69, 95% CI (1.15, 6.28)). Furthermore, the participants in the
100% communicative condition were more likely to punish than the par-
ticipants in the baseline control condition (M = 0.07, s.e.m. = 0.04,
χ2(1, N = 92) = 19.22, P < 0.001, OR = 18.63, 95% CI (5.04, 68.89)).
75% Finally, the participants in the non-communicative condition were
more likely to punish than the participants in the baseline control
condition (χ2(1, N = 92) = 8.23, P = 0.004, OR = 6.94, 95% CI (1.85,
26.04)), again indicating that non-communicative punishment can-
50% not be explained by a preference for locking up boxes. Thus, across
two studies, we find consistent evidence for the presence of both
consequentialist and retributive motives, thereby suggesting that
children, like adults, are naive pluralists.
As in Study 1, we also examined the comparative strength of dif-
ferent motives. In doing so, we found that the participants punished
24% more (OR = 2.69, 95% CI (1.15, 6.28)) in the communicative
condition than in the non-communicative condition. Furthermore,
the participants punished 26% more (OR = 6.94, 95% CI (1.85,
26.04)) in the non-communicative condition than in the baseline
control condition. As in Study 1, because the CIs for both the con-
sequentialist and the retributive effect overlap, it suggests that chil-
dren’s retributive desires were not significantly stronger than their
consequentialist ones or vice versa.
Unlike in Study 1, condition did interact with children’s con-
tinuous age (χ2(2, N = 138) = 7.85, P = 0.020). Further investigation
revealed that this interaction was largely driven by the fact that only
three children punished in the baseline control condition, and all
children’s retributive motives were not significantly different from of these children were five years old. If we analyse only the com-
the strength of children’s consequentialist motives. municative and non-communicative conditions, we do not find an
The results of Study 1 provide initial evidence that children pre- age × condition effect (χ2(1, N = 92) = 2.08, P = 0.150). Because of
dominantly between the ages of five and seven are naive pluralists— this and because we did not find an age interaction in Study 1, we
they, like adults, punish for both consequentialist and retributive did not consider this age interaction any further, although see the
reasons. Beyond documenting the presence of both motives, we Supplementary Information for more details about age effects in
also find that children’s retributive and consequentialist desires do Studies 1 and 2.
not significantly differ in strength. Two questions remained, which We next considered whether non-communicative punishment
we tested in a second experiment (N = 138; the methods were pre- could be explained by children in this condition erroneously infer-
registered at https://aspredicted.org/9su64.pdf). First, did children ring that they could teach transgressors a lesson by punishing them
punish in the non-communicative condition because they falsely (despite us explicitly informing them to the contrary). If this was
believed that the other child would reform their behaviour follow- the case, then the participants who punished in both the commu-
ing punishment? In Study 2, we tested this by asking the partici- nicative and non-communicative conditions should believe that the
pants to predict whether the antisocial other would re-offend in the target of punishment would be less likely to re-offend. If not, only
future. Second, did the participants punish considerably more in the participants in the communicative condition should believe
the communicative condition because we told them that the pun- that punishment would reduce re-offending. A logistic regression
ished child would learn a lesson? In reality, it is never guaranteed revealed an interaction between punishment decision (yes, no)
that punishment targets will learn; thus, instructing the participants and condition (communicative, non-communicative) when pre-
that the punished other ‘would learn a lesson’ may have artificially dicting beliefs about re-offending (χ2(1, N = 92) = 3.94, P = 0.047,
inflated punishment in the communicative condition. In Study 2, R2 = 0.092, Fig. 5). In the communicative condition, participants
we therefore instructed the participants that the punished child who punished were less likely to think that the transgressor would
‘could’ (instead of ‘would’) learn a lesson. re-offend than participants who did not punish (χ2(1, N = 46) = 7.33,
We made two minor changes in addition to those two main P = 0.007, OR = 20.46, 95% CI (2.30, 181.73)). However, in the
changes. First, we added several exploratory measures, including non-communicative condition, there was no effect of punish-
children’s general attitudes about punishment, how the partici- ment decision on beliefs about re-offending (χ2(1, N = 46) = 0.36,
pants felt when they made their decision to punish or not, and how P = 0.551, OR = 1.51, 95% CI (0.39, 5.90)). This interaction
deserving of punishment they considered the antisocial (or neu- was not moderated by participant age (χ2(1, N = 92) = 0.76,
tral) other. See the Supplementary Information for the full details. P = 0.383). These findings demonstrate that participants who
Second, Study 2 focused on five- to seven-year-olds largely because punished in the non-communicative condition did not do so
four-year-olds disproportionately struggled with the methodology because they erroneously believed that the transgressor would
in Study 1 (~50% of comprehension check failures in Study 1 were reform their behaviour.
four-year-olds; see the Supplementary Information for the details). Finally, in exploratory analyses, we examined children’s
Study 2 fully replicated our findings from Study 1 (Fig. 4). We self-reported motives about punishment in general. Specifically,
found an effect of condition on children’s punishment decisions we asked children four questions—two of which measured con-
(χ2(2, N = 138) = 20.20, P < 0.001, R2 = 0.193). The effect of condi- sequentialist motives (for example, “Do you think people who do
tion remained when including participants who were excluded for bad things should be punished because they should change their
failing the comprehension checks (P < 0.001). The participants in behavior?”) and two of which measured retributive motives (for
the communicative condition were more likely to punish (M = 0.57, example, “Do you think people who do bad things should be pun-
s.e.m. = 0.07) than the participants in the non-communicative ished because they deserve to feel sad?”). Paralleling findings with
dehsinup
ohw
stnapicitrap
fo
egatnecreP
Condition
Baseline control
Non-communicative
Communicative
Strength of consequentialist
motive
Strength of
25% retributive
motive
0%
Fig. 3 | Percentages of participants who punished depending on
condition in Study 1 (N = 113). The error bars represent bootstrapped
95% CIs. The brackets indicate estimates of the strengths of retributive
and consequentialist motives in children, as reflected in the difference
in punishment rates between the non-communicative and baseline
control conditions (for the former) and the non-communicative and
communicative conditions (for the latter).
NAture HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Nature HumaN BeHaviour Articles
adults15, we found that children differentially endorsed each of these
items (F(3, 135) = 82.97, P < 0.001, partial eta squared (η2) = 0.648). p
Specifically, children endorsed the two consequentialist items 100%
the most—they indicated that antisocial others should be punished
in general because they should change their behaviour (M = 4.37,
s.d. = 1.74) and because antisocial others need to learn a lesson 75%
(M = 4.16, s.d. = 1.86). The degree of endorsement did not dif-
fer between these two items (t(137) = 1.24, P = 0.219, Cohen’s
d = 0.12, 95% CI (−0.07, 0.30)). Children also endorsed retributive
motives, but less so. Specifically, children endorsed the idea that 50%
antisocial others should be punished because it is the right thing
to do (M = 2.66, s.d. = 1.92), and the degree of endorsement for this
item differed from those for the item about changing behaviour
(t(137) = 9.00, P < 0.001, d = 0.93, 95% CI (0.70, 1.17)) and for the
item about lesson-learning (t(137) = 8.91, P < 0.001, d = 0.79, 95%
CI (0.60, 0.99)). Children also endorsed the idea that antisocial
others should be punished because antisocial others deserve to
feel sad (M = 2.01, s.d. = 1.76), although children endorsed this
item less than the item about changing behaviour (t(137) = 13.90,
P < 0.001, d = 1.35, 95% CI (1.10, 1.60)), the item about lesson-
learning (t(137) = 11.73, P < 0.001, d = 1.19, 95% CI (0.94, 1.43)) and
the item about whether punishment is the right thing to do
(t(137) = 3.49, P = 0.001, d = 0.35, 95% CI (0.15, 0.56)). We do
find that, for all motives, children’s responses significantly differed
from ‘no’ (all P values < 0.001). These findings mirror children’s
actual behaviour: children in general endorsed both retributive and
consequentialist motives, but, similar to their punitive behaviour,
they endorsed consequentialist motives more than retributive ones because lesson-learning is often considered positively and valued
(see the Supplementary Information for additional information). in adulthood32 and also in childhood, as evidenced by children’s
self-reported punitive motives in Study 2. Taken together, then,
Discussion these findings support the naive pluralist hypothesis.
Overall, these two preregistered studies provide clear evidence for Our data not only speak to the presence of consequentialist
the presence of both consequentialist and retributive motives in and retributive motives in young children but also speak to the
young children, supporting the naive pluralism hypothesis. Our comparative strength of these motives. Specifically, children’s con-
observations cohere with past research showing that children sequentialist motives (that is, punishment rates in the communi-
between the ages of five and seven25–28 are willing to engage in costly cative condition relative to the non-communicative condition) did
third-party punishment, and reveal the motives behind children’s not significantly differ from children’s retributive motives in either
punitive behaviour. Children reliably engaged in purely retributive study (that is, punishment rates in the non-communicative condi-
punishment: they punished solely to make an antisocial other sad tion relative to the baseline control condition). The present find-
without any possibility of deterring future antisocial behaviour. ings therefore align with work suggesting that children punish out
Children did not punish in the non-communicative condition out of of prosocial concerns about restoring justice to victims insofar as
a preference for locking iPads in boxes, shown by the fact that chil- children in our studies punish because they are concerned with pro-
dren punished less in the baseline control condition. Furthermore, moting cooperation29,30.
non-communicative punishment could not be explained by erro- In general, children’s punitive motives align with those of
neous beliefs that punishing would teach the transgressor a lesson. adults—both children and adults are concerned with consequential-
This demonstrates that young children are not pure consequential- ist and retributive punishment. As a result, these findings suggest
ists. Rather, our data suggest that young children engaged in costly that ample social experience with punishment may be minimally
third-party punishment for purely retributive reasons. required for the emergence of both motives in young children.
Yet our data also demonstrate that young children are not solely Instead, children around the age of five seem inclined to weigh both
retributivists—they punished more when doing so conferred a consequentialist and retributive concerns when deciding whether
social benefit than when it did not, and concurrently believed that to punish. This raises questions about how certain motives can sub-
the target of punishment would be less likely to re-offend in the sequently be promoted, mitigated, or maintained through social
future. This aligns with research showing that adults punish more learning and cultural values. For instance, some philosophers have
when transgressors will know that they are being punished15. One argued that punishment should be less rooted in retributive inter-
could argue that communicative punishment could be driven partly ests and more grounded in consequentialist outcomes33–39. Because
by retributive motives above and beyond the non-communicative children seem to value both concerns, it seems plausible that they
condition, if the participants believe that communicating to the are capable of reasoning about punishment in consequentialist
antisocial child that they did something wrong would inflict terms, and therefore, a foundation exists to promote such reasoning
added emotional damage. Nevertheless, we find it unlikely that the throughout early childhood and into adulthood.
increase in punishment between the non-communicative and com- We should note, however, that we only tested children from
municative conditions can be entirely explained by the retributive predominantly middle- to upper-class backgrounds and did not
component of the communicative condition because our partici- test enough children within the different age categories. Because of
pants did not predict that the antisocial child, if punished, would this, our generalizability is limited, and we have limited power to
be sadder in the communicative than the non-communicative con- detect age effects. In light of this limitation, we think future research
dition (Supplementary Information). Instead, we think it is plau- should investigate the degree to which children in different cultures
sible that children punish more in the communicative condition (for example, non-WEIRD cultures) and at different ages may be
dehsinup
ohw
stnapicitrap
fo
egatnecreP
Condition
Baseline control
Non-communicative
Communicative
Strength of
consequentialist
motive
25% Strength of
retributive
motive
0%
Fig. 4 | Percentages of participants who punished depending on condition
in Study 2 (N = 138). As in Fig. 3, but for Study 2. The error bars represent
bootstrapped 95% CIs. The brackets indicate estimates of the strengths
of retributive and consequentialist motives in children, as reflected in
the difference in punishment rates between the non-communicative and
baseline control conditions (for the former), and the non-communicative
and communicative conditions (for the latter).
NAture HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles Nature HumaN BeHaviour
children may be less inclined to punish retributively, although
future research is required to assess this. Additionally, punishment
could be made more or less costly by varying how much the par-
100% ticipant has to give up to punish the transgressor. It seems plau-
sible that, as punishment becomes cheaper, children may be more
inclined to punish in general, thereby minimizing the difference
between retributive and consequentialist punishment. Finally, our
study involves verbal scaffolding to ensure that the participants
understand the consequences of some punishments compared with
75%
others; it remains unclear whether children would respond similarly
in situations that involve more spontaneity.
In conclusion, two preregistered studies provide evidence that,
from a young age, children willingly engage in costly third-party
punishment even when doing so exclusively satisfies retributive
50% concerns. At the same time, young children are more willing to
punish when doing so teaches the transgressor a lesson. These find-
ings provide evidence that young children are naive pluralists in
their punishment behaviour, calibrated to both retributive and
consequentialist concerns.
Methods
Study 1. Participants and design. These studies were approved by the Yale Human
Subjects Committee (Protocol No. 1302011578), and we obtained informed
parental consent and verbal assent from all participants.
The sample included 113 participants: 37 participants in the communicative
condition (M age = 6.59, s.d. age = 1.05; 22 females), 38 in the non-communicative
condition (M age = 6.29, s.d. age = 1.13; 17 females) and 38 in the baseline control
condition (M age = 6.15, s.d. age = 1.03; 16 females). The participants were recruited
for the communicative and non-communicative conditions first, followed by
the baseline control condition. This is because the necessity of the baseline
control condition was contingent on the results from the other two experimental
conditions. This condition was necessary only if children did engage in
punishment in the non-communicative condition to verify that punishment was
not a result of a preference for locking up iPads. We thus ran the communicative
and non-communicative conditions first. For more information about this and for
information about the preregistration and power analyses, see the Supplementary
Information.
The sample comprised 16 four-year-olds, 25 five-year-olds, 31 six-year-olds
and 41 seven-year-olds (M = 6.34, s.d. = 1.08). The sample was predominantly
inclined to punish for consequentialist versus retributive purposes, white (N = 67). Eight additional children were mixed race, 7 were Hispanic, 3 were
Black, 3 were Asian, and 2 were South Asian. The parents of the remaining children
and whether childhood motives for punishment in a given culture
opted to not report their child’s ethnicity. Fifty-eight of the participants were male
are related to patterns of norm enforcement observed among adults
(55 females). All participants were tested in the Mind and Development Lab at Yale
in that culture. University. The participants were covertly videorecorded for the purposes of data
There are several additional limitations worth noting. First, our coding. Several additional children (N = 24) were tested but excluded in accordance
methodology, for practical purposes, involved witnessing a trans- with our preregistered exclusion criteria (described in ‘Materials and procedure’).
See the Supplementary Information for the full information.
gression on a video rather than in real life. This feature of the design
may have affected whether participants truly believed that they were
Materials and procedure. All verbatim scripts are available on OSF (https://osf.io/
interacting with a real person and that their actions elicited real out- ht7j6/).
comes. Our comprehension checks suggest that children believed
their decisions would result in real consequences, but we cannot Introduction of the iPad and costly self-report validation. We first introduced
children to an iPad, let them play an iPad game, and measured the degree to which
know for sure. Furthermore, our methodology was highly verbal,
they liked playing on the iPad and how much they wanted to continue playing.
and because of this, younger children may have struggled more with Specifically, the children were shown either a game called Scoops, where the aim of
following the different components of the study. the game is to collect ice cream scoops and avoid onions and tomatoes, or Happy
An additional consideration pertains to whether adults prefer Fall, where the aim of the game is to help a candy collect coins while going down
punishment over alternative means of rectifying injustice40,41. It is a tunnel. We chose these games because children would probably not have any
previous familiarity with either game (no children expressed having played the
possible that punishment may be attenuated in a context whereby
game previously), and neither game involved violence. See the Supplementary
there are alternative ways to intervene, such as compensating the Information for the full information.
victim or mere verbal intervention. Additional work is needed to
test whether children prefer punishment—imposing a cost on the Antisocial (or neutral) child introduction. The experimenter then told the child
transgressor (such as removing the iPad or removing the stolen a story about another child, named either Jessica or John. We counterbalanced
good from the thief)—over compensatory actions that only help the across participants such that approximately half of the female and half of the
male participants witnessed John as the transgressor (for clarity’s sake, the script
victim and do not impose a direct cost on the transgressor (such
described here and in the remainder of the paper will involve Jessica). We examine
as giving the victim extra candy). We think future research can stimulus effects in the Supplementary Information. In Study 1, we find that the
answer this question fully, and there is some emerging evidence participants punished the female transgressor more than the male transgressor
that children prefer punishment to compensation, as evidenced by regardless of their own gender, but these stimulus effects did not replicate in
McAuliffe and Dunham (unpublished manuscript) and others42. Study 2.
In the story, it was described that Betty and Jessica were drawing pictures, and
Other factors may moderate the results found here. For instance,
Betty went to go to the bathroom. In the communicative and non-communicative
the punishment in our studies is moderately harmful. We specu- conditions, the experimenter then showed the participant child a short video clip
late that, as the punishment becomes disproportionate to the crime, in which Jessica ripped up Betty’s artwork. In the baseline control condition, the
detacidni
ohw
stnapicitrap
fo
egatnecreP
dneffo-er
ton
dluow
rossergsnart
eht
taht
Communicative Non-communicative
condition condition
25%
0%
Punishment (lockbox) No punishment (open box)
Fig. 5 | Percentages of participants who predicted that the transgressor
will not re-offend. Percentages of participants who predicted that
the transgressor will not re-offend as a function of condition (either
communicative or non-communicative) and of their punishment decision
(either punish or not). The error bars represent bootstrapped 95% CIs.
NAture HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Nature HumaN BeHaviour Articles
experimenter showed the participant child a short video clip in which Jessica just very important given research indicating that reputational concerns play a role
looked at Betty’s artwork. For both Study 1 and Study 2, the exact stimulus videos in shaping participants’ punitive decisions31. More specifically, the participants
are not included on OSF because of privacy concerns. Not all parents consented were instructed that the first experimenter would leave the room, and once they
to having their children’s video posted on the internet. The videos are available on had decided which box to put the iPad in, they should ring a bell, and a different
request from the first author. Importantly, though, all children in our stimuli were experimenter would return. Once the child rang the bell, this second experimenter
the same age (six years old) and were provided the same instructions when filming returned to the room, introduced themselves to the children and recorded the
the stimulus videos. two dependent punishment measures. For the binary punishment measure,
the experimenter indicated which box the child had selected (the locked or
Meanness validation item and emotion questions. The experimenter then asked the unlocked box). We also asked a continuous punishment measure (Supplementary
meanness validation item and three emotion items (happiness, sadness and anger) Information). The experimenter also asked the participant why they made their
in a randomized order. See the Supplementary Information for the wording and punitive selection: “Why did you choose that box?” Finally, the experimenter
findings. allowed the child to play with the iPad regardless of their punishment choice.
Locked box and open box introduction. The experimenter then introduced the Study 2. Participants and design. Study 2 involved the same three conditions as
participant to two black boxes (Fig. 2; whether the box was placed on the left or in Study 1: communicative condition (antisocial child), non-communicative
right was counterbalanced). One box had a functioning lock, and the other box condition (antisocial child) and baseline control condition (neutral child). The
did not. The experimenter explained that they could choose to place the iPad in assignment of condition was randomized across all participants. The sample
the locked box (which would prevent Jessica from playing on it) or the open box resulted in a total of 138 children: 46 participants in the communicative condition
(which would allow Jessica to play on it). The experimenter also explained that, (M age = 6.61, s.d. age = 0.84; 23 females), 46 in the non-communicative condition
if the locked box was selected, the participant could no longer play on the iPad, (M age = 6.54, s.d. age = 0.86; 25 females), and 46 in the baseline control condition
and that, if the open box was selected, the participant could play on the iPad. We (M age = 6.63, s.d. age = 0.88; 17 females). Notably, we did not test four-year-olds,
did not specify the amount of time the participant would give up on the iPad if because they had difficulties understanding the experiment, as evidenced by
they chose to do so. But given the nature of the experimental study sessions in the them representing the majority age group failing the comprehension checks
lab, the participant knew that they would be leaving the lab shortly after having in Study 1.
finished the study, so children in reality were giving up approximately 10–15 We aimed to equally recruit participants within each age group within each
minutes of time on the iPad (depending on how long the family wanted to stay in condition. However, the sample ultimately comprised mostly seven-year-olds
the lab). The non-punitive children were generally told that the study was over and (N = 57), primarily because more children of this age signed up at the schools
that they should select a prize for participating (standard protocol in the lab); a few where we tested. Forty-two six-year-olds and 39 five-year-olds also participated.
children stuck around to play on other toys that were present in the waiting room. Forty-three participants were tested at schools and summer camps in Connecticut,
Next, the experimenter asked two comprehension checks. For each box, the 41 participants were tested in the lab at Yale University, 35 participants were
experimenter asked, “Can you tell me: if you decide to put the iPad in this box, tested at a private school in Atlanta, and 19 participants were tested at a private
will you get to play with the iPad anymore? Yes or no?” If the participant answered school in Manhattan. Because we did not exclusively test children in the lab, as
incorrectly, the experimenter corrected them and re-asked the question. If the we did in Study 1, we were not able to collect parental demographic data. Several
participant continued to respond incorrectly, they were excluded from analyses for additional children (N = 17) were tested but excluded for various reasons—see the
comprehension check failure. Supplementary Information for the full information.
Isolating retributive motives. First, the experimenter introduced the participant Materials and procedure. Introduction of the iPad and costly self-report validation.
to a sign associated with the open box (the sign read “Yes iPad” with a large The introduction of the iPad and the costly self-report validation items were the
green check mark). Next, the experimenter introduced the participant to a sign same as in Study 1. As in Study 1, we asked two questions about whether the
associated with the locked box. The locked box sign read either “No iPad because participant liked playing on the iPad and whether they wanted to play more. See
you ripped up the drawing” (in the communicative condition) or just “No iPad” the Supplementary Information for the full information.
(in the non-communicative and baseline control conditions). These signs depicted
an iPad with a large red X over the iPad. The visualizations on the cards (that is, Antisocial (or neutral) child introduction. The introduction of the antisocial (or
the green check mark and the red X) aided participants who may have difficulty neutral) child was largely similar to Study 1. We made two main changes. First,
reading the signs. rather than including only one Jessica character and one John character, we had
Because some of the younger participants probably could not read the two Jessica characters and two John characters to ensure that the effects in Study
language on the signs, verbal instructions were given to the participants, and 1 were not a result of the specific stimuli we had used. Which character the
these descriptions varied across conditions. In the communicative condition, the participants learned about was randomized across participants.
participants were told that, if they placed the iPad in the locked box, Jessica would Second, we altered one slight ambiguity in Study 1’s script. Specifically, in
know why she couldn’t play with the iPad and would thereby learn a lesson. In the Study 1, we said, “When Betty had to go to the bathroom, I’m going to show you a
non-communicative condition, the participants were told that, if they placed the video of what Jessica did to Betty’s artwork.” In Study 2, we said, “When Betty was
iPad in the lockbox, Jessica would not know why she couldn’t play and thereby done drawing, she had to go to the bathroom, so she asked Jessica to look at her
would not learn a lesson. In the baseline control condition, the participants were drawing while she went. I’m going to show you a video of what happened next.” We
told that, if they placed the iPad in the lockbox, Jessica would not know why she made this change because we thought it may have been confusing in Study 1 to say
couldn’t play with the iPad; we did not mention anything about learning a lesson that Jessica did something to Betty’s drawing when she simply looked at it in the
because there is no lesson to be learned when acting neutrally. Critically, the baseline control condition.
participants were told in all conditions that, if they placed the iPad in the lockbox,
Jessica would feel sad. Locked box and open box introduction. The locked and open box introduction
The experimenter then asked the participant several comprehension checks was largely similar to Study 1. However, rather than stating that Jessica would learn
in randomized order: (1) for knowledge comprehension, “If you do decide to put a lesson in the communicative condition, we changed the language to: “Jessica
the iPad in this box, will Jessica know why she can’t play with the iPad? Or will could learn a lesson.” For the projected sadness question, we used a six-point
she not know why?”; and (2) for sadness comprehension, “If you do decide to put scale whereby, after children indicated that Jessica would be sad if she could not
the iPad in this box, will Jessica feel sad that she can’t play?” (After the sadness play on the iPad, we asked, “How sad will she be? A tiny bit sad, very, very sad,
comprehension check, we also asked the participants how sad they thought the or somewhere in between?” The question was accompanied by a laminated card
antisocial child would be. We asked, “How sad do you think Jessica will be? A teeny depicting five sad faces increasing in size. The design of these questions then
bit sad, a little bit sad, or very sad?” This resulted in a three-point Likert-style scale rendered a six-point Likert-style question in which 1 signified responding ‘no’ and
of projected sadness.) For the communicative and non-communicative conditions, 6 signified ‘very, very sad’.
the participants were also asked (3) for lesson-learning comprehension, “Can you
tell me? If you do decide to put the iPad in this box, will Jessica learn a lesson about Punishment decision. The punishment decision was also as in Study 1, but we did
not ripping up people’s drawings?” This third question was not included in the not include the continuous punishment measure because the results did not differ
baseline control condition because it was not relevant. for the continuous and binary measures in Study 1.
For each question, if the participant responded incorrectly, the experimenter
corrected them and asked the question a second time. If the participant continued Follow-up questions. We asked several follow-up questions after the participants
to answer incorrectly, they were excluded. made their punishment decisions. We provide the methods here only for the ones
presented in the main text; see the Supplementary Information for the additional
Punishment decision. We had the participants make their punishment decisions questions.
in private, and we instructed the participants before making their decisions that
a different experimenter would come back into the room after the participant Re-offending question. We asked the participants to recall what happened
had made their decision. We viewed these two methodological components as in the video they had seen earlier to verify the children had not forgotten.
NAture HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles Nature HumaN BeHaviour
The experimenter then asked, “So, if Jessica comes back tomorrow, do you think 21. Vaish, A., Missana, M. & Tomasello, M. Three‐year‐old children intervene
Jessica will do that again? Yes or no?” We also asked, “Why do you think that?” in third‐party moral transgressions. Br. J. Dev. Psychol. 29, 124–130
(2011).
General punitive attitudes. Inspired by previous work15, we developed four 22. Heyman, G. D., Loke, I. C. & Lee, K. Children spontaneously police adults’
questions, two of which measured consequentialist beliefs and two of which transgressions. J. Exp. Child Psychol. 150, 155–164 (2016).
measured retributive ones: (1) “Do you think people who do bad things should 23. Yucel, M. & Vaish, A. Young children tattle to enforce moral norms. Soc. Dev.
be punished because they deserve to feel sad?” (retributive), (2) “Do you think 27, 924–936 (2018).
people who do bad things should be punished because it’s the right thing to do?” 24. House, B. R. et al. Social norms and cultural diversity in the development of
(retributive), (3) “Do you think people who do bad things should be punished third-party punishment. Proc. R. Soc. B 287, 20192794 (2020).
because they need to learn a lesson?” (consequentialist) and (4) “Do you think 25. Jordan, J. J., McAuliffe, K. & Warneken, F. Development of in-group favoritism
people who do bad things should be punished because they should change their in children’s third-party punishment of selfishness. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA
behavior?” (consequentialist). We asked these questions in a randomized order. For 111, 12710–12715 (2014).
each of these questions, we asked ‘yes’ or ‘no’. If the participants said ‘yes’, we asked, 26. McAuliffe, K., Jordan, J. J. & Warneken, F. Costly third-party punishment in
“How much do you think that? A teeny bit, a lot, or somewhere in between?” These young children. Cognition 134, 1–10 (2015).
questions were accompanied by a laminated sheet featuring five circles increasing 27. Yang, F., Choi, Y. J., Misch, A., Yang, X. & Dunham, Y. In defense of the
in size. This structure rendered a six-point scale where 1 represented ‘no’ and 6 commons: young children negatively evaluate and sanction free riders.
represented ‘a lot’. Psychol. Sci. 29, 1598–1611 (2018).
28. Yudkin, D. A., Van Bavel, J. J. & Rhodes, M. Young children police in-group
Reporting Summary. Further information on research design is available in the members at personal cost. J. Exp. Psychol. Gen. 149, 182–191 (2019).
Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article. 29. Riedl, K., Jensen, K., Call, J. & Tomasello, M. Restorative justice in children.
Curr. Biol. 25, 1731–1735 (2015).
Data availability 30. Kanakogi, Y. et al. Preverbal infants affirm third-party interventions that
protect victims from aggressors. Nat. Hum. Behav. 1, 0037 (2017).
All data related to these studies are publicly available on OSF at https://osf.io/ht7j6/.
31. Jordan, J. J., Hoffman, M., Bloom, P. & Rand, D. G. Third-party punishment
as a costly signal of trustworthiness. Nature 530, 473–476 (2016).
Code availability
32. Twardawski, M., Tang, K. T. & Hilbig, B. E. Is it all about retribution? The
Most analyses were conducted in SPSS and using freely available packages in flexibility of punishment goals. Soc. Justice Res. 33, 195–218 (2020).
the R environment for statistical computing. All syntax and code are available at 33. Bommarito, N. Virtuous and vicious anger. J. Ethics Soc. Philos. 11,
https://osf.io/ht7j6/. 1–27 (2017).
34. Flanagan, O. The Geography of Morals: Varieties of Moral Possibility
Received: 14 October 2019; Accepted: 21 September 2020; (Oxford Univ. Press, 2016).
Published: xx xx xxxx 35. Leboeuf, C. in The Moral Psychology of Anger (eds Cherry, M. & Flanagan, O.)
15–30 (Rowman & Littlefield International, 2017).
36. Nussbaum, M. C. Anger and Forgiveness: Resentment, Generosity, and Justice
references
(Oxford Univ. Press, 2016).
1. Fehr, E. & Fischbacher, U. The nature of human altruism. Nature 425,
37. Silvermint, D. Rage and virtuous resistance. J. Polit. Philos. 25,
785–791 (2003).
461–486 (2017).
2. Henrich, J. et al. Markets, religion, community size, and the evolution of
38. Tessman, L. Burdened Virtues: Virtue Ethics for Liberatory Struggles
fairness and punishment. Science 327, 1480–1484 (2010).
(Oxford Univ. Press, 2005).
3. Vidmar, N. & Miller, D. T. Social psychological processes underlying attitudes
39. Srinivasan, A. The aptness of anger. J. Polit. Philos. 26, 123–144 (2018).
toward legal punishment. Law Soc. Rev. 14, 565–602 (1980).
40. FeldmanHall, O., Sokol-Hessner, P., Van Bavel, J. J. & Phelps, E. A. Fairness
4. Güth, W., Schmittberger, R. & Schwarze, B. An experimental analysis of
violations elicit greater punishment on behalf of another than for oneself.
ultimatum bargaining. J. Econ. Behav. Organ. 3, 367–388 (1982).
Nat. Commun. 5, 5306 (2014).
5. Fehr, E. & Fischbacher, U. Third-party punishment and social norms.
41. Heffner, J. & FeldmanHall, O. Why we don’t always punish: preferences for
Evol. Hum. Behav. 25, 63–87 (2004).
non-punitive responses to moral violations. Sci. Rep. 9, 13219 (2019).
6. Fehr, E. & Gächter, S. Altruistic punishment in humans. Nature 415,
42. Miller, D. T. & McCann, C. D. Children’s reactions to the perpetrators and
137–140 (2002).
victims of injustices. Child Dev. 50, 861–868 (1979).
7. Boyd, R., Gintis, H., Bowles, S. & Richerson, P. J. The evolution of altruistic
punishment. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 100, 3531–3535 (2003).
Acknowledgements
8. Balliet, D., Mulder, L. B. & Van Lange, P. A. Reward, punishment, and
cooperation: a meta-analysis. Psychol. Bull. 137, 594–615 (2011). We thank the Crockett Lab and the Mind and Development Lab for their valuable
9. Mathew, S. & Boyd, R. Punishment sustains large-scale cooperation in feedback in the design and methodology of the present studies. We also thank A. Buck,
prestate warfare. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 108, 11375–11380 (2011). A. Gollwitzer, S. Hollander, C. Johnson, E. Mahaffey, S. Minnillo, A. Morra, I. Munday,
10. Kant, I. in Why Punish? How Much? A Reader on Punishment A. Sacchi, C. Seita and C. Welsh for assistance with the data collection. Finally, we thank
(ed. Tonry, M. H.) 31–36 (Oxford Univ. Press, 2011). the generous and wonderful parents, children and schools who helped us with
11. Bentham, J. in What Is Justice? Classic and Contemporary Readings this project.
(eds Soloman, R. C. & Murphy, M. C.) 215–220 (Oxford Univ. Press, 2000).
12. Funk, F., McGeer, V. & Gollwitzer, M. Get the message: punishment is Author contributions
satisfying if the transgressor responds to its communicative intent. Pers. Soc. J.M., D.A.Y. and M.J.C. developed the study concept and study design. J.M. collected the
Psychol. Bull. 40, 986–997 (2014). data and performed the analyses. J.M., D.A.Y. and M.J.C. drafted the manuscript and
13. Baron, J. in Psychological Perspectives on Justice: Theory and Applications provided critical revisions. All authors approved the final version of the manuscript for
(eds. Mellers, B. & Baron, J.) 109–137 (Cambridge Univ. Press, 1993). submission.
14. Carlsmith, K. M., Darley, J. M. & Robinson, P. H. Why do we punish?
Deterrence and just deserts as motives for punishment. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. Competing interests
83, 284–299 (2002).
The authors declare no competing interests.
15. Crockett, M. J., Özdemir, Y. & Fehr, E. The value of vengeance and the
demand for deterrence. J. Exp. Psychol. Gen. 143, 2279–2286 (2014).
16. Goodwin, G. P. & Gromet, D. M. Punishment. WIREs Cogn. Sci. 5, Additional information
561–572 (2014).
Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/
17. Keller, L. B., Oswald, M. E., Stucki, I. & Gollwitzer, M. A closer look at an eye
s41562-020-00975-9.
for an eye: laypersons’ punishment decisions are primarily driven by
retributive motives. Soc. Justice Res. 23, 99–116 (2010). Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to J.M. or M.J.C.
18. Nadelhoffer, T., Heshmati, S., Kaplan, D. & Nichols, S. Folk retributivism and Peer review information Primary handling editor: Charlotte Payne.
the communication confound. Econ. Philos. 29, 235–261 (2013).
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
19. Ouss, A. & Peysakhovich. When punishment doesn’t pay. J. Law Econ. 58,
625–655 (2015). Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
20. Hamlin, J. K., Wynn, K., Bloom, P. & Mahajan, N. How infants and toddlers published maps and institutional affiliations.
react to antisocial others. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 108, 19931–19936 (2011). © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2020
NAture HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
1
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
April
2020
Corresponding author(s): Julia Marshall & Molly Crockett
Last updated by author(s): May 13, 2020
Reporting Summary
Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency
in reporting. For further information on Nature Research policies, see our Editorial Policies and the Editorial Policy Checklist.
Statistics
For all statistical analyses, confirm that the following items are present in the figure legend, table legend, main text, or Methods section.
n/a Confirmed
The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
A statement on whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided
Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.
A description of all covariates tested
A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
A full description of the statistical parameters including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient)
AND variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)
For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted
Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.
For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated
Our web collection on statistics for biologists contains articles on many of the points above.
Software and code
Policy information about availability of computer code
Data collection All available is on Open Science Framework: https://osf.io/ht7j6/?view_only=9daf7fe7b8ef40a5bb4fa77c07a0fcf4
Data analysis All data analyses were conducted on either SPSS or R. All code for these analyses are on OSF.
For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors and
reviewers. We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Research guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.
Data
Policy information about availability of data
All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable:
- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets
- A list of figures that have associated raw data
- A description of any restrictions on data availability
All data related to these studies are publicly available on Open Science Framework at https://osf.io/ht7j6/?view_only=9daf7fe7b8ef40a5bb4fa77c07a0fcf4.
2
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
April
2020
Field-specific reporting
Please select the one below that is the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.
Life sciences Behavioural & social sciences Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences
For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/documents/nr-reporting-summary-flat.pdf
Behavioural & social sciences study design
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
Study description The studies involved quantitative research methodologies.
Research sample The sample included children ranging in age from 4 to 7 years of age (in Study 1) and children ranging in age from 5 to 7 years of age
(in Study 2). We recruited a developmental sample because our research question pertained to the early emergence of retributive
behavior. The demographics of the sample are included in the methods. In general, the children in Study 1 were from the New Haven
area. The sample from Study 2 involved a more geographically diverse sample, as some participants were recruited in Atlanta, New
York, New Haven, and other areas around Connecticut.
Sampling strategy Both samples were convenience samples. The sample size determinations are explained in detail in our pre-registrations. For Study 1,
we set a rule to either end data collection after two months or after we reached ~144 participants--the 144 number was determined
from a power analysis in which we aimed to have 85% power to detect a medium effect size of condition. The sample size for Study 2
was based off of a power analysis in which we had 80% power to replicate the smallest effect documented in Study 1 (the difference
between control and non-communicative punishment).
Data collection The data was all recorded via a video camera and coded by research assistants who were blind to experimental hypotheses. It was
impossible to fully blind the experimenters considering they had to read different scripts for different conditions. In Study 1, we were
able to switch experimenters at the time of the decision to minimize any task demands or experimenter effects. We were not able to
do so in Study 2 because we tested many of the participants in schools and were therefore subject to different testing conditions in
those situations. Still we document retributive behavior in both studies. We also had several experimenters during the course of data
collection, further mitigating any potential experimenter effects.
Timing For Study 1, as described in the Method section, we tested children in the communicative and non-communicative conditions in the
summer of 2018. Data collection for the control condition occurred in December 2018-February 2019 after the other conditions were
completed. Importantly, in Study 2, all conditions were tested collectively (randomized across participants, between-subjects) from
March 2019 to August 2019.
Data exclusions In Study 1, 24 children were excluded, as described on pp. 24 in the main manuscript. These exclusions were as a result of
comprehension check failures that were pre-registered. Importantly, as explained in the mansucript, the results do not meaningfully
change if we include all participants. The same was true in Study 2--we had to exclude 17 children for reasons outlined in our
preregistration. These are described in the Supplemental Materials.
Non-participation No participants began the experiment and dropped out.
Randomization Participants were randomly assigned to condition. Prior to beginning Study 1 and 2, we created a list from a random number
generator to determine which condition participants would be subject to.
Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods
We require information from authors about some types of materials, experimental systems and methods used in many studies. Here, indicate whether each material,
system or method listed is relevant to your study. If you are not sure if a list item applies to your research, read the appropriate section before selecting a response.
Materials & experimental systems Methods
n/a Involved in the study n/a Involved in the study
Antibodies ChIP-seq
Eukaryotic cell lines Flow cytometry
Palaeontology and archaeology MRI-based neuroimaging
Animals and other organisms
Human research participants
Clinical data
Dual use research of concern
3
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
April
2020
Human research participants
Policy information about studies involving human research participants
Population characteristics See above.
Recruitment For Study 1, participants included families who have previously signed up for the Yale Mind & Development lab database. In
general, these are families who reside in the New Haven area. For Study 2, we designed the experiment such that it was more
portable and were therefore able to test participants outside of the lab. Here we sent permission forms home to families
attending schools for which we have a collaboration to see whether they would want their child to participate in the study. In
general, we have high rates of consent form return and do not suspect any evidence of a problematic self-selection bias in
recruitment. Nonetheless, we note the limitations of our sample in the main manuscript in the penultimate paragraph on pp.
13.
Ethics oversight Yale Human Subjects Committee (Protocol number: 1302011578)
Note that full information on the approval of the study protocol must also be provided in the manuscript.