Articles
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-019-0718-z
Age-related preference for geometric spatial cues
during real-world navigation
Marcia Bécu 1*, Denis Sheynikhovich 1, Guillaume Tatur 1, Catherine Persephone Agathos 1,
Luca Leonardo Bologna 1,2, José-Alain Sahel 1,3,4,5 and Angelo Arleo 1*
Ageing effects on spatial navigation are characterized mainly in terms of impaired allocentric strategies. However, an alterna-
tive hypothesis is that navigation difficulties in aged people are associated with deficits in processing and encoding spatial
cues. We tested this hypothesis by studying how geometry and landmark cues control navigation in young and older adults in
a real, ecological environment. Recordings of body and gaze dynamics revealed a preference for geometry-based navigation
in older adults, and for landmark-based navigation in younger ones. While cue processing was associated with specific fixa-
tion patterns, advanced age manifested itself in a longer reorientation time, reflecting an unbalanced exploration–exploitation
trade-off in scanning policies. Moreover, a battery of tests revealed a specific cognitive deficit in older adults with geometric
preference. These results suggest that allocentric strategy deficits in ageing can result from difficulties related to landmark
coding, and predict recovery of allocentric strategies in geometrically polarized environments.
A
geing is associated with a decline in the spatial naviga- reality study30 showed that older adults experience difficulties when
tion abilities essential for independence, safety and qual- reorienting with non-geometric cues. Conversely, another virtual
ity of life1,2. The highly dynamic and multisensory nature reality study31 found that older subjects were impaired in learning
of spatial navigation makes it one of the cognitive faculties most locations relative to environmental boundaries—that is, a geomet-
severely affected by ageing3–5. Compensatory adaptations to age- ric cue. In addition, experimental evidence indicates that the use of
related motor6–8, perceptual9–11 and cognitive12,13 deficits affect the screen-based virtual reality to study spatial navigation in older sub-
way sensory cues are processed and used to guide goal-directed jects can be problematic. Joystick-operated motion prevents the use
actions. Age-related changes in spatial navigation have usually been by subjects of proprioceptive and vestibular cues for reorientation
described in terms of a bias towards egocentric strategies (that is, and navigation. This constitutes a problem, since it has been shown
based on the encoding of subject-to-object spatial relations) to the that age-related differences are dependent on the availability of mul-
detriment of allocentric strategies (based on object-to-object rela- tisensory information, with greater navigation difficulties observed
tions, independently from the position and viewpoint of the sub- with larger sensory restrictions11,32,33. Moreover, a screen-based set-
ject)1,14–16. However, the choice of a navigation strategy depends up limits the extent of the visual field, potentially restricting the use
on the availability of sensory cues17–20. Hence, difficulties in the of geometric cues for reorientation34 and perturbing active visual
processing of different types of spatial cues can bias subsequent exploration as compared to natural conditions.
navigational decisions. We sought to test reorientation and navigation performances in
Two different types of visual cue can be used for self-orienting young and older adults in a real street-like environment, when geo-
and navigation planning21–24: while geometric cues describe the rela- metric and landmark information are in conflict. To gain a deeper
tionships between surrounding large-scale surfaces (for example, insight into behavioural decisions and provide a characterization
building walls, the street line, leafy border of a nearby park), land- of information-encoding strategies mediating these decisions, we
mark cues refer to the featural contents of those surfaces that can recorded body and eye movements of the navigating subjects during
serve as points-of-reference25 (for example, shop signs, street signs, both spatial learning and in a conflict situation. In primates, includ-
colour of the leaves). Several experimental studies have provided ing humans, spatial representation is closely associated with visual
evidence of developmental differences in the use of these spatial cue coding mechanisms and it involves visually responsive areas of the
types26. Children appear to preferentially encode geometric over brain to a much greater extent than in rodents35–40. Unlike rodents,
landmark cues, since it was shown that the shape of an experimen- primates benefit from a foveated, high-resolution visual system
tal enclosure dominated their sense of orientation at the expense of that can provide information about environmental cues based
featural wall contents26 (in a scale-dependent manner27). In contrast, solely on visual exploration of the surrounding scene. Therefore,
young adults are able to use and efficiently combine both types of the analysis of oculomotor behaviour can reveal which spatial cues
cue28 but they rely preferentially on landmarks when the two types are employed, in the same way as the analysis of rodent explor-
of information are conflicting19. atory behaviour can tell us what learning strategy is being used41.
While the developmental effects on reorientation and visual cue In a virtual water maze study in humans, it was shown that good
processing are relatively well characterized29, little is known about navigators preferentially focused on distal landmarks at the begin-
the influence of advanced age on these visuo-cognitive functions and ning of the trial, a behavioural component that was not present in
the available evidence remains controversial. A screen-based virtual bad navigators42. Surprisingly, no study has comparatively examined
1Sorbonne Université, INSERM, CNRS, Institut de la Vision, Paris, France. 2Institute of Biophysics, National Research Council, Palermo, Italy. 3CHNO des
Quinze-Vingts, INSERM-DGOS CIC 1423, Paris, France. 4Fondation Ophtalmologique Rothschild, Paris, France. 5Department of Ophthalmology,
The University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. *e-mail: marcia.becu@inserm.fr; angelo.arleo@inserm.fr
NATure HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NATuRe HuMAN BeHAviouR
the link between navigation and gaze dynamics in young and older We found that a majority of young adults reoriented and navi-
navigators. Determining oculomotor signatures of landmark- ver- gated to the goal based on the environmental landmarks during
sus geometry-related spatial coding was one of the objectives of this the probe trial (Fig. 2a). In contrast, a majority of older subjects
study. reoriented and navigated according to the geometry of the environ-
ment, apparently neglecting the rotation of the landmarks (Fig. 2a).
results There was a significant difference in the proportion of subjects who
Data were collected from 39 participants (20 young and 19 older oriented based on geometry across the two age groups (𝜒2 = 5.77,
adults). The participants were clinically and functionally screened P < 0.02), indicating a preference for geometric cues in the older
to ascertain that their visual, audio-vestibular, postural, oculomotor adults (who were five times more likely to orient themselves accord-
and cognitive (in particular, visuo-spatial memory) characteristics ing to geometry than were young adults; odds ratio = 5.14, odds
were within or above the normal age limits. Both whole-body motion ratio 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.30–20.36). No significant gen-
and gaze dynamics were recorded as the subjects searched for a hid- der effect was found (𝜒2 = 1.43, P = 0.23, odds ratio = 0.45, odds ratio
den goal in a real street-like environment (Fig. 1a; see Methods and 95% CI 0.12–1.67; Supplementary Fig. 1), in contrast to results from
Supplementary Video 1). During the first eight trials, constituting
the learning phase, all cues were fixed and subjects were instructed
to find, as quickly as possible, an unmarked goal (location G in a
Fig. 1b). At the beginning of each trial, subjects were disoriented
(with eyes closed) and situated in one of four pseudo-random envi-
ronmental locations, each time with a different orientation. Then,
subjects had to reorient (after opening their eyes), plan and initi-
ate their goal-oriented behaviour. Reaching the goal zone was auto-
matically signalled by a sound. Before the ninth (probe) trial, the
entire array of wall panels was rotated, unknown to the subjects,
to set landmark and geometric information in conflict concerning
the goal location (Fig. 1c). If disoriented subjects were reliant on
wall landmarks during learning (for example, they remembered that
the goal was located between the brown door, the green window
and the ATM machine), they were expected to go first to corner L
on the probe trial. If subjects relied on geometric information (for
example, they recalled that the goal was located in the corner with a
long wall to the right and a short wall to the left), they were expected b
Learning phase
to go to the actual goal location (G) or its geometrically equivalent
location (S). While the assumption of an exclusive use of one type of
cue is unlikely, we hypothesized that a preference towards one or the
other type of cue would emerge during the probe trial. During four
post-probe trials, the same wall panel configuration was used as in
the probe trial and the experimental procedure was identical to that
s4 s3
of the learning phase (see Methods).
G
Fig. 1 | The real, ecological experimental set-up and the spatial task. a,
By using the Streetlab platform (Vision Institute), a street-like, open-field s2 s1
maze was set up to allow both young and older subjects to navigate a real,
yet fully controlled, environment (see Methods and Supplementary Video
1). Both whole-body and eye motions were recorded (at 120 and 60 Hz,
respectively) as subjects navigated through the obstacle-free environment.
b, Configuration of the realistic relief scenery during the learning phase
(that is, the first eight trials). Subjects were required to find unmarked
goal location G (80 × 80 cm2), which triggered a rewarding sound. At the c
Testing phase
beginning of each trial, subjects were disoriented and placed in one of
four positions (s1–4) and one of three different orientations (indicated
b thy
e
a prr ro ow bes (a nt is nt ta hr )t i tn rg
ia
lp ao ns dit i to hn
e
s f1 o) l.
l
oc w, C ino gn f fi og uu rr a pt oio stn
-
po rf
o
l ban ed tm riaa lr sk
,
s
w
d hu icr hin g
Rotation
constituted the testing phase. The entire array of wall panels was rotated to
create a conflict between landmark and geometric spatial cues. Following
rotation, landmarks that were initially near goal corner G were positioned
G E
in the adjacent, geometrically different, corner L. Preference for a spatial
cue (landmark or geometry) was identified during the first probe trial
based on the subject’s trajectory. Entering areas G or S assigned a subject
to the geometry group, whereas entering area L assigned a subject to L S
the landmark group. E, error area. The four areas were of the same size
(80 × 80 cm2) as the goal position (G) experienced during the learning
phase, and their spatial position corresponded exactly to either G or the
mirror positions (L, S and E) relative to the room’s principal axes. Credit:
Figure adapted, with permission, from CNRS images. Consent to publish
from each research participant was obtained.
NATure HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NATuRe HuMAN BeHAviouR Articles
a b P < 0.001, partial η2 = 0.57, η2 95% CI 0.33–0.70; Fig. 2c). Cue prefer-
1 ence was also reflected in the time spent by the geometry and land-
mark groups in zones G and L, respectively (Supplementary Fig. 2).
0.8
To study how age and cue preference were reflected in spatial
0.6 behaviour, we assessed a set of navigation variables across learning
*
trials—that is, before the cue conflict was introduced. To separate
0.4
a putative information-sampling period from the subsequent gen-
eration of motor behaviour42, we analysed the behavioural variables 0.2
separately for the orientation period—that is, the time from eye
0 opening after disorientation until the initiation of a goal-directed Young adults Older adults
movement, and the navigation period—that is, the remainder of
the trial time. Analysis of the age factor revealed that both groups
reached asymptotic performance by trial four on average, but the
spatial behaviour of older subjects differed from that of young sub-
c jects (Fig. 3). First, older subjects spent a significantly longer time
in reorienting across all learning trials (F = 47.41, P < 0.001, par-
(1,35)
tial η2 = 0.57, η2 95% CI 0.33–0.7; Fig. 3a). Second, they walked at a
significantly slower speed (F = 13.47, P < 0.001, partial η2 = 0.28,
(1,35)
η2 95% CI 0.05–0.47; Fig. 3b) and they travelled a longer and a
more tortuous path to the goal (distance: F = 15.40, P < 0.001, (1,35)
partial η2 = 0.30, η2 95% CI 0.07–0.49; path tortuosity: F = 13.95;
(1, 35) P < 0.001, partial η2 = 0.28, η2 95% CI 0.06–0.48; heading deviation:
F = 7.77, P < 0.01, partial η2 = 0.18, η2 95% CI 0.01–0.38; Fig. 3c–e).
(1,35)
As a result, it required longer for older subjects to reach the goal
location (escape latency: F = 31.10, P < 0.001, partial η2 = 0.47,
(1,35)
η2 95% CI 0.21–0.62; Fig. 3f). There was no effect of the cue-pref-
erence factor (orientation period duration: F = 0.15, P = 0.70;
(1, 35)
walking speed: F = 0.05, P = 0.83; distance travelled: F = 0.61,
(1,35) (1, 35)
P = 0.44; path tortuosity: F = 0.93, P = 0.34; heading deviation:
(1,35)
F = 0.94, P = 0.33; escape latency: F = 2.23, P = 0.14) and no
(1,35) (1,35)
significant interaction for any of the navigation variables. The fact
that the difference in cue preference was not accompanied by dif-
ferences in the navigation measures suggests that learning accord-
ing to either landmarks or geometry may occur at the same rate23.
We found that eight subjects committed at least one rotational error
during learning (mode: second trial, Supplementary Fig. 2). These
were all older adults, and seven of these eight subjects reoriented
according to geometry in the probe test. None of the young subjects
committed rotational errors during learning. These data show that,
even though we found no difference in overt navigation behaviour,
the preference for geometric cues manifested itself early during
spatial learning, even before the cue conflict, at least in the older
subjects (see Supplementary Results 1 and Supplementary Fig. 4 for
analyses of the same navigation variables during the probe and post-
probe phases).
Two intermediary conclusions can be drawn from the behav-
ioural results above. First, advanced age is associated with a stron-
ger preference for geometry processing, which, however, is not
reflected in standard navigation measures. Second, advanced age
entails a longer reorientation period, observed during both learning
previous studies30,43. Among older subjects who relied on geometry, and post-probe trials and which seems unrelated to potential age-
75% went to the actual goal corner (G) while 25% committed a rota- related motor deficits. Since visual cues provided most of the spatial
tional error—that is, they went to corner S (Fig. 1c). None of the information available to the subjects in our task (because subjects
young subjects committed rotational errors in the probe trial. The were disoriented), the analysis of oculomotor behaviour during
existence of rotational errors confirms the reliance on geometric as reorientation and navigation periods can be informative of goal-
opposed to featural cues, since the two corners are identical with related decisions mediating spatial behaviour. It has previously been
respect to the surface geometry of the room but not with respect shown in humans that old age is associated with changes in visual
to landmarks on the walls22,26. Since the preference for geometric or exploration strategies44,45, while recent studies in non-human pri-
landmark cues was not exclusive in the two age groups, we further mates linked oculomotor behaviour with spatial processing in the
characterized cue-dependent behaviours by separating all subjects brain41,46. We analysed the spatiotemporal organisation of visual
according to their spatial cue preference (that is, landmark or geom- fixational patterns with respect to cue preference and age. Given the
etry) based on their behaviour during the probe trial. There was a potential link between eye movements and spatial memory41, we
clear separation between the two cue-preference groups in terms of sought to answer the two following questions: (1) is cue preference
trajectories employed during the probe trial (Fig. 2b), quantified by (geometry versus landmarks) associated with specific oculomotor
a statistically significant deviation of the mean group trajectory with fixation patterns? (2) Is the observed age-related difference in goal-
respect to the goal location or its symmetric location (F = 46.66, directed movement initiation (as measured by the duration of the
(1,35)
noitroporP
Mean trajectory
L
Geometry group
Landmark group
Landmark group
Geometry
Landmark
80
Geometry group
60
40
20
0 Geometry Landmark
group group
noitaived
gnidaeH
)°(
noitisop
laog
ot
G E
S
G E
L S
***
G E
L S
Fig. 2 | Preference for geometric cues in older adults. a, Proportions
of young and older participants that reoriented and navigated to the
goal according to either landmarks or geometry during the probe trial.
A majority of young adults used the landmarks, whereas most older
adults anchored their spatial behaviour on the geometry of the
environment. The proportion metric was automatically determined as the
area (G, L, S or E) first entered by the subject, based on their trajectory
in the probe trial, which was calculated by tracing over time the centre of
mass of the four markers positioned on the eye-tracker goggles. Error bars
show the 68% CI. Pearson chi-square test, *P < 0.05 (n = 39). b, Mean
trajectory (top) and vector field representations (middle and bottom)
associated with the spatial behaviour of the landmark and geometry
groups. The coloured dots displayed on the edges of zones G, S and L
represent the locations where the subjects’ trajectory first crossed the
area. c, The mean trajectory of the landmark group, as compared to the
geometry group, deviated significantly more with respect to the goal
position. Box plot representations showing the median (coloured lines),
the interquartile range (25th and 75th percentiles, length of the boxes),
1.5× interquartile range (whiskers) and outliers (circles; not present here).
Main effect of cue preference originating from two-way ANOVA (age × cue
preference), ***P < 0.001 (n = 39).
NATure HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NATuRe HuMAN BeHAviouR
a b of age. Also, the lowered gaze behaviour observed among partici- 12
10 pants with a preference for geometry cues was not due to postural
8 or mobility constraints in older adults (Supplementary Results 2).
6
4 We reasoned that if observing the floor was a critical compo-
2 nent for the processing of geometry, then the environment sym-
8 metry should be reflected in the oculomotor behaviour. To verify
this prediction, we analysed the pattern of floor fixations during
c d the orientation period by counting fixations that fell into four floor
quadrants (Fig. 5a), such that quadrants a and a′ were geometrically
related to the goal area during learning, while quadrants b and b′
were not. We found that fixations in the geometry group were sig-
nificantly more concentrated in the symmetric quadrants related to
the goal (Wilcoxon signed-rank W = 135, P < 0.001, r = 0.59; Figs. 5a,b).
Moreover, the number of fixations that fell into areas a and
e f
a′ were not statistically different (W = 61, P = 0.29; Supplementary
Fig. 7). These data suggest that the symmetry of the environment
was indeed reflected in the fixation pattern of the geometry group
during the reorientation period. This is in stark contrast to the land-
mark group, in which we did not observe a difference in ground
fixations in the areas geometrically related versus unrelated to the
goal (W = 62.5, P = 0.26; Figs. 5a,b). In addition, the vast majority
Young adults
of fixations fell within area a compared to a′ (W = 78, P < 0.001,
Older adults
r = 0.46; Supplementary Fig. 7), suggesting that landmarks strongly
biased fixations in this group. During goal-oriented navigation, sub-
jects in the landmark group gazed preferentially at the wall panels
adjacent to the goal location, whereas those in the geometry group
concentrated almost exclusively on the floor of the goal quadrant,
confirming the importance of floor information for geometric cue
preference (Fig. 5c). Given such a clear distinction between the
two cue-preference groups in terms of fixation patterns, we tested
whether the navigational decision during the probe trial could be
inferred by the analysis of oculomotor behaviour during learning.
We found that a binary classifier could predict, on a single subject–
single trial basis, whether he/she will decide according to either geo-
metric or landmark cues, based on the location of fixations executed
before the probe trial (Fig. 4d and Supplementary Results 3).
We further investigated whether the age-related difference in
goal-directed motion initiation (as measured by the duration of the
orientation period) was accompanied by changes in spatiotempo-
ral fixation characteristics. The analysis of fixation counts revealed
that older adults produced significantly more fixations during the
orientation period compared to young adults across learning tri-
als (F = 34.01, P < 0.001, partial η2 = 0.50, η2 95% CI 0.25–0.65;
(1,35)
Fig. 6a). However, we did not find any significant difference in
orientation period) accompanied by differences in spatiotemporal fixation frequency, duration and interfixation distance between
fixation characteristics? the two groups (Supplementary Fig. 8). Moreover, fixations in the
We found that the time course of fixational patterns throughout older group were not produced to explore a larger portion of the
a trial was different between cue-preference groups (Fig. 4a), with visual environment, as neither the surface area covered by fixations
the landmark group spending more time observing the wall panels (F = 0.72, P = 0.4; Fig. 6b) nor the number of different panels
(1,35)
compared to the geometry group (orientation period: F = 7.61, observed (F = 3.22, P = 0.08, partial η2 = 0.08, η2 95% CI 0–0.27;
(1,35) (1,35)
P < 0.01, partial η2 = 0.18, η2 95% CI 0.01–0.38; navigation period: Supplementary Fig. 8b) was significantly different between age
F = 11.06, P < 0.01, partial η2 = 0.24, η2 95% CI 0.04–0.44; Fig. 4b). groups. These results suggest that the longer orientation period in
(1,35)
Conversely, the geometry group spent more time observing older adults was due to a more repetitive sampling of visual cues,
the floor than did the landmark group (reorientation: F = 7.79, rather than to a general slowing of ocular movements. To verify this
(1,35)
P = 0.01, partial η2 = 0.18, η2 95% CI 0.01–0.39; navigation: conclusion, we classified fixations in two groups based on their func-
F = 10.16, P < 0.01, partial η2 = 0.22, η2 95% CI 0.03–0.42; Fig. 4c). tional properties: explorative fixations were those directed to a wall
(1,35)
The peak in floor fixation time at the end of the orientation period panel not previously seen in the course of the current trial; exploit-
may indicate that gazing at the floor is a critical behaviour before ative fixations were directed (either successively or subsequently) to
making a navigational decision according to geometric cues47. We previously fixated panels during the same trial. To perform statisti-
found no significant effect of age and no interaction in these data cal comparisons, we averaged the fixation counts during the trial
(Supplementary Figs. 5a,b and 6). Thus, even though a higher pro- time across age and cue preference groups (Figs. 6c,d, respectively).
portion of older adults reoriented using boundary-related geomet- We then assessed whether these two factors significantly affected
ric cues, we found no evidence for a difference in the distribution the proportion of explorative (and exploitative) fixations during the
of panel/floor fixation times between the two age groups. In other orientation period. The results showed that older adults produced
words, subjects with geometric or landmark preference paid more more exploitative fixations (F = 13.32, P < 0.001, partial η2 = 0.22,
(1,35)
attention to the floor or to the panels, respectively, independently η2 95% CI 0.03–0.42; Fig. 6c) or, conversely, fewer explorative
noitatneirO )s(
noitarud
P < 0.0001
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Learning trials
gniklaW
)1–s
m(
deeps
P < 0.001
20
15
10
5
0
ecnatsiD )m(
dellevart
P < 0.001 6
4
2
0
Learning trials
ytisoutrot
htaP
P < 0.001
100
50
0
gnidaeH
)°(
noitaived
P < 0.01
40
20
0
epacsE )s(
ycnetal
0
P < 0.0001
Fig. 3 | Spatial navigation performance of young versus older adults
during learning. a–f, Although both groups learned the task and
performance had plateaued by learning trial 4, age-related effects impacted
all navigation parameters, reflecting suboptimal spatial behaviour. a, The
reorientation period was consistently and significantly longer in older
adults across the entire learning phase, with a larger difference during the
first two trials. b, Expectedly, older adults navigated towards the goal at a
significantly slower speed, again particularly during early learning. c, The
goal-oriented trajectory was less direct in older adults, since they travelled
significantly longer distances compared to young subjects. d, Accordingly,
older adults’ path to the goal was significantly more tortuous. e, Also, on
average, the trajectory of older navigators deviated more from the ideal
direct path as compared to young subjects. f, As a consequence, the
latency to reach the goal location was significantly greater in older adults
than in young subjects. Error bars show between-subject s.e.m. P values at
the top of each graph show the main effect of age originating from two-way
ANOVA (age × cue preference) on data averaged over the eight learning
trials (n = 39).
NATure HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NATuRe HuMAN BeHAviouR Articles
a
Geometry group Landmark group
0.045
0.04
0.035
0.03
0.025
0.02
0.015
0.01
0.005
0
Floor 0.05
0
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
Trial duration (time proportion)
b c d
0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2 P < 0.05
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
Performance of the model
fixations (F = 5.29, P < 0.05, partial η2 = 0.13, η2 95% CI 0–0.33) first component significantly discriminated subjects according to
(1,35)
than young adults. At the same time, the geometric group as a whole their age (F = 77.72, P < 0.001, partial η2 = 0.73, η2 95% CI 0.52–
(1,31)
made fewer explorative fixations compared to the landmark group 0.82; Fig. 7a), whereas no clear distinction could be seen according
(F = 4.45, P < 0.05, partial η2 = 0.11, η2 95% CI 0–0.31; Fig. 6d). to their cue preference (F = 0.07, P = 0.79). There was no effect
(1,35) (1,31)
No significant interaction was found between the factors age and of either factor on the other components. This analysis was con-
cue preference, either during reorientation or navigation. These firmed by a significant effect of age (and no effect of cue preference)
results suggest that the longer reorientation period of older adults when considering raw visuo-cognitive data (Supplementary Figs. 9
was associated with a more repetitive sampling of visual cues during and 10). The fact that cue preference did not contribute significantly
the earlier part of the trial. This suboptimal visual scanning policy to the principal components may suggest that either its cause (or
could reflect either a reduction in the area from which information effect) is not well captured by the tests, or that it is specific to one
can be extracted, requiring additional ocular fixations48–50, or defi- particular domain and does not account for much of the variability
cits of behavioural monitoring51 or impaired memory processes41. in the data. The potential specificity of cue preference with respect
Finally, we looked for potential perceptual or cognitive mark- to a specific domain was supported by a significant correlation with
ers of increased preference for geometry-related spatial coding in the outcome of only one cognitive test, namely perspective-taking/
older adults. We assessed a variety of visual and cognitive functions spatial orientation52. More specifically, older adults in the geometry
through a battery of tests (Supplementary Tables 1 and 2). We per- group performed significantly worse in this test than those in the
formed principal component analysis on these data and examined landmark group (Welch t = 2.21, P < 0.05, Hedges’s g = 0.82,
(15.71)
whether age or cue-preference factors were associated with differ- Hedges’s g CI−0.11 to 1.83; Fig. 7b). Results of none of the other
ences in principal component scores. We found that the first two tests correlated significantly with cue preference. On the basis of
principal components accounted for 60% of the total variance. The these data, we hypothesize that the observed stronger preference for
ytilibaborP
Chance level
Geometry Landmark
group group
Normalized
fixation
time
Floor
Reorientation Navigation Reorientation Navigation
Trial duration (time proportion)
Fixations on the panels
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
Geometry Landmark
group group
emit
noitaxif
dezilamroN
0.15
**
0.1
0.05
0
emit
noitaxif
dezilamroN
Fixations on the floor
**
Fig. 4 | Spatiotemporal signatures of visual fixational patterns predict landmark versus geometry cue preference. a, Time course of visual fixations over
trial duration for the geometry (left, n = 17) and landmark (right, n = 22) groups. Qualitative representation of the time spent fixating on different spatial
locations (panels and the floor of the environment) during both orientation and navigation averaged across learning trials. The dotted line delimits the
orientation and navigation periods. b,c, On average, subjects anchoring their spatial behaviour on landmarks (according to their choice during the probe
trial) spent significantly more time fixating on panels, whereas subjects preferring geometry gazed more at the floor. There is no main effect of age or
interaction in these data. Box plots show the median (black lines), the interquartile range (25th and 75th percentiles, length of the boxes), 1.5× interquartile
range (whiskers) and outliers (circles). Main effect of cue preference originating from two-way ANOVA (age × cue preference) on data averaged over
the eight learning trials, ** P < 0.01 (n = 39). d, Performance of a generalized linear model (trained on the basis of fixation spatiotemporal characteristics)
in predicting spatial cue preference on a single subject–single trial basis. The performance distribution of correct predictions (80%) suggests that gaze
dynamics is indeed predictive of the spatial cue coding policy used by subjects. The indicated P value corresponds to P(performance < 0.5).
NATure HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NATuRe HuMAN BeHAviouR
a b
Landmark group Geometry group
Areas a and a′
Areas b and b′
1
a b
0.5
b′ a′
0
c
1
0.5
0
geometric cues in ageing is caused by an impaired capacity to infer might be incidental23. Nevertheless, subjects in the geometry group
position (either of the navigator per se or of the goal) relative to a chose the actual goal corner significantly more often than its diago-
constellation of landmarks. nally opposite one, ruling out an exclusive use of this type of cue.
Given that subjects were disoriented at the start of each trial, the
Discussion most likely explanation for this pattern of results is that both geo-
This study provides evidence of a behavioural preference for geo- metric and landmark cues were concurrently used in the two cue-
metric cues in older adults, as compared to young adults, navigating preference groups. In the geometry group, landmarks had a smaller
a real ecological environment. This preference is associated with a contribution in navigation but they did contribute to the behav-
decreased capacity to deal with, and take perspective from, a con- ioural decision, nevertheless, by making the actual goal corner a
stellation of landmarks in older subjects. Importantly, our findings more reliable choice. Indeed, in the probe trial, corner G is correct
indicate that geometry-based spatial coding is mediated by specific with respect to geometry, at the same time being spatially closer
oculomotor signatures, independently from age. In particular, gaze to location L indicated by the rotated landmarks. This explanation
dynamics are predictive of the spatial cue preference that deter- suggests that the ability to combine both cue types, as observed in
mines the anchoring of subjects’ spatial representation on either young adults26,56, deteriorates with age to a differing degree in dif-
landmarks or geometry. In addition, our results suggest that repeti- ferent subjects. Moreover, if this explanation is correct, it argues
tive sampling of visual information is the main non-motor correlate against the idea of a geometric module impervious to other types
of ageing in navigation, reflecting a suboptimal exploration– of information57,58. Another interesting implication of these results
exploitation balance in the visual scanning policies and resulting in is that the observed age-related deficit in landmark use cannot be
a longer reorientation time. attributed to the mastering of spatial language, as it has been pro-
We found striking differences in the visual exploration pat- posed in reorientation studies with children59. Indeed, language
terns performed by the two cue-preference groups before making abilities are well preserved in ageing60.
a behavioural decision, in that observation of floor cues, especially Previous reorientation studies have shown that the size of an
near symmetric corners, was a marker of geometric processing. experimental environment can affect the use of visual cues for
The apparent important role of the ground-related information navigation. In studies with children, for example, it was shown that
for geometry-based decisions in our study is in agreement with their preference for geometric cues26,59 is a size-dependent effect: in
the reported ground-dominance effect when judging distances larger rooms, children under 6 years of age were capable of using
between objects53, and with data demonstrating that a disruption landmarks to distinguish the correct corner from its rotationally
of the structure between the ground and walls prevents geometry symmetric one27. These data suggest that, while children are able to
from being used as an orienting cue54, and it impairs the response of use both types of cue, in some situations they prefer to orient with
boundary-sensitive areas of the brain55. respect to geometry even though this preference is associated with
The fact that the environment geometry was used as an orienting a performance loss. One possible interpretation of these studies and
spatial cue is clearly indicated by the presence of rotational errors our results is that the capacity to efficiently use landmarks for navi-
during learning, the decisions taken during the probe trial and the gation improves in early development, but deteriorates with ageing,
oculomotor patterns. Since rotational errors appeared early during giving rise to an inverted U-shaped dependence on landmark pro-
learning, the processing of the geometry appears to be rapid and it cessing across the lifespan. Even though speculative at this point,
noitatneirO
noitagivaN
35 P < 0.001 P = 0.26
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Geometry Landmark
group group
tnuoc
noitaxiF
Fig. 5 | Spatial distribution of visual fixations as a function of cue preference. a, During the orientation period, ground fixations produced by the geometry
group (n = 17) were significantly more concentrated in the quadrants that shared the same rewarded geometric properties (areas a and a′) as compared
to the other adjacent quadrants (areas b and b′). Ground fixations of the landmark group (n = 22) did not differ across the same pairs of floor quadrants.
Box plots show the median (black lines), the interquartile range (25th and 75th percentiles; length of the boxes), 1.5× interquartile range (whiskers)
and outliers (circles). P values at the top of graphs correspond to the Wilcoxon signed-rank test for paired samples. b,c, These results are qualitatively
illustrated by heat maps of fixation distribution on the panels and on the floor during the orientation and navigation periods, respectively. The colour maps
correspond to normalized fixation count.
NATure HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NATuRe HuMAN BeHAviouR Articles
a b
30
20
10
0
c
d
this interpretation makes a strong and experimentally testable pre- and visual scanning policies, while cue preference manifested itself
diction: in an environment presenting both landmark and geometric only in spatial distribution of oculomotor fixations. Moreover, we
cues, navigation performance of children and older adults, but not showed that cue preference can be predicted from the fixation alti-
young adults, should improve under a condition of polarized geom- tude on a subject-by-subject basis. Surprisingly, however, we did not
etry compared to a non-polarized one (keeping the landmark array find any interaction between age and cue preference in any of the
constant across the two conditions; see Supplementary Discussion). variables analysed, suggesting that the bias in cue preference in older
What are the reasons for the increased reliance on geometric subjects may be due to a specific deficit reflected in neither locomo-
information in older adults, at the expense of landmark cues? Our tion- nor oculomotion-related measures. Correlating cue prefer-
analyses of navigational and oculomotor variables showed that age ence with the outcomes of a battery of visuo-cognitive tests revealed
strongly affected orientation duration, navigational performance a cognitive impairment potentially related to cue preference, since
)n(
snoitaxiF
P < 0.0001 P = 0.44
0.35
0.25
0.15
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Learning trials Learning trials
Young subjects
Older subjects
Geometry group
Landmark group
derevoc
aera
dezilamroN
snoitaxif
evitatiolpxE
0.8 P < 0.001 P = 0.32
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
1Reorientation Navigation 50
Trial duration (time steps, n)
snoitaxif
evitarolpxE
0.8 P < 0.05 P = 0.17
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
1Reorientation Navigation 50
Trial duration (time steps, n)
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
1Reorientation Navigation 50
Trial duration (time steps, n)
snoitaxif
evitatiolpxE
0.8 P = 0.31 P < 0.01
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
1Reorientation Navigation 50
Trial duration (time steps, n)
snoitaxif
evitarolpxE
P < 0.05 P = 0.11
Fig. 6 | Age- and cue preference-related differences in visual fixation characteristics. a, Older navigators produced, on average across learning trials,
a significantly higher number of fixations during the reorientation period compared to young participants. b, However, during the same period, older
adults did not explore a larger portion of the environment, given that the surface area covered by fixations in young and older adults was equivalent. The
surface area was calculated by considering a field of view of 18° around each fixation, which was a function of the distance between the observer and the
room walls. The surface area is expressed as a ratio relative to the total area of the room. Error bars represent the between-subject s.e.m., and P values
at the top of graphs show the main effect of age originating from two-way ANOVA (age × cue preference) on data averaged over the eight learning trials
(n = 39). c, Proportion of explorative (left) versus exploitative (right) fixations during reorientation and navigation periods averaged across learning trials
for both young and older adults. During reorientation, older adults produced significantly fewer explorative (and more exploitative) visual fixations than
young adults. d, Analysis of the same oculomotor data with respect to cue preference showed that, during reorientation, the geometry group produced
fewer explorative visual fixations than the landmark group. Cue preference did not lead to differences in the number of exploitative fixations during
reorientation, although landmark subjects tended to perform more exploitative fixations when approaching the goal. Note that ground fixations were not
taken into account in these analyses. Shaded areas indicate the between-subject s.e.m. and the dashed lines separate the reorientation and navigation
periods. P values at the top of graphs show the main effects originating from two-way ANOVA (age × cue preference) on data averaged over the period of
orientation and navigation (n = 39).
NATure HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NATuRe HuMAN BeHAviouR
magnetic resonance imaging studies have linked perspective-taking
a
with neural areas involved in spatial navigation61, while deficits in
0.4
this ability are correlated with impaired route learning and taking
0.3 novel shortcuts62,63. We thus propose that the preferential switch to
geometry in older adults is linked with a difficulty in using envi-
0.2 ronmental landmarks for orientation or, more specifically, to infer
their own position, or that of a goal, from the landmark array. This
0.1 difficulty may bias older subjects to use the geometric layout of the
0 environment, since this information can more easily be extracted
from visual input. While our hypothesis has to be confirmed with
–0.1 further studies, the potential specificity of the age-induced deficit
related to cue preference is conceivably a positive aspect because,
–0.2 if indeed true, it can be targeted by precisely tuned rehabilitation
techniques and design of informative environments.
–0.3
While other age-related factors are likely to also contribute to
–0.4 the geometry preference observed in the present study, our results
argue against an involvement of three potentially related processes.
–0.4 –0.3 –0.2 –0.1 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4
First, the absence of significant differences between groups in the
Component 1
figural memory test (Supplementary Fig. 10) suggests that the pref-
erence for geometry is unlikely to be explained by an impaired abil-
ity to memorize features, in agreement with previous studies64–66.
Second, it could be argued that unspecific difficulties related to
the processing of a large number of landmarks in our experimental
b set-up might bias older subjects to use geometry. However, it has
been shown that older adults are impaired in reorienting even with
a single cue30 (a coloured wall), thus making such an explanation
implausible. Third, age-related postural constraints67, which may
bias old adults to look at the floor68, are unlikely to contribute to
the geometry preference, since (1) the ground-dominance effect in
visual exploration was statistically significant in both young and
older subjects in the geometry group, and (2) we did not find any
statistical evidence for postural differences in our data.
A number of previous navigation studies have proposed that
ageing is associated with a specific difficulty in using allocentric
navigation strategies compared to egocentric ones69–71. Whereas an
allocentric strategy implies locating a goal according to the spatial
relationships between environmental cues, an egocentric strategy
relies on self-centred stimulus–response associations72,73. The allo-
centric navigation deficits in the above studies were derived from
an analysis of changes in older subjects’ behaviour after manip-
ulation of the landmark array, and therefore they were critically
dependent on the capacity of the subjects to infer the goal location
from surrounding landmarks. Moreover, geometric cues in these
paradigms were isotropic and uninformative about the goal loca-
tion (that is, either a circular room31 or a symmetric radial arm
maze69,70), thus preventing their use in reorienting and navigating.
If older navigators experience difficulties in using landmarks for
navigation, as our results indicate, then such age-related wayfind-
ing problems, previously characterized in terms of navigational
strategy preference, may in fact be explained in terms of cue-pro-
cessing deficit. The utility of the allocentric–egocentric dichotomy
in studying navigation has been questioned on the grounds of
mathematical and functional similarity of the two types of repre-
sentation, resulting in a lack of process-pure measures of naviga-
tion dissociating these representations74–76. It has been proposed
that both allocentric and egocentric representations are learned in
parallel in a single network of brain regions and that they can be
used in a highly dynamic fashion during navigation, with some
experimental conditions favouring one or another to different
degrees75. Our results contribute to this view by suggesting that one
older subjects in the geometry group were impaired specifically in potentially important factor, especially in older navigators, is the
the perspective-taking test52. In this test, subjects are presented with geometric polarization of the experimental environment. We thus
a two-dimensional array of landmarks and asked to (1) take the per- predict that making the geometry of an experimental environment
spective of a particular landmark (that is, orient oneself relative to unambiguous will improve the use of allocentric strategies in older
the array) and (2) indicate the position of another landmark (that is, adults, contrary to the proposal that the use of allocentric strate-
infer the position of a third element relative to the array). Functional gies is impaired in ageing.
2 tnenopmoC
UFOV1
FGT3CORSI2 UFOV2
CORSI1 CS4
FGT2 CS3 FGT1 CS5
CS2
CS6 CS1
MR VAL
VAD
UFOV3
PERSP
INHIB
VF
FLEX
Young adults
Older adults
Landmark group
Geometry group
Perspective-taking test
**
*
)°(
noitaived
ralugnA
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
Young Older adults, Older adults,
adults landmarks geometry
Fig. 7 | visual and cognitive correlates of geometric preference in ageing.
a, Principal component analysis of visual and cognitive data in a subset of
young (n = 15) and older adults (n = 19). MR, mental rotation score (3D);
FLEX, mental flexibility index (TMT); FGT1, visual memory (learning);
FGT2, visual memory (short-term recall); FGT3, visual memory (long-
term recall); CORSI1, spatial memory (short-term span); CORSI2, spatial
memory (working-memory span); INHIB, inhibition index (go/no-go);
PERSP, perspective-taking; VAD, visual acuity (dioptres); VAL, visual acuity
(LogMAR); UFOV1, useful field of view (processing speed); UFOV2 ,useful
field of view (divided attention); UFOV3, useful field of view (selective
attention); VF, visual field; CS1, contrast sensitivity (0.5 cycles per degree);
CS2, contrast sensitivity (1 cycle per degree); CS3, contrast sensitivity
(2 cycles per degree); CS4, contrast sensitivity (4 cycles per degree);
CS5, contrast sensitivity (8 cycles per degree); CS6, contrast sensitivity (16
cycles per degree). b, Focus on performance during the perspective-taking
test. Among older adults, those subjects that reoriented and navigated
according to geometry (n = 12) had a significantly lower performance than
those using landmarks (n = 7). Errors bars show the between-subject s.e.m.
and individual data points are superimposed on bars. Welch’s t-test,
** P < 0.01, * P < 0.05.
NATure HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NATuRe HuMAN BeHAviouR Articles
Finally, the observed higher proportion of exploitative fixations as brick walls, doors and windows. The floor of the room was covered in black
in older adults during the orientation period may be related to the linoleum. There were no obstacles within the environment. Light and sound
conditions of the environment were fully controlled. A homogeneous illumination
phenomenon of the inhibition of return (IoR), expressed as a ten-
(195 lux) and street-like multi-source sounds were provided during the experiment
dency to avoid previously inspected locations during visual search77. to increase immersion in the environment. Speakers were evenly distributed over
However, there are large differences between our task and the quite the walls of the room to prevent sound-based self-localization. When necessary,
constrained experimental conditions during which a classical IoR vocal instructions were given to the subjects through the speakers without the
effect is usually observed. It is not clear, for example, that the sub- experimenter entering the room.
Body kinematics was recorded by an opto-electronic motion capture system
jects’ behaviour in the orientation period of our experiment can be
(ten infrared cameras, model T160) at a sampling frequency of 120 Hz (VICON
considered as visual search (especially in older subjects, who are Motion Systems Inc.). The cameras were positioned above the panels and placed
for the most part geometric). Moreover, an exploitative fixation, symmetrically to avoid spatial cueing. During the experiment, participants wore a
according to our definition, is a fixation targeting a previously seen tight black suit equipped with 39 infrared reflective markers, following the Vicon
Plug-In-Gait model. Movement of the right eye was recorded by a video-based eye-
wall panel, as opposed to targeting exactly the same spatial posi-
tracker (Mocaplab) at 60 Hz. The eye-tracker camera was mounted on light goggles
tion as in an IoR task. While experimental evidence suggests only
that allowed the participant to wear their own glasses during the experiment.
weak effects of ageing on IoR78,79, the observed repetitive sampling Participants habitually wearing far-vision lenses were encouraged to keep their
of visual cues can be caused by other age-related effects. Ageing has glasses on during the experiment.
been associated with shrinking of the useful field of view, defined as A calibration procedure was done to compute the three-dimensional (3D) gaze
the area in which information can be acquired with one fixation48,49. vector in the model of the environment. The calibration involved computing the
centre of rotation of the eye relative to the four reflective markers positioned on
Therefore, an inefficient sampling of a visual cue that falls on the
the eye-tracker goggles. Correspondence between the coordinates for eye position
periphery of the visual field would require a higher number of fixa- in the eye-tracker camera and the room coordinates was subsenquently calculated
tions on the same wall panel50. using an ellipsoidal calibration grid composed of 25 markers. The grid was 145 cm
In summary, by using the combined recording of subject motion wide and 100 cm high and it was placed at eye level, approximately 1 m away from
the subject, to cover the maximal range of eye orientations. Additionally, to correct
and gaze direction during spatial navigation in an ecological experi-
for potential drift occurring over the course of the experiment, a two-point drift
mental set-up, our study presents a characterization of landmark-
correction was performed before each trial.
and geometry-related behaviour in young and older navigators. Our
data echo ageing effects in both navigation strategy preference70,80 Experimental protocol. Subjects were asked to navigate as quickly as possible to
and the capacity to associate position and direction with land- an invisible goal location in the experimental environment. The square goal zone
marks64,81, which are manifestations of global brain changes across (80 × 80 cm2) was located in the northwest quadrant of the room (approximately
70 cm from the two closest walls) during the whole experiment for all subjects
the lifespan82. This work contributes, therefore, to the characteriza- (Fig. 1b, area G). The size and location of the zone were chosen so that the
tion of compensatory adaptation to age-related deficits, an impor- entrance of the subject into the goal zone could be reliably detected by the motion-
tant prerequisite for the development of rehabilitation solutions, as tracking system. At the start of the experiment, the subjects were naïve about
well as space design, that can improve safety and quality of life in the the environment and the goal location. All subjects were disoriented before each
trial. The disorientation procedure required the subject to sit on a chair, with
ageing population.
eyes closed, while the experimenter slowly rotated and moved the chair around
the room. The disorientation procedure always started at the centre of the room
Methods and ended in one of four positions (Fig. 1b, dashed areas s1–s4), henceforth
Participants. Twenty young (range, 19–37 years, µ = 26.25, σ = 4.97, 11 females, referred to as the starting positions, facing one of three orientations (arrows on
9 males) and 20 older adults (range, 61–81 years, µ = 72.2, σ = 4.06, 10 females, area s1 in Fig. 1b) in a pseudo-random manner. To verify that subjects were truly
10 males) were enrolled in this study. One older subject was excluded due disoriented, they were asked (still with eyes closed) to point towards the centre of
to motion-tracking issues, which led to a final sample of 39 participants. No the room at the end of the disorientation procedure (Supplementary Fig. 11). After
statistical methods were used to predetermine the sample size, which was similar disorientation, all experimenters left the room and subjects were instructed to open
to previously reported study populations75. The participants were part of the their eyes and search for the goal (start of the trial time). As soon as the subject’s
SilverSight cohort population (~350 enrolled subjects) at the Vision Institute– trajectory (see below for trajectory calculation) crossed the border of goal zone G
Quinze-Vingts National Ophthalmology Centre, in Paris. All screening and from any direction, as detected by the motion-tracking system, an audio signal was
experimental procedures were performed in accordance with the tenets of the automatically released to signify that the goal was reached (if a subject navigated to
Declaration of Helsinki, and they were approved by the Ethical Committee CPP an incorrect location, no sound was given indicating that he/she should continue
Ile de France V (ID_RCB 2015-A01094-45, No. CPP: 16122 MSB). All participants the goal search). Subjects were then instructed to stop moving and close their eyes
were voluntary; they received financial compensation for their participation in the (end of trial). The navigation trajectory (between the start and end of a trial) was
experiment, and they gave informed consent approval for inclusion based on the then submitted to off-line analysis (see below). After eight learning trials, and
following criteria: (1) corrected visual acuity of at least 7/10 (or 5/10 in participants before the start of the probe trial, the entire configuration of panels was rotated
aged 70 years or over); (2) a mini-mental state examination score of 24 or higher; (unknown to the subjects), without changing their order, to set landmarks and
(3) no physical inability in terms of locomoting without assistance; and (4) no geometric information in conflict. As a result of rotation, landmarks that were near
ophthalmological, otological or neurological disorders. A detailed description of the goal corner during the learning phase were positioned, after rotation, in the
the inclusion/exclusion criteria of the SilverSight cohort is given in Supplementary adjacent, geometrically different, corner (Fig. 1c). The probe trial and four post-
Table 1. The clinical and functional assessment used to enrol participants in the probe trials (named testing phase, Fig. 1c) were performed with panels rotated,
cohort involved: (1) ophthalmological screening (for example, optical coherence but otherwise they were identical to the learning trials. Participants were naïve
tomography, fundus photography); (2) functional visual screening (for example, about the research question, while data analysis was not performed blind to the
visual acuity, visual field extent, contrast sensitivity, attentional field of view); (3) conditions of the experiment.
otorhinolaryngological examination (for example, audiogram, vestibular function);
(4) cognitive-neuropsychological assessment (for example, visuo-spatial memory, Behavioural, oculomotor and postural analyses. Subjects’ movement trajectory
mental rotation, executive functions); (5) oculomotor evaluation (for example, in a trial was estimated (both online by the motion capture system and offline for
ocular fixation, saccadic control); and (6) a static/dynamic balance assessment. A trajectory analysis) by tracing over time the position of the centre of mass of the
series of questionnaires were administered to evaluate the quality of vision with four markers attached to the eye-tracker goggles. Recording frames corresponding
respect to mobility. The complete battery of clinical examination of the SilverSight to artefactual motion speeds >6 m s–1 were discarded from the analysis.
cohort is presented in Supplementary Fig. 12. We used a subset of the clinical tests Participants’ cue preference (landmark or geometry) was defined based on the
of the cohort to assess cross-dependencies between visuo-cognitive functions and analysis of their movement trajectories during the probe trial. The first crossing
navigation performance, which is described in Supplementary Table 2. of a trajectory with either goal zone G, its rotationally symmetric zone S, the
landmark zone L or the error zone E was considered. The size of the three areas
Experimental set-up. The experiment was performed in a real environment (S, L and E) was identical to that of goal zone G, and their locations were symmetric
using the Streetlab platform at the Vision Institute (http://www.streetlab-vision. to the goal zone with respect to the room’s cardinal axes. If a subject’s trajectory
com). The experimental environment consisted of a rectangular enclosure first entered either the goal zone or its rotationally symmetric area, he/she was
(8.55 × 4.30 m2) with an aspect ratio of 1.99. Nineteen panels providing real-world assigned to the geometry group. If the trajectory entered the landmark area first,
wall textures (width variable, height 3 m) fully covered the walls of the enclosure the subject was assigned to the landmark group. None of the trajectories entered
(see Supplementary Video 1). The panels imitated street-like relief scenery such the error area first. The number of subjects oriented by geometry in an age group,
NATure HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NATuRe HuMAN BeHAviouR
divided by the total number of subjects in the age group, gave the proportion of 10–13). Note that three subjects did not perform the four post-probe trials due to
geometry-based subjects. time limitations. Where applicable, data were preferentially analysed by two-way
Rotational errors were counted separately for the learning trials and the probe analysis of variance (ANOVA; with ageing and cue preference as factors) or two-
trial. In a learning trial, if a subject went to zone S before reaching goal zone G, a sample t-test. Normality of the data was verified quantitatively by the Lilliefors
rotational error was counted. In the probe trial, if the first crossing of a subject’s normality test, as well as by visual inspection of Q–Q plots. All raw data were
trajectory was with zone S, a rotational error was counted. transformed with a Box–Cox transformation to achieve normality and equalize
Navigation variables were defined as follows: the orientation duration variance86. When normality and homoscedasticity were dubious, we used the non-
corresponded to the length of the orientation period, defined as the time from parametric Wilcoxon signed-rank test for paired samples and the Mann–Whitney
eye opening until movement initiation, the latter determined as the moment test in the case of independent samples. Alpha level for statistical significance was
when the subject’s trajectory crossed a virtual circle (radius, 40 cm) around the set at P < 0.05, and we used one-tailed tests as there is evidence in the literature that
starting position. Walking speed, distance travelled, path tortuosity and heading ageing influences spatial navigation negatively1,2. For the postural characteristics’
deviation were estimated from the navigation period, defined as the time from analysis, the Matlab Circular Statistics Toolbox was used to obtain mean, median
movement initiation until the trajectory entered the goal zone. Speed and distance and standard deviation values across and within trial sequences. Effect sizes were
were estimated directly from motion trajectories. Path tortuosity was calculated calculated as partial η2 for the main effect of two-way ANOVA and Hedges’s g
as the ratio between trajectory length and the shortest distance from the starting for the two-sample t-test, with the Matlab MES Toolbox. Effect size for non-
position to the centre of the goal zone. Heading deviation was calculated as the parametric tests were calculated as a correlation coefficient r, where r = Z/√n.
mean angular error of momentary velocity vectors along the trajectory relative to
the direction to the centre of the goal zone. Finally, escape latency was calculated as Generalized linear regression model. To predict subjects’ cue preference from
total trial length (that is, sum of the orientation and navigation period lengths). measured oculomotor data, we trained a classifier based on a generalized linear
Group trajectories during the probe trial were represented either as vector regression model (binary logistic regression) with the fixation altitude as the
fields (that is, by velocity vectors averaged across spatial bins of area 20 cm2) or explanatory variable and the cue preference as the binary response. The response
as mean trajectories (calculated across time bins of ten time steps each). When variable was selected according to the results, showing that participants in the
comparing mean trajectories in the two cue-preference groups, heading deviation landmark group preferentially fixated wall panels approximately at eye level,
of the mean trajectory was calculated relative to the centre of area S for subjects whereas those in the geometry group looked more often at the floor. Fixation
who committed a rotational error, and relative to the centre of area G for the altitude was measured as the vertical component of the 3D fixation point in the
remaining subjects. room reference frame for a particular time bin. For each run of the classifier,
Oculomotor data were obtained by computing the gaze vector and its subjects were randomly assigned to either the training or validation set. Fixation
intersection within the 3D model of the environment (Supplementary Video 1). altitudes across all trials from the subjects in the training set, together with the
To detect ocular fixations, we calculated gaze dispersion vector as the Euclidean corresponding class labels (that is, landmark or geometry), constituted the training
distance, in the environment coordinates, between two successive data points. database. The trained classifier was then used to predict, for each subject in the
A continuous period of time during which gaze dispersion was below twice validation set, whether he/she belonged to the landmark or geometry group
the interquartile range from the median of the distribution was considered according to the mean score across all fixations from this subject. The classifier
as a candidate fixation. We calculated frequency (in Hz), duration (in s) and performance was assessed using two different sizes of the validation set, since
interfixation distance (in degrees of visual field) of all fixations >100 ms. Fixations a larger validation set provides a more reliable performance estimate but at the
of shorter length were excluded from the analysis. The surface area covered by a expense of fewer training data. For the validation set consisting of ten subjects,
fixation was calculated by considering a portion of visual field 18° around each 1,000 runs of the classifier were performed and the proportion of correctly
fixation (that is, by considering the distance between the observer and the fixation predicted cue preference was calculated as the performance measure. For the
location). This value was chosen as it corresponds to the interfixation distance, validation set consisting of one subject (leave-one-out), all possible combinations
averaged across all subjects and all trials, and it is compatible with the range of were tested as well as the number of correct predictions. The classification
saccade amplitudes generally found in natural tasks83,84. It corresponds with the procedure described above was performed (1) with all subjects, including fixations
idea that attention is driven from one location to the other using parafoveal and across complete trials; (2) separately in different age groups (young versus older
perifoveal information85. The surface area is expressed as a ratio relative to the total subjects); and (3) across all subjects, but separately for the orientation and
area of the room. navigation periods. For the latter two cases, only leave-one-out cross-validation
To compare the contribution of explorative and exploitative fixations for performance is reported.
different subjects across age and cue-preference groups, fixation count data were
averaged by a window of 1 s sliding over 15 (orientation period) and 35 (navigation Reporting Summary. Further information on research design is available in the
period) time steps. To represent fixation time, fixations were binned over five Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.
(orientation period) and ten (navigation period) time bins and normalised by
period length. To represent fixation location, we calculated heat maps in which a Data availability
contribution of each individual fixation was Gaussian-shaped (σ = 20 cm) and all The datasets generated and analysed during the current study are available from the
contributions summed spatially over a 3D grid (cell size, 10 cm). The normalisation
corresponding author upon request.
of heat maps was computed conjointly for both subject groups and separately for
the panels and the floor.
Code availability
Postural control analyses were carried out on a subset of subjects (n = 28,
14 young and 14 older adults) to investigate whether any differences in posture All custom software can be found at http://www.aging-vision-action.fr/ava_files/
could have constrained the gaze behaviour of older participants. Head and silversight/custom.software.zip.
trunk orientations were calculated during sequences of straight-ahead walking
and while standing during the orientation period. Head and trunk segments Received: 2 August 2018; Accepted: 31 July 2019;
were considered as rigid bodies with an associated Cartesian coordinate Published: xx xx xxxx
system, the origin being the centroid of the four eye-tracker markers for the
head, and the centroid of the two shoulders plus the seventh cervical vertebral
markers for the trunk. Angle values were calculated in each plane based on references
Euler’s rotation theorem, applied to the coordinate system for each segment. 1. Lester, A. W., Moffat, S. D., Wiener, J. M., Barnes, C. A. & Wolbers, T. The
To obtain comparable behaviour across participants and trials, we segmented aging navigational system. Neuron 95, 1019–1035 (2017).
the trajectories of each trial according to the trunk rotation in yaw (horizontal 2. Moffat, S. D., Elkins, W. & Resnick, S. M. Age differences in the neural
plane) to extract sequences of straight-ahead walking, during the navigation systems supporting human allocentric spatial navigation. Neurobiol. Aging 27,
period. Trunk orientation in yaw was examined within each step duration for the 965–972 (2006).
navigation period. We classified the trajectory during each step as straight-ahead 3. Bates, S. L. & Wolbers, T. How cognitive aging affects multisensory
walking if the difference between the heading direction and trunk orientation in integration of navigational cues. Neurobiol. Aging 35, 2761–2769 (2014).
yaw was <15°. Mean orientation in pitch (sagittal plane) of the head, as well as 4. Kunz, L. et al. Reduced grid-cell-like representations in adults at genetic risk
the relative head-to-trunk pitch angle, were analysed to examine whether an age- for Alzheimer’s disease. Science 350, 430–433 (2015).
related lowering of the head in older adults might bias them to direct their gaze 5. Gazova, I. et al. Spatial navigation—a unique window into physiological and
toward the floor and potentially lead to a preferential use of geometry cues. Head- pathological aging. Front. Aging Neurosci. 4, 16 (2012).
to-trunk oscillations in yaw and pitch were also analysed—that is, the amplitude 6. Lord, S. R., Rogers, M. W., Howland, A. & Fitzpatrick, R. Lateral stability,
of yaw rotations about a mean value. The head–trunk orientation was taken as the sensorimotor function and falls in older people. J. Am. Geriatr. Soc. 47,
angular difference between the two segments. 1077–1081 (1999).
7. Anderson, P. G., Nienhuis, B., Mulder, T. & Hulstijn, W. Are older adults
Data statistics. Statistical analyses were performed separately on data averaged more dependent on visual information in regulating self-motion than
over the learning phase (trials 1–8), probe trial (ninth) and post-probe trials (trials younger adults? J. Mot. Behav. 30, 104–113 (1998).
NATure HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NATuRe HuMAN BeHAviouR Articles
8. Lövdén, M., Schellenbach, M., Grossman-Hutter, B., Krüger, A. & 39. Epstein, R. & Vass, L. Neural systems for landmark-based wayfinding in
Lindenberger, U. Environmental topography and postural control demands humans. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B 369, 20120533 (2014).
shape aging-associated decrements in spatial navigation performance. Psychol. 40. Ekstrom, A. D. et al. Cellular networks underlying human spatial navigation.
Aging 20, 683–694 (2005). Nature 425, 184–188 (2003).
9. Sekuler, R., Hutman, L. & Owsley, C. Human aging and spatial vision. Science 41. Meister, M. L. R. & Buffalo, E. A. Getting directions from the hippocampus:
209, 1255–1256 (1980). the neural connection between looking and memory. Neurobiol. Learn. Mem.
10. Warren, W. H., Blackwell, aW. & Morris, M. W. Age differences in 134, 135–144 (2016).
perceiving the direction of self-motion from optical flow. J. Gerontol. 44, 42. Hamilton, Da, Johnson, T. E., Redhead, E. S. & Verney, S. P. Control
147–153 (1989). of rodent and human spatial navigation by room and apparatus cues.
11. Mahmood, O., Adamo, D., Briceno, E. & Moffat, S. D. Age differences in Behav. Process. 81, 154–169 (2009).
visual path integration. Behav. Brain Res. 205, 88–95 (2009). 43. Sandstrom, N. J., Kaufman, J. & Huettel, A. S. Males and females use different
12. Klencklen, G., Després, O. & Dufour, A. What do we know about aging distal cues in a virtual environment navigation task. Cogn. Brain Res. 6,
and spatial cognition? Reviews and perspectives. Ageing Res. Rev. 11, 351–360 (1998).
123–135 (2012). 44. Brandstatt, K. L. & Voss, J. L. Age-related impairments in active learning and
13. Eyler, L. T., Sherzai, A., Kaup, A. R. & Jeste, D. V. A review of functional strategic visual exploration. Front. Aging Neurosci. 6, 19 (2014).
brain imaging correlates of successful cognitive aging. Biol. Psychiatry 70, 45. Uiga, L., Cheng, K. K. C., Wilson, M., Masters, R. S. W. & Capio, C. M.
115–122 (2011). Acquiring visual information for locomotion by older adults: a systematic
14. Konishi, K. & Bohbot, V. D. Spatial navigational strategies correlate with gray review. Ageing Res. Rev. 20, 24–34 (2015).
matter in the hippocampus of healthy older adults tested in a virtual maze. 46. Wirth, S., Baraduc, P., Planté, A., Pinède, S. & Duhamel, J. R. Gaze-informed,
Front. Aging Neurosci. 5, 1–8 (2013). task-situated representation of space in primate hippocampus during virtual
15. Iaria, G., Palermo, L., Committeri, G. & Barton, J. J. S. Age differences in the navigation. PLoS Biol. 15, e2001045 (2017).
formation and use of cognitive maps. Behav. Brain Res. 196, 187–191 (2009). 47. Gilroy, K. E. & Pearce, J. M. The role of local, distal, and global
16. Harris, M. A., Wiener, J. M. & Wolbers, T. Aging specifically impairs information in latent spatial learning. J. Exp. Psychol. Anim. Learn. Cogn. 40,
switching to an allocentric navigational strategy. Front. Aging Neurosci. 4, 212–224 (2014).
1–9 (2012). 48. Ball, K. K., Beard, B. L., Roenker, D. L., Miller, R. L. & Griggs, D. S. Age and
17. Foo, P., Warren, W. H., Duchon, A. & Tarr, M. J. Do humans integrate routes visual search: expanding the useful field of view. J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 5,
into a cognitive map? Map- versus landmark-based navigation of novel 2210–2219 (1988).
shortcuts. J. Exp. Psychol. Learn. Mem. Cogn. 31, 195–215 (2005). 49. Sekuler, A. B., Bennett, P. J. & Mamelak, M. Effects of aging on the useful
18. Bosco, A., Picucci, L., Caffò, A. O., Lancioni, G. E. & Gyselinck, V. field of view. Exp. Aging Res. 26, 103–120 (2000).
Assessing human reorientation ability inside virtual reality environments: the 50. Scialfa, C. T., Thomas, D. M. & Joffe, K. M. Age differences in the useful field
effects of retention interval and landmark characteristics. Cogn. Process. 9, of view: an eye movement analysis. Optom. Vis. Sci. 71, 736–742 (1994).
299–309 (2008). 51. Moffat, S. D., Kennedy, K. M., Rodrigue, K. M. & Raz, N. Extrahippocampal
19. Newcombe, N. S. & Ratliff, R. Reorienting when cues conflict: evidence for contributions to age differences in human spatial navigation. Cereb. Cortex
an adaptive-combination view. Psychol. Sci. 19, 1301–1307 (2008). 17, 1274–1282 (2007).
20. Wegman, J., Tyborowska, A. & Janzen, G. Encoding and retrieval of 52. Hegarty, M. & Waller, D. A dissociation between mental rotation and
landmark-related spatial cues during navigation: an fMRI study. Hippocampus perspective-taking spatial abilities. Intelligence 32, 175–191 (2004).
24, 853–868 (2014). 53. Bian, Z., Braunstein, M. L. & Andersen, G. J. The ground dominance effect in
21. Gallistel, C. R. The Organization of Learning (MIT Press, 1990). the perception of relative distance in 3-D scenes is mainly due to characteristics
22. Cheng, K. A purely geometric module in the rat’s spatial representation. of the ground surface. Percept. Psychophys. 68, 1297–1309 (2006).
Cognition 23, 149–178 (1986). 54. Kelly, D. M. & Spetch, M. L. Reorientation in a two-dimensional
23. Doeller, C. F. & Burgess, N. Distinct error-correcting and incidental learning environment: I. Do adults encode the featural and geometric properties of a
of location relative to landmarks and boundaries. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA two-dimensional schematic of a room? J. Comp. Psychol. 118, 384–395 (2004).
105, 5909–5914 (2008). 55. Ferrara, K. & Park, S. Neural representation of scene boundaries.
24. Pearce, J. M. The 36th Sir Frederick Bartlett Lecture: an associative analysis of Neuropsychologia 89, 180–190 (2016).
spatial learning. Q. J. Exp. Psychol. 62, 1665–1684 (2009). 56. Hermer, L. & Spelke, E. Modularity and development: the case of spatial
25. Presson, C. C. & Montello, D. R. Points of reference in spatial cognition. reorientation. Cognition 61, 195–232 (1996).
Stalking the elusive landmark. Br. J. Dev. Psychol. 6, 378–381 (1988). 57. Sheynikhovich, D., Chavarriaga, R., Strösslin, T., Arleo, A. & Gerstner, W. Is
26. Hermer, L. & Spelke, E. A geometric process for spatial reorientation in there a geometric module for spatial orientation? Insights from a rodent
young children. Nature 370, 57–59 (1994). navigation model. Psychol. Rev. 116, 540–566 (2009).
27. Learmonth, A. E., Newcombe, N. S., Sheridan, N. & Jones, M. Why size 58. Cheng, K. & Newcombe, N. S. Is there a geometric module for spatial
counts: children’s spatial reorientation in large and small enclosures. Dev. Sci. orientation? Squaring theory and evidence. Psychon. Bull. Rev. 12, 1–23 (2005).
11, 414–426 (2008). 59. Hermer-Vazquez, L., Moffet, A. & Munkholm, P. Language, space, and the
28. Hermer-Vazquez, L., Spelke, E. S. & Katsnelson, A. S. Sources of flexibility in development of cognitive flexibility in humans: the case of two spatial
human cognition: dual-task studies of space and language. Cogn. Psychol. 39, memory tasks. Cognition 79, 263–299 (2001).
3–36 (1999). 60. Lindenberger, U. Human cognitive aging: corriger la fortune? Science 346,
29. Cheng, K., Huttenlocher, J. & Newcombe, N. S. 25 years of research on the 572–578 (2014).
use of geometry in spatial reorientation: a current theoretical perspective. 61. Lambrey, S., Doeller, C., Berthoz, A. & Burgess, N. Imagining being
Psychon. Bull. Rev. 20, 1033–1054 (2013). somewhere else: neural basis of changing perspective in space. Cereb. Cortex
30. Picucci, L., Caffò, A. O. & Bosco, A. Age and sex differences in a virtual 22, 166–174 (2012).
version of the reorientation task. Cogn. Process. 10, 272–275 (2009). 62. Fields, A. W. & Shelton, A. L. Individual skill differences and large-scale
31. Schuck, N. W., Doeller, C. F., Polk, T. A., Lindenberger, U. & Li, S.-C. Human environmental learning. J. Exp. Psychol. Learn. Mem. Cogn. 32, 506–515 (2006).
aging alters the neural computation and representation of space. Neuroimage 63. Kozhevnikov, M., Motes, M. A., Rasch, B. & Blajenkova, O. Perspective-
I, 141–150 (2015). taking vs. mental rotation transformations and how they predict spatial
32. Adamo, D. E., Briceño, E. M., Sindone, Ja, Alexander, N. B. & Moffat, S. D. navigation performance. Appl. Cogn. Psychol. 20, 397–417 (2006).
Age differences in virtual environment and real world path integration. 64. Zhong, J. Y. & Moffat, S. D. Age-related differences in associative learning of
Front. Aging Neurosci. 4, 26 (2012). landmarks and heading directions in a virtual navigation task. Front. Aging
33. Harris, Ma & Wolbers, T. Ageing effects on path integration and landmark Neurosci. 8, 122 (2016).
navigation. Hippocampus 22, 1770–1780 (2012). 65. Head, D. & Isom, M. Age effects on wayfinding and route learning skills.
34. Sturz, B. R., Kilday, Za & Bodily, K. D. Does constraining field of view Behav. Brain Res. 209, 49–58 (2010).
prevent extraction of geometric cues for humans during virtual-environment 66. Wilkniss, S. M., Jones, M. G., Korol, D. L., Gold, P. E. & Manning, C. A.
reorientation? J. Exp. Psychol. Anim. Behav. Process. 39, 390–396 (2013). Age-related differences in an ecologically based study of route learning.
35. Rolls, E. T. Spatial view cells and the representation of place in the primate Psychol. Aging 12, 372–375 (1997).
hippocampus. Hippocampus 9, 467–480 (1999). 67. Fon, G. J., Pitt, M. J. & Thies, A. C. Thoracic kyphosis: range in normal
36. Ekstrom, A. D. Why vision is important to how we navigate. Hippocampus subjects. Am. J. Roentgenol. 134, 979–983 (1980).
25, 731–735 (2015). 68. Itoh, N. & Fukuda, T. Comparative study of eye movements in extent of
37. Killian, N. J., Jutras, M. J. & Buffalo, E. A. A map of visual space in the central and peripheral vision and use by young and elderly walkers. Percept.
primate entorhinal cortex. Nature 5, 3–6 (2012). Mot. Skills 94, 1283–1291 (2002).
38. Epstein, R. & Kanwisher, N. A cortical representation of the local visual 69. Rodgers, M. K., Sindone, J. A. & Moffat, S. D. Effects of age on navigation
environment. Nature 392, 598–601 (1998). strategy. Neurobiol. Aging 33, 997–1003 (2012).
NATure HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NATuRe HuMAN BeHAviouR
70. Bohbot, V. D. et al. Virtual navigation strategies from childhood to 85. Henderson, J. M., Hayes, T. R., Rehrig, G. & Ferreira, F. Meaning guides
senescence: evidence for changes across the life span. Front. Aging Neurosci. attention during real-world scene description. Sci. Rep. 8, 13504 (2018).
4, 28 (2012). 86. Osborne, J. W. Improving your data transformations: applying the Box-Cox
71. Colombo, D. et al. Egocentric and allocentric spatial reference frames in transformation. Pract. Assess. Res. Eval. 15, 1–9 (2010).
aging: a systematic review. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 80, 605–621 (2017).
72. Klatzky, R. L. in Spatial Cognition. Lecture Notes in Computer Science Vol. Acknowledgements
1404 (eds. Freksa, C. et al.) 1–17 (Springer, 1998).
This research was supported by ANR—Essilor SilverSight Chair No. ANR-14-CHIN-0001.
73. Arleo, A. & Rondi-Reig, L. Multimodal sensory integration and concurrent
The funders had no role in the study design, data collection and analysis, decision to
navigation strategies for spatial cognition in real and artificial organisms.
publish or preparation of the manuscript. We thank S. Mohand-Said of the Clinical
J. Integr. Neurosci. 6, 327–366 (2007).
Investigation Centre of the Quinze-Vingts Hospital, Paris, for medical supervision during
74. Burgess, N. Spatial memory: how egocentric and allocentric combine.
clinical screening of participants. We also thank K. Lagrené and A.-R. Bourefis, from
Trends Cogn. Sci. 10, 551–557 (2006).
the Aging in Vision and Action laboratory at Vision Institute, for helping in enrolling/
75. Ekstrom, A. D., Huffman, D. J. & Starrett, M. Interacting networks of brain
profiling the participants and for assistance in performing the experiments, respectively.
regions underlie human spatial navigation: a review and novel synthesis of
Finally, the authors wish to thank E. Gutman, J. Lebrun and C. Authié of the Streetlab
the literature. J. Neurophysiol. 118, 3328–3344 (2017).
team for technical support in setting up the experiments in the Streetlab platform.
76. Wang, R. F. Spatial updating and common misinterpretations of spatial
reference frames. Spat. Cogn. Comput. 17, 222–249 (2017).
77. Klein, R. M. Inhibition of return. Trends Cogn. Sci. 4, 138–147 (2000). Author contributions
78. Langley, L. K., Fuentes, L. J., Hochhalter, A. K., Brandt, J. & Overmier, J. B. M.B., D.S., L.L.B., J.-A.S. and A.A. designed the experiment. M.B., G.T., C.P.A. and L.L.B.
Inhibition of return in aging and Alzheimers disease: performance as a collected and analysed the data. M.B., D.S., C.P.A., J.-A.S. and A.A. wrote the article.
function of task demands and stimulus timing. J. Clin. Exp. Neuropsychol. 23,
431–446 (2001). Competing interests
79. Castel, A. D., Chasteen, A. L., Scialfa, C. T. & Pratt, J. Adult age differences in
The authors declare no competing interests.
the time course of inhibition of return. J. Gerontol. B 58, P256–P259 (2003).
80. Bullens, J., Iglói, K., Berthoz, A., Postma, A. & Rondi-Reig, L. Developmental
time course of the acquisition of sequential egocentric and allocentric Additional information
navigation strategies. J. Exp. Child Psychol. 107, 337–350 (2010).
Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/
81. Cowan, N., Naveh-Benjamin, M., Kilb, A. & Saults, J. S. Life-span
s41562-019-0718-z.
development of visual working memory: when is feature binding difficult?
Dev. Psychol. 42, 1089–1102 (2006). Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
82. Douaud, G. et al. A common brain network links development, aging, and Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to M.B. or A.A.
vulnerability to disease. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 111, 17648–17653 (2014). Peer review information Primary handling editor: Stavroula Kousta.
83. Pelz, J. B. & Canosa, R. Oculomotor behavior and perceptual strategies in
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
complex tasks. Vis. Res. 41, 3587–3596 (2001).
published maps and institutional affiliations.
84. Land, M. F. & Hayhoe, M. In what ways do eye movements contribute to
everyday activities? Vis. Res. 41, 3559–3565 (2001). © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2019
NATure HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
1
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Corresponding author(s): Angelo Arleo & Marcia Bécu
Last updated by author(s): July, 12th 2019
Reporting Summary
Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency
in reporting. For further information on Nature Research policies, see Authors & Referees and the Editorial Policy Checklist.
Statistics
For all statistical analyses, confirm that the following items are present in the figure legend, table legend, main text, or Methods section.
n/a Confirmed
The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
A statement on whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided
Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.
A description of all covariates tested
A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
A full description of the statistical parameters including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient)
AND variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)
For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted
Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.
For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated
Our web collection on statistics for biologists contains articles on many of the points above.
Software and code
Policy information about availability of computer code
Data collection We used a Vicon motion capture system (Vicon Motion Systems Inc., Oxford, UK) with eight T160 cameras and the Nexus 2.2.3 software
version to collect body kinematics. Eye-tracking data were collected by a video-based eye tracker developped by Mocaplab, which is a
french motion capture specialist company based in Paris.
Data analysis Body kinematics were reconstructed with the Vicon Nexus software version 2.2.3. A custom software developed by Streetlab (Institut de
la Vision, Paris) was used to detect the center of the pupil (in 2D camera coordinates), the center of the eyeball (in 3D room coordinates)
and to compute the calibration of the eye-tracker. We used Matlab version 2015 onwards to create custom-made scripts for all other
data analysis.
For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors/reviewers.
We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Research guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.
Data
Policy information about availability of data
All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable:
- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets
- A list of figures that have associated raw data
- A description of any restrictions on data availability
The datasets generated and analysed during the current study are available from the corresponding author upon request.
2
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Field-specific reporting
Please select the one below that is the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.
Life sciences Behavioural & social sciences Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences
For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/documents/nr-reporting-summary-flat.pdf
Life sciences study design
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
Sample size This work is a hypothesis-driven study whereby the principal objective is to separate subjects of two age groups into two categorical groups
according to the spatial cues used for reorientation in a real and ecological environment. We choose a sample size of 40 participants that
allowed us to have enough observations in each group (20 young and 20 old adults), and at the same time deal with the long duration of each
experimental session. Indeed, because we chose to study natural behavior in an ecological environment (as opposed to virtual-reality-based
studies), the duration of a single experimental session was 4 hours per subject. The chosen sample size allowed us to fulfill the requirements
of the chi2 test that we used to test our principal hypothesis (whereby the value in each of contingency cell should be 5 or more).
Data exclusions We performed the experiment on 40 participants initially. However, we had to exclude one older participant from the analysis due to an error
ocurring during the experiment: the automatic detection triggering the goal signal, based on motion tracking data, did not work on some of
the trials, thus compromising the data interpretation for that particular participant.
Replication We performed no replication of our data.
Randomization Participants were randomly chosen from our SilverSight cohort of ~350 participants based on their age (under 40 or over 65 years of age) and
fited the inclusion criteria described in the Methods section of the paper. We paid attention in the selection process to have an equivalent
number of men and women in each group because of a potential effect of gender on our data.
Blinding The participants were naive about the research question and the rotation procedure. The experimenters were not blind relative to the age of
the participant, as it is directly visible. On the other hand, they were blind relative to the participant' cue preference, as they were outside of
the experimental room during the trials. Moreover, the experimenters interacting directly with the subject had no prior knowledge about the
experimental hypothesis. Finally, the data analysis was not performed blind to the conditions of the experiment.
Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods
We require information from authors about some types of materials, experimental systems and methods used in many studies. Here, indicate whether each material,
system or method listed is relevant to your study. If you are not sure if a list item applies to your research, read the appropriate section before selecting a response.
Materials & experimental systems Methods
n/a Involved in the study n/a Involved in the study
Antibodies ChIP-seq
Eukaryotic cell lines Flow cytometry
Palaeontology MRI-based neuroimaging
Animals and other organisms
Human research participants
Clinical data
Human research participants
Policy information about studies involving human research participants
Population characteristics The characteristics of the population (in terms of age and gender) were controlled as described in the section 'Methods'. We
furthermore ascertained that during the enrollment process all participants of our sample did not suffer from any pathology,
injury or other condition that could influence their behaviour (this procedure is described in the paper).
Recruitment We recruited our participants from the SilverSight cohort, at the Institute of Vision, Paris, France. All participants were voluntary,
they received a financial compensation for their participation and they gave informed consent approval for inclusion.
Ethics oversight All screening and experimental procedures were in accordance with the tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki and they were
approved by the Ethical Committee “CPP Ile de France V” (ID_RCB 2015-A01094-45, n. CPP: 16122 MSB).
Note that full information on the approval of the study protocol must also be provided in the manuscript.