Articles
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-019-0748-6
Young children consider the expected utility of
others’ learning to decide what to teach
Sophie Bridgers 1*, Julian Jara-Ettinger 2 and Hyowon Gweon 1*
Direct instruction facilitates learning without the costs of exploration, yet teachers must be selective because not everything
can nor needs to be taught. How do we decide what to teach and what to leave for learners to discover? Here we investigate
the cognitive underpinnings of the human ability to prioritize what to teach. We present a computational model that decides
what to teach by maximizing the learner’s expected utility of learning from instruction and from exploration, and we show
that children (aged 5–7 years) make decisions that are consistent with the model’s predictions (that is, minimizing the learn-
er’s costs and maximizing the rewards). Children flexibly considered either the learner’s utility or their own, depending on the
context, and even considered costs they had not personally experienced, to decide what to teach. These results suggest that
utility-based reasoning may play an important role in curating cultural knowledge by supporting selective transmission of high-
utility information.
H
umans actively explore their surroundings and learn from to teach is rooted in early-developing capacities to reason about
their own experience. Even young children direct their own other minds, not only in terms of what other people know or want
learning through exploratory play, and update their beliefs (theory of mind)7, but also what is rewarding for other people to
from self-generated evidence1–4. However, exploration involves acquire and what is costly to achieve on their own (naïve utility cal-
uncertainty; learners may not know the time and effort required to culus)8. We formalize these intuitions as decisions that maximize
make a discovery, and even after much trial and error, they may fail learners’ expected utilities, and demonstrate that even young chil-
to discover anything at all. Such uncertainty can make it especially dren can decide what to teach based on an intuitive cost–benefit
challenging for novice learners to decide what or when to explore, analysis of learning from instruction versus learning from explora-
because they often lack the knowledge or experience to estimate the tion—arguably the most and least teacher-driven forms of learning.
expected costs and rewards of exploration. Unlike observational learning or imitation, instruction involves
Social learning provides an effective solution to this problem. a knowledgeable teacher who deliberately provides helpful infor-
Teaching, in particular, is a powerful way to facilitate learning. mation for the learner, often accompanied by ostensive cues (for
When knowledgeable individuals teach what they know, naïve example, pointing) that signal pedagogical communication of infor-
learners can avoid the uncertainties of exploration and acquire mation. Some theories suggest that young children are prepared to
useful knowledge, even when self-guided discovery is too costly5. interpret information in these contexts as conveying generic, shared
For instance, a hunter-gatherer who already knows how to make knowledge9, while others emphasize the role of mutual, recursive
fire can save others from hours of trial and error by showing them mental-state reasoning between the teacher and the learner that
how to make it. However, teaching requires an investment of time, constrains the learner’s inferences10,11. Yet the majority of theoreti-
effort and resources6, making it necessary for teachers to be selective cal and empirical work on human pedagogy has focused on how
in what they choose to teach. Indiscriminately teaching anything learners benefit from teaching, with an implicit assumption that
would be inefficient; not all of one’s knowledge is useful for others, the teacher already knows what knowledge or concept needs to be
and some knowledge can be acquired easily without being taught, taught. We address a question that complements this previous work:
or only through direct experience. Relying on learners’ requests to how do teachers decide what to teach in the first place?
decide what to teach would also be ineffective; ignorant learners Our work is grounded in a broader computational framework
may be unaware of what they need to learn or unable to communi- that has successfully captured how humans interpret others’ behav-
cate their requests. Thus, while teaching yields significant benefits iours through a naïve utility calculus8: people have an intuitive theory
for learners, it also presents a decision problem for teachers: what of agents as ‘utility maximizers’, expecting agents to pursue reward-
needs to be taught, and what can be left for learners to discover on ing goals while minimizing the associated costs12–14. Critically, how-
their own? ever, agents can only maximize their utilities insofar as they have an
As adults, we share the intuition that it is better to teach things accurate representation of the costs and rewards of their actions; a
that are useful, novel, and interesting for others (i.e., rewarding), or learner who is ignorant of, or even mistaken about, the cost–reward
difficult, risky or even impossible to discover by oneself (i.e., costly). structure of the world might incur significant costs only to gain little
Although what humans find useful, interesting, or difficult can dif- to no reward. The key insight behind our model is that a ‘teacher’—
fer between cultures, change across generations and develop over a knowledgeable agent who already understands the cost–reward
a lifetime, the tendency to prioritize information that one consid- structure of the world—can help the learner reduce or eliminate the
ers to be rewarding and costly to acquire may be grounded in basic costs and uncertainties of exploration. By selectively teaching what
social cognition. We propose that the human ability to decide what is rewarding and/or costly to learn, the teacher can ensure that the
1Department of Psychology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA. 2Department of Psychology, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA.
*e-mail: sbridge@stanford.edu; gweon@stanford.edu
NaturE HumaN BEHaviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles Nature HumaN BeHaviour
learner reaps the rewards of learning while also bypassing poten- decides what to teach depending on how this choice modulates oth-
tially extreme costs. Importantly, such prioritization of high-utility ers’ expected utilities. We then ask whether the ability to consider
information still allows the learner to explore and make additional the expected costs and rewards of learning (from exploration and
discoveries, even if the teacher cannot teach everything. from instruction) is present even early in childhood, by comparing
Following the focus of our computational model, our experi- children’s decisions with the model predictions. We chose 5–7 years
ments are designed to test young children’s ability to decide what as our target age range, because children of this age consider others’
it is best to teach and what can be left for the learner to discover on mental states to decide what to communicate as teachers22,28,29, and
their own. Anticipating what information would be rewarding for can infer and integrate expected costs and rewards when reasoning
others and how costly it would be for them to acquire it on their about others’ goal-directed actions8.
own involves a host of cognitive capacities that go far beyond a gen- Consider a scenario in which an agent (the child participant) has
eral motivation to help or teach; one must reason about the process to decide which of two causal devices a teacher (the experimenter)
by which a naïve learner might explore their environment, and should teach to a naïve learner (note that children were not asked
understand what information would be more rewarding for the to teach the learner themselves; see Methods). Each device has a
learner, or more costly for the learner to discover without being distinct causal mechanism that generates an effect, and the child
taught. Thus, one might assume that such sophisticated decision- and the experimenter already know how to activate both devices.
making abilities would take years of experience or even explicit The learner will learn how to activate the device that is chosen by
training to develop. However, there are reasons to believe that the the participant, but because only one device can be taught, they will
prerequisite representational and inferential capacities for such rea- also have to figure out how to activate the other device through
soning are present in childhood. their own exploration. Formally, this decision can be described as
First, children, as learners themselves, selectively engage in active a choice between two possible teaching plans (that is, teach device
exploration, especially when additional discovery is likely4,11,15,16, X and let the learner explore device Y, or vice versa) that differ
and rationally decide whether to explore or seek help17,18. This in their expected utilities from the learner’s perspective. For each
work suggests that an intuitive understanding of the relative ben- teaching plan, the learner’s expected utility can be described as the
efits of social learning and self-guided exploration may be present difference between their expected rewards and costs of learning one
early in life. Second, by the beginning of formal schooling, children device through instruction and learning the other through explora-
already have an abstract understanding of what constitutes infor- tion (Fig. 1a). By choosing to teach the device that generates a more
mative teaching (that is, the information communicated should be rewarding effect or has a causal mechanism that is more costly to
accurate and sufficient, yet not superfluous), and readily evaluate discover, the participant can maximize the learner’s expected utility.
others’ teaching accordingly19–23. As teachers themselves, children In our experiments, the devices were causal toys that varied in
can also tailor the content of their communication based on the discovery reward (high or low) and discovery cost (low, medium,
learner’s goal or knowledge state24–26, readily selecting appropriate high or extra-high). High-reward toys had an orb that spun around
evidence to communicate a concept27, correct another’s false belief28 and lit up in different colours when activated. Low-reward toys
or disambiguate a causal system22,29. In particular, when evidence is played music. Low-cost toys had one big button (enabling almost
physically costly to generate (for example, demonstration requires immediate discovery). Medium- and high-cost toys had one big but-
multiple actions or walking over a distance), 5- to 6-year-olds resist ton and six small buttons. The medium-cost toy required pressing
providing unnecessary information22,29, suggesting that children are one particular small button to activate it and thus was less difficult
sensitive not only to the value of information but also the cost of to figure out than the high-cost toys, which required pressing the
generating it. big button and a particular small button at the same time. Activating
Yet a hallmark of helpful, effective teaching is its potential to the extra-high-cost toy also required simultaneously pressing the
make learning less costly from the learner’s perspective; a ten- one big button and one particular small button, but it had 11 small
dency to minimize the overall cost of generating information could buttons, entailing much trial and error before discovery.
emerge solely from the teacher’s motivation to minimize their own Our main and alternative models formalize different hypotheses
costs, rather than a regard for the learner. Given that even infants about which variables children consider when deciding which toy
and young children expect others to act in ways that maximize the experimenter should teach. The main (full) model assumes chil-
their expected utilities30–34, an important open question is whether dren will consider both the costs and rewards of the toy that would
children can actively choose to maximize others’ utilities. Consistent be taught (that is, the chosen toy’s activation cost and activation
with this possibility, one study has reported that children prioritize reward), as well as the costs and rewards of the toy the learner would
teaching what was taught by an adult (over what children discov- explore on their own (that is, the unchosen toy’s discovery cost and
ered on their own) when the taught information is causally opaque discovery reward), and select the teaching plan with the higher net
and thus difficult to discover35. However, children in this study utility as the best one to execute.
could have privileged this information because it was provided Four alternative models consider subsets of these variables and
by a knowledgeable adult or because the taught information was represent possible developmental changes in children’s reasoning.
novel or surprising to them. To test whether young children have a While previous work has shown an early-developing understand-
genuine understanding of the utilities of others’ learning, it is criti- ing of others’ costs and rewards31,32,36, as well as the ability to rea-
cal to distinguish between the role of reward (that is, the pleasure son about uncertain future events37–39, it is possible that children
or benefit of knowing something) and the role of cost (that is, the do not consider all of the variables represented in the full model
expected time or effort required to acquire the knowledge) in chil- to decide what to teach. Children might consider some variables to
dren’s decisions. be less relevant, or lack the representational or processing capaci-
Combining developmental and computational approaches, the ties to integrate them into a single decision. For instance, since it is
current work provides a unifying utility-based framework for how easy to activate the toys and obtain their rewards once one knows
humans decide what to teach. While previous utility-based models how they work, children might just focus on the learner’s discovery
of social reasoning have focused on formalizing people’s inferences costs (the costs-only model). Alternatively, since children already
about others’ actions or mental states8,13,14, here we are concerned know how the toys work, they might fail to consider the discovery
with how these inferences inform people’s decisions about what it costs for a naïve learner and only consider the rewards (the rewards-
is best to teach. Using a family of computational models, we gen- only model). It is also possible that children consider both costs and
erate precise, quantitative predictions about how a rational teacher rewards but fail to represent the utilities of both instruction and
NaturE HumaN BEHaviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Nature HumaN BeHaviour Articles
Model parameters
Activation Activation Discovery Discovery
reward cost reward cost
Activation Activation Discovery Discovery
reward (R) cost (C) reward (R ) cost (C )
A A D D
R(toy ) – C (toy ) P (R (toy ) – C (toy )) A X A X E D Y D Y
R (toy ) – C (toy )
A Y A Y
Chosen toy Unchosen toy
(instructed) (explored)
exploration; they may only concern themselves with the immediate different costs: the toys were matched in reward but varied in cost
consequence of what would be taught (the instruction-only model), (low-reward/high-cost toy versus low-reward/low-cost toy); and (3)
or just focus on the trial and error the learner will experience trying different rewards: the toys were matched in cost but varied in reward
to activate the unchosen toy (the exploration-only model). Figure (high-reward/low-cost toy versus low-reward/low-cost toy). In the
1b summarizes the different considerations of the main and alter- remaining three conditions, a high-reward/low-cost toy was con-
native models (see Methods and Supplementary Note 1 for more trasted with a low-reward toy that varied in its discovery cost: (4)
details). medium-cost conflict; (5) high-cost conflict; and (6) extra-high-cost
In experiment 1, we tested the model predictions across six conflict. These three conditions forced children to trade-off costs and
between-subjects conditions that presented children with different rewards because one toy was higher in rewards while the other was
pairs of toys (Fig. 2b). The choice was over-determined in the first higher in discovery costs. Formal model comparison will allow us to
condition: (1) rewards and costs: one toy was higher in both cost determine how well our full model captures the pattern of empirical
and reward than the other toy (high-reward/high-cost toy versus data relative to the simpler alternatives. We also present additional
low-reward/low-cost toy). In the next two conditions, either the cost experiments showing that children flexibly consider the learner’s
or the reward varied across toys while the other was matched: (2) utility or their own, depending on the context (experiment 2),
ledoM
a b
Full model
Costs only
U(teach ) = + X
Rewards only
U(teach ) = + P (R (toy ) – C (toy ))
Y E D X D X Instruction only
Exploration only
Fig. 1 | Full model equation and table of model space. a, Equations of the costs and rewards considered in each teaching plan in the full model. Activation
reward and discovery reward are assumed to be equal. The discovery cost is always greater than the activation cost, except for the low-cost toy whose
activation and discovery costs are 1. The cost function is assumed to be the physical cost of pressing buttons and is based on the toys’ physical properties.
The toys’ rewards were sampled from beta distributions and grounded in children’s relative preferences for the lights and the music (see Methods for more
details). P is the probability that the learner will explore the unchosen toy. Alternative models consider different subsets of these variables, as depicted
E
in b. b, Various components used by the full model and four alternative (lesioned) models to calculate the utility of each teaching plan. Each row is a
model and each column is a component participants might consider when deciding what to teach. The full model includes all components, whereas each
alternative model includes a subset.
a c
25
20
15
10
5
0
Rewards and Different Different Medium-cost High-cost Extra-high- Rewards and Different Different Medium-cost High-cost Extra-high-
costs costs rewards conflict conflict cost conflict costs costs rewards conflict conflict cost conflict
Condition Condition
b d
Red toy L Lo ow w r ce ow stard L Lo ow w r ce ow stard H Loig wh cr oe sw tard H Loig wh cr oe sw tard H Loig wh cr oe sw tard H Loig wh cr oe sw tard
Yellow toy High reward Low reward Low reward Low reward Low reward Low reward High cost High cost Low cost Medium cost High cost Extra-high cost
mTw eo ch-b au nt it so mn mOn ee ch-b au nt it so mn mTw eo ch-b au nt it so mn Rewards an Did f fc e Diro ffest en Ms t r eec dino t
u
s rt mes -w c Ha o Eir s xgt td rhs c - a-co hon if sl gi t c ht c -o c Rn o efl si t
w
c at c ro dn sf li ac nt Did f fc e Diro ffest en Ms t r eec dino t
u
s rt mes -w c
H
Ea o ir xs
g
ttd rhs c - a-co hon if sl gi t hct c -co Ron ef sli t
w
c at c ro dn sf li act n Did f fc e Diro ffest en Ms t r eec dino t
u
s rt mes -w c Ha Eo ir xs
g
ttd rhs c - a-co hon if sl gi t hct c -co Ron ef sli t
w
ct ac ro dn sfl i act n Did f fc e Diro ffest en Ms t r eec dino t
u
s rt mes -w c Ha Eo ir xs
g
ttd rhs c - a-co hon if sl gi t hct c -co onf sli t ct conflict
nerdlihc
fo
rebmuN
25
20
15
10
5
0
nerdlihc
fo
rebmun
detciderP
Cost only Rewards only Instruction only Exploration only
25 20
15
10
5
0
Condition
rebmun
detciderP
nerdlihc
fo
Fig. 2 | Experiment 1: stimuli, behavioural results and model predictions. a, Choices made by children in experiment 1 (n = 25 per condition). Red
represents the number of children who selected the red toy, as shown in the top row of b, while yellow represents the number of children who selected the
yellow toy, as shown in the bottom row of b. Error bars are bootstrapped 95% CIs. b, Schematic of the toys used in each condition of experiment 1 and as
shown in a, c, and d. c, The full model’s predictions of children’s choices. d, Predictions made by each alternative model.
NaturE HumaN BEHaviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles Nature HumaN BeHaviour
and that they can infer the expected costs of exploration, even with- Experiment 2. Our experimental task was designed to minimize the
out having personally experienced these costs (experiment 3). influence of children’s own utilities on their decisions; children did
not demonstrate the toys themselves to the learner, but instead made
results a decision about which toy the experimenter should teach. Note also
Experiment 1. The full model predicts that children will prefer that at the time of this decision, the cost of generating an effect with
the high-cost/high-reward toy in the rewards and costs condition, the medium-cost, high-cost and extra-high-cost toys was low, simi-
because this choice maximizes the learner’s utility by both increas- lar to that of the alternative low-cost toy, and was always lower for
ing their rewards (ensures they will enjoy the high-reward effect) the children than for the learner (that is, activation cost < discovery
and decreasing their costs (they will not have to go through the cost, especially for the high- and extra-high-cost toys). Thus, the
trouble of figuring out the high-cost toy). In the different costs and fact that children prioritized toys that were relatively higher in cost
different rewards conditions, it predicts a preference for the high- suggests that they considered the learner’s expected discovery costs.
cost toy and high-reward toy, respectively. However, note that the However, it is possible that children preferred teaching the
quantitative predictions are not symmetrical across these two con- higher-cost toy not because it would be harder for the learner
ditions; the model assumes that the relative difference in the toys’ to figure out but because their own previous success in figur-
rewards (reward from seeing the lights versus hearing the music) in ing out how it worked made it more attractive than the low-cost
the different rewards condition is more variable and smaller than toy. Alternatively, the existence of multiple buttons (despite being
the difference in the toys’ discovery costs in the different costs con- inert) may have made the higher-cost toy more fun to play with or
dition. This assumption reflects children’s intuitions about which more visually appealing than the low-cost toy with a single button.
effect is ‘cooler’ (see Supplementary Methods 2 and Supplementary If children’s choices are based on their own rewards, children might
Results 2). In our conflict conditions, the model predicts that chil- show a preference for the relatively higher-cost toy, even when there
dren’s tendency to select the low-reward toy over the high-reward is no learner to consider, such as when they are choosing a toy with
toy will increase as a function of the magnitude of the relative dif- which they themselves would like to play. However, if children’s
ference in the toys’ discovery costs. decisions about what it is best to teach are based on a genuine con-
In experiment 1, children’s (n = 25 per condition; mean sideration of the learner’s expected costs of exploration, they should
(M) ± s.d. = 6.35 ± 0.97 years of age; 53% female) choices were prioritise high-cost toys when they are choosing a toy for the learner
highly consistent with the full model’s predictions. In the conditions but not when choosing a toy for themselves. We tested this predic-
where rewards and costs were not in conflict, children showed a tion in experiment 2.
tendency to choose toys that were either higher in both rewards and Children (n = 25 per condition; M ± s.d. = 6.19 ± 0.77 years
costs (rewards and costs condition: 84% (21/25); 95% confidence of age; 54% female) were asked to choose a toy to teach a learner
interval (CI) = 0.68–0.96), higher in costs (different costs condition: (teach condition), or for themselves to play with (play condition),
84% (21/25); 95% CI = 0.68–0.96) or higher in rewards (different between a pair of toys that pit the high-cost mechanism against the
rewards condition: 68% (17/25); 95% CI = 0.50–0.86). All reported (intended) high-reward effect (high-reward/low-cost toy versus
CI’s were bootstrapped using 10,000 samples. low-reward/high-cost toy). The teach condition was a replication of
In the conditions involving a trade-off between costs and experiment 1’s high-cost conflict condition, whereas the play condi-
rewards, children’s tendency to select the low-reward toy over the tion was identical to the teach condition except for the final prompt:
high-reward toy increased as the expected discovery cost of the low- children were asked with which toy they would like to play.
reward toy increased. While only 44% (11/25; 95% CI = 0.25–0.64) As predicted, children’s choice of toys differed across conditions:
selected the low-reward toy in the medium-cost conflict condition, they were more likely to choose the low-reward/high-cost toy in
this increased to 60% (15/25; 95% CI = 0.40–0.79) in the high-cost the teach condition than in the play condition (72% (18/25) ver-
conflict condition and 76% (19/25; 95% CI = 0.58–0.92) in the sus 20% (5/25); two-tailed Fisher’s exact test, P < 0.001; odds ratio
extra-high-cost conflict condition. Children’s preference for the toy (OR) = 9.71; see Fig. 4). In fact, the majority of children in the play
higher in cost increased linearly across these conditions (logistic condition chose the high-reward/low-cost toy (80% (20/25); two-
regression: chose high-reward toy ∼ conflict condition; β = −0.226; tailed binomial test, P = 0.004; 95% CI = 0.63–0.95), reflecting chil-
t(74) = −2.348; P = 0.0216). See Fig. 2a,c for behavioural data dren’s strong preference for the lights effect. In contrast, the majority
and full model predictions (for more details, see Supplementary of children in the teach condition chose the low-reward/high-cost
Results 1). toy (72% (18/25); two-tailed binomial test, P = 0.043; 95% CI = 0.53–
To evaluate how well each model captures children’s responses, 0.89; no significant difference from experiment 1’s high-cost conflict
we calculated the likelihood of each model generating the pattern condition: two-tailed Fisher’s exact test, P = 0.55; OR = 1.70).
of results across all six conditions. Likelihood ratios between the These results further support the interpretation of children’s
full model and each alternative model represent how well the full choices in experiment 1 in terms of the full model: their decisions
model explains the data relative to each alternative. All comparisons to teach the higher-cost toys probably reflected a concern for the
favoured the full model by at least five orders of magnitude (all like- learner’s expected cost of exploration rather than a personal prefer-
lihood ratios > 1 × 105), providing compelling support for the full ence for these toys. Furthermore, children’s decisions were flexible
model over the four alternatives (see Fig. 3). For further details on depending on the context: they prioritized the learner’s utilities over
how each alternative model failed to capture the behavioural data, their own when deciding what to teach, but without a learner to
see Supplementary Note 1. consider, children readily considered their own preferences.
The tight correspondence between the behavioural results and
the full model suggests that children in our task coordinated mul- Experiment 3. Together, experiments 1 and 2 suggest that chil-
tiple considerations for a learner to decide what to teach. Children dren were sensitive to what would be difficult or time-consuming
did not consider just the expected rewards or just the expected costs for others to learn from exploration and understood that teaching
for the learner, nor did they reason about just the utility of instruc- can effectively reduce or eliminate such costs. However, it remains
tion or just the utility of exploration. Rather, they considered the unclear whether children’s decisions are based on their own past
relative expected costs and rewards for a learner under different experience of struggling to explore the toys with high discovery
teaching plans (that is, learning one toy from instruction and the costs, or the ability to infer the cost that others would incur to make
other from exploration, or vice versa) and chose the plan that maxi- a meaningful discovery even in the absence of direct previous expe-
mized the learner’s expected utility. rience with these costs.
NaturE HumaN BEHaviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Nature HumaN BeHaviour Articles
log−likelihood ratios of full model
vs. alternative models
Costs only
Rewards only
–10 0 20 40 40 80 100 120
log−likelihood ratios
The ability to draw inferences about the expected costs of dis-
covery is critical for continued transmission of knowledge that
is difficult to acquire without being taught; without this ability, a
learner who acquires high-cost information without personally
incurring the costs (for example, because they learned it through
direct instruction) might fail to prioritize teaching this informa-
tion to others. Is children’s ability to consider others’ costs limited
to what they have directly experienced in the past, or can they infer
these costs without experience? Given recent work on 3- to 5-year-
olds’ abilities to estimate the relative difficulty of novel tasks40, we
predicted that children would be able to consider the expected dis-
covery costs for a learner even in the absence of experiencing these
costs themselves.
In experiment 3, children (n = 25 per condition; that children can consider the costs of others’ learning and make
M ± s.d. = 6.20 ± 0.79 years of age; 60% female) made a teaching decisions that maximize others’ utilities, even when they learned
decision between two toys that differed only in costs (low-reward/ from direct instruction and never personally experienced the cost
high-cost toy versus low-reward/low-cost toy). In the exploration of exploration. This experiment also provides further support for
condition, children first explored the toys to learn how they worked the idea that when children selected the toys higher in discovery
(replicating experiment 1’s different costs condition). In the instruc- costs as the best ones to teach, they did so because they anticipated
tion condition, children did not interact with the toys but watched that the learner would find them more difficult to discover on their
the experimenter demonstrate how to activate them; thus, children own, and not simply because children received help with these toys
learned from instruction without the cost of exploration. If chil- via the experimenter’s prompts (see Methods).
dren’s decisions of what it is best to teach in our experiments criti-
cally depend on self-experience, they should choose the high-cost Discussion
toy in the exploration condition but not in the instruction condi- Humans are incredibly sophisticated social learners. However, part
tion. However, if children are able to infer the discovery costs for a of what allows us to learn so effectively from others is that we are
learner unfamiliar with the toys, they should select the high-cost toy also sophisticated social teachers. Without helpful teachers who pri-
in both conditions. oritize the communication of knowledge that is important yet costly
Children chose the high-cost toy in the exploration condition, to acquire, human social learning would not be nearly as successful.
replicating the results from experiment 1 (80% (20/25); two-tailed The goal of the current work was to understand the general princi-
binomial test, P = 0.004; 95% CI = 0.63–0.95). Critically, children ples and social and cognitive capacities that underlie our common-
also showed this preference in the instruction condition (72% sense intuitions about what it is best to teach.
(18/25); two-tailed binomial test, P = 0.043; 95% CI = 0.53–0.89). Complementing previous work that focused on the actual pro-
We found no credible evidence of a difference across conditions cess of teaching a given concept, we presented a computational-
(two-tailed Fisher’s exact test, P = 0.742; OR = 0.65; see Fig. 4), level account41 that characterizes how human teachers decide which
nor between either condition and experiment 1’s different costs concepts or what knowledge to teach, and empirically tested its
condition (two-tailed Fisher’s exact tests; exploration: P = 1.00; predictions with young children. Our account is grounded in the
OR = 0.77; instruction: P = 0.496; OR = 0.50). These results suggest theoretical proposal that humans expect other agents to act in ways
ledom
evitanretlA
Experiment 2 Experiment 3
High reward Low reward Low cost Low cost
25
Noise
0.01
0.05
0.1 20
Instruction only 0.3
0.4
0.5
Exploration only 15
Fig. 3 | Experiment 1: model comparison by noise parameter. Log-
likelihood ratios for the full model versus the alternative models
(log[L(data|full model)/L(data|alternative model)], where L is the
likelihood function) as a function of different noise parameters. Values
above 0 (meaning that the likelihood ratio is >1) reflect that the full
model explains the data better than the alternative model. Values below L Ho igw h r ce ow sa trd L Ho igw h r ce ow sa trd
0 (meaning that the likelihood ratio is <1) indicate that the alternative
Teach Play Exploration Instruction
model explains the data better than the full model. The full model better Condition
explains the data compared with the four alternative (lesioned) models for
all noise-parameter values. For the model comparison reported in the main
text, we used a small degree of noise (α = 0.1), as shown in light blue, and
all comparisons favoured the full model by at least five orders of magnitude
(all likelihood ratios > 1 × 105).
nerdlihc
fo
rebmuN
10
5
0
Fig. 4 | Experiments 2–3: behavioural results. Bar plots show children’s
responses in experiment 2’s teach and play conditions (left; n = 25 per
condition) and experiment 3’s exploration and instruction conditions (right;
n = 25 per condition). Yellow represents the number of children selecting
the yellow toys as best to teach (or play with), while red represents the
number of children selecting the red toys. Error bars are bootstrapped
95% CIs. In experiment 2, children more often chose the low-reward/
high-cost toy in the teach condition than in the play condition (two-tailed
Fisher’s exact test, P < 0.001; OR = 9.71). Children in the play condition
chose the high-reward/low-cost toy (two-tailed binomial test, P = 0.004;
95% CI = 0.63–0.95), while children in the teach condition chose the low-
reward/high-cost toy (two-tailed binomial test, P = 0.043; 95% CI = 0.53–
0.89). In experiment 3, children chose the high-cost toy in both conditions
(two-tailed binomial tests; exploration: P = 0.004; 95% CI = 0.63–0.95;
instruction: P = 0.043; 95% CI = 0.53–0.89; two-tailed Fisher’s exact test
across conditions, P = 0.742; OR = 0.65).
NaturE HumaN BEHaviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles Nature HumaN BeHaviour
that maximize their utilities8,13,14, as well as recent empirical work on increases. If children were simply considering either the difference
early-developing abilities to reason about the utilities of others’ goal- in rewards or the difference in costs, their decisions would not dif-
directed actions31,32,34. The full model formalizes our main hypothe- fer across these conditions. Children’s tendency to select the higher-
sis that children can consider the costs and rewards of learning from cost toy gradually increased with the magnitude of the difference in
instruction and learning from exploration to decide what it is best discovery costs, suggesting a trade-off between the toys’ discovery
to teach. Children’s decisions in experiment 1 were most consistent costs and rewards. Collectively, our work shows how smart, con-
with the full model, compared with simpler alternatives, and were siderate teaching decisions can naturally emerge from early-devel-
graded with respect to the learner’s utility. These results suggest oping social and cognitive capacities (that is, an understanding of
that children have an abstract understanding of how teaching and what others want or know47, as well as what is costly or rewarding
exploration differentially influence the utilities of learning and can for others8) without the need to posit explicit norms about what
integrate these variables into a single teaching decision. constitutes helpful teaching. A similar approach has been used to
Additionally, children considered the learner’s costs of explora- derive Gricean maxims from utility-theoretic models of pragmatic
tion selectively when deciding what to teach, but not when deciding communication48.
what to play with (experiment 2), even when they had not person- Further work is still needed to provide a more rigorous test of the
ally incurred these costs (experiment 3). Since even adults often hypothesis that children’s teaching decisions vary flexibly as a func-
fall victim to a ‘curse of knowledge’, both in everyday reasoning42,43 tion of the relative differences in the toys’ costs and rewards. This
and teaching44, it is impressive that children chose to teach what endeavour would benefit from finding more precise ways of esti-
would be more costly to learn from a naïve learner’s perspective mating the shape of children’s subjective cost and reward functions.
even though it was no longer costly for them (that is, both toys were We made reasonable simplifying assumptions to estimate these
easy to activate once learned). Given that even infants expect other functions (see Supplementary Note 1), and our full model captured
agents to avoid costly options and pursue goals that are lower in the overall pattern of children’s choices at the group level. However,
costs31,32,45, one might have expected children to have chosen the toy it cannot capture potential individual differences in the exact shape
that was less costly to discover as the best one to teach. Yet, children of these functions. Developing models that can predict children’s
made the opposite choice, suggesting that they understood the goal choices with better quantitative fit, and linking group-level predic-
of teaching (that is, maximizing the learner’s utilities) and could dis- tions to individuals’ behaviour, remain important challenges for
tinguish the cost of discovering how the toy works from the cost of future work.
activating it. We aimed to formalize the basic ingredients that contribute to
Our experiments were designed to maximize the chances of human teaching decisions within the broader context of utility-
identifying such competence in young children. First, we situated based reasoning. From this perspective, our full model is by no
the task in a dyadic, pedagogical context with which US children are means a complete model of human teaching. Yet a key strength is
highly familiar, where the learner’s goals (the learner wants to learn that it easily lends itself to extensions that incorporate additional
about both toys) and the teacher’s knowledge and motivation (the factors that might influence teaching decisions in more complex,
experimenter knows about both toys and wants to help the learner) real-world contexts. For example, real-world teaching often involves
are made clear. Second, by asking children to choose which toy the flexibly deciding how much time or effort one ought to invest in
experimenter should teach (rather than asking children to directly teaching others depending on the context. Although we deliberately
teach the learner), we were able to isolate children’s ability to make a designed the current task to isolate children’s consideration of oth-
prosocial decision for the learner without the influence of their own ers’ utilities from their own, previous work on children’s resistance
costs and rewards as teachers. Third, the simple forced-choice task of to providing redundant information suggests that consideration of
teaching one of two toys (and leaving the other to be explored) was one’s own utilities may indeed influence children’s behaviours as
a distillation of the real-world constraints that not everything can be teachers22,29. Would children be less likely to teach the toys high in
taught and that selecting to teach certain concepts may come at the discovery cost if these toys were also more costly to demonstrate?
expense of teaching others. Note that teaching either toy was helpful; Future work might explore this question by extending the model to
by asking children to choose just one, we could identify which teach- incorporate the teacher’s costs, and asking children to choose and
ing plan they considered more helpful. Beyond making proactive directly teach one of two toys that vary in activation costs.
decisions to protect others from failing46, children also anticipate the Our models also assumed that exploration is costly and that
expected costs of discovery, and prioritize what to teach in ways that the discovery reward of a toy is the same as its activation reward.
help others to learn more effectively and efficiently. Correspondingly, the actual process of repeatedly pressing inert
The current work is an example of how developmental experi- buttons on the (extra-)high-cost toys was not particularly exciting
ments and theory-driven computational modelling can mutu- for the children. However, a helpful teacher might also understand
ally inform one another. Our full model assumes that children that the process of exploration and discovery itself can be beneficial
are able to reason about rewards and costs simultaneously, and for learning49 and that pursuing a challenging goal may be intrinsi-
trade-off between them. While integration of rewards and costs cally rewarding50. Anecdotally, two children in experiment 1 chose
is a basic assumption in utility-based reasoning, one might ques- to teach the low-cost toy and explicitly mentioned the value of let-
tion whether such integration is necessary to explain children’s ting the learner explore the more challenging toy on their own (see
decisions. For example, children in our study might have relied Supplementary Results 1). Although we can incorporate the added
on a set of rules or heuristics that approximate reasoning about value of exploration and discovery into our model by sampling dif-
utilities rather than simultaneously considering both rewards and ferent rewards for activation and discovery, measuring and manipu-
costs (see Supplementary Note 1). Given that children of this age lating these variables remains a challenge for empirical work. How
are unlikely to have acquired explicit rules about what to prioritize and when children acquire such a nuanced understanding of the
when teaching others, even the use of such heuristics that systemati- costs and rewards of learning is an intriguing topic for research,
cally consider either costs or rewards (and especially the tendency with deep implications for promoting motivation in classrooms and
to preferentially teach high-cost options) would still be an impres- informal learning contexts51.
sive feat. The conflict conditions in experiment 1, however, provide Children’s success in our study raises questions about what really
some evidence against such heuristics-based accounts. In these con- develops and why these children might still fare poorly as teachers
ditions, the difference in expected rewards is held constant while in the real world. One possibility is that children’s ability to con-
the difference in expected discovery costs between the two toys sider more abstract costs and rewards develops over time. Our task
NaturE HumaN BEHaviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Nature HumaN BeHaviour Articles
involved concrete, perceptual rewards and physical costs, which we provide the theoretical, formal and empirical groundwork for
lend themselves well to formalization, and are easy for even young studying the development of human intuitions about what to teach.
children to understand. However, adult teachers also understand the Even in their early years as learners, human children understand
long-term expected utility of generalizable information and skills how to selectively share what they know to help others learn.
(for example, natural pedagogy9) and discovery costs that cannot be
gleaned from visual complexity, such as causal complexity52 or the methods
physical and mental demands of novel tasks40. Children’s ability to Implementation of the main (full) model. Given two devices (toy X and toy Y),
consider others’ utility functions that differ from their own may also our main (full) model compares the learner’s expected utilities under the following
continue to develop. In our task, because children were presented two teaching plans: teach X (and let the learner explore Y) and teach Y (and let the
learner explore X). The learner’s expected utility under a given teaching plan is
with a generic learner whose specific preferences and competen-
defined as the linear sum of the following components: after being taught a toy, the
cies were unknown, children might have reasonably assumed that
learner incurs a small activation cost (C ) to obtain the activation reward (R ) of
A A
what was rewarding or costly for them in the past would also be this chosen toy; in exploring the other toy (the unchosen toy), the learner incurs
rewarding or costly for the learner. Making teaching decisions for a discovery cost (C ), and obtains the discovery reward (R ) upon successful
D D
others who have quite different utility functions than they do (for discovery. Making a decision about what to teach (and consequently what the
example, different preferences or competencies31,36,53) may be more learner will explore) is formalized as choosing the plan that maximizes the learner’s
expected utilities (see Fig. 1a).
challenging and improve in tandem with children’s theory of mind
The cost function is assumed to be the physical cost of pressing buttons, and is
and executive control25,28,54. based on the toys’ physical properties. The activation cost (C) is the number of button
A
The ability to prioritize teaching knowledge that yields a higher presses required to activate the toy: 1 for low-cost toys and the medium-cost toy
utility for the learner, when implemented by multiple individuals (all of which have a single-button mechanism), and 2 for the high-cost toys and the
extra-high-cost toy (all of which require two specific buttons to be pressed together).
over generations, may be a powerful force that shapes our collec-
These values are both small, reflecting the fact that once an agent knows how the two
tive knowledge. It would allow human societies to incorporate new
toys work, both are easy to activate. The discovery cost (C) of a toy is the expected
D
discoveries, preserve timeless wisdom, and filter out obsolete skills number of button presses required for a naïve learner to explore and discover how
and knowledge, thereby curating a collection of cultural knowledge to activate it, assuming that the learner would first try simpler actions (pressing one
deemed valuable by its members. Our computational account pro- button at a time) and then try more complex actions (pressing combinations of two
vides a possible explanation for how such curation might occur. buttons) once the simpler hypothesis space has been depleted (low-cost toys: C D = 1;
Furthermore, over time, the tendency to teach high-utility knowl- m C De =di Eu (m C- Dc )o =st 7 t 9o ;y s: e C e D S = up E p( lC emD) e = n 4 ta; rh yi g Nh o- tc eo 1st ft oo ry ms: oC rD e = d eE t( aC ilD s) ) .= 29; extra-high-cost toy:
edge may give rise to different cultural norms about what it is best The activation reward (R ) and discovery reward (R ) of a toy are assumed to
A D
to teach. The cognitive mechanisms that subserve the formation of be equal, but variable across participants, to allow for the possibility that different
such norms might also allow them to diversify and evolve over time; participants assign different subjective rewards to each effect. The toys’ rewards
were sampled from beta distributions (ranging from 1–87, to allow the maximum
as the intellectual and technological repertoire of a society grows
reward of a toy to be as high as three times the expected discovery cost of the
and changes, its members can reassess the utility of existing knowl- high-cost toys, which is also higher than the expected discovery cost of the extra-
edge and flexibly update the content of these norms to reflect the high-cost toy). We fit these distributions such that there was an 80% probability
changes in the cost–reward structure of their environment. that a sample from the lights (high-reward) distribution would be higher in value
Relatedly, human societies show significant variability in the than a sample from the music (low-reward) distribution, matching empirical data
on children’s relative preference for these causal effects (80% of children (20/25)
degree to which they rely on direct pedagogy as the primary means
preferred the lights; see Supplementary Methods 2, Supplementary Results 2 and
of knowledge transfer (as opposed to observation or exploration)55,56. Supplementary Note 1 for more details).
Our work suggests that such variability might reflect the relative It is possible that children’s reasoning about rewards and costs is more complex
utility of direct instruction, compared to other ways of learning, than how we have implemented these functions. For example, cost may not increase
linearly with each button press, and reward might be the highest on first observation
given the nature of the knowledge and skills to be acquired; teach-
and then degrade with each subsequent observation due to decreasing novelty. In
ing may not be necessary if learning can occur through other means
the context of our experiment, model predictions depend on the relative reward
that do not require a ‘teacher’ who is willing to increase others’ utili- and cost rather than their absolute values; identifying the precise shape of children’s
ties at the expense of their own6,57. Compared with more abstract cost and reward functions is beyond the scope of the current work. Thus, we adopt
knowledge (such as algebra), practical skills (such as cooking) or the simplest cost function that is consistent with how children actually explored the
medium-cost, high-cost and extra-high-cost toys (that is, most children first pressed
social conventions (such as who sits where during mealtime) may
each button individually before attempting combinations of buttons), and the
be easier to acquire through observation and imitation. In such
simplest reward function where rewards remain constant across time. Some children
cases, knowledgeable individuals might slow their actions or toler- might also assume an extra value to the process of exploration and discovery (for
ate onlookers as a way to facilitate others’ learning. But even the example, R A < R D), or consider the utility of the teacher. See Discussion for how the
tendency to slow down or allow onlookers may be higher for goals current model could be extended to incorporate these possibilities.
Additionally, we considered the probability (P) that the learner would explore
that are more costly to achieve for the observer5,55. It is thus possible E
the unchosen toy. This exploration certainty parameter (higher means more
that selective communication via an intuitive cost–benefit analysis
certain) reflects the idea that teaching ensures immediate learning and guarantees
is a culturally universal yet distinctively human ability that extends a reward, while there is more uncertainty about the learner’s future exploratory
beyond pedagogical contexts. However, our work leaves open the behaviours and whether or not they will successfully activate the unchosen toy. For
question of whether prioritization of high-utility information is example, they may never explore this toy, or even if they do, they might not figure
it out, which is of particular concern for the high-cost and extra-high-cost toys.
observed in non-pedagogical social learning contexts or in cultures
Our full model considers all of these components to compute the learner’s
where direct instruction is rare16,55. expected utilities under each teaching plan (see Fig. 1), and chooses the plan
Theories of human learning have often contrasted the value of with the higher overall expected utility for the learner. To generate the model
active exploration and discovery1–4,49,58 and the importance of social predictions reported in the main text (Fig. 2c,d), we used P E = 0.5, as well as a small
learning9,59–63. These views have fuelled theoretical debates about the degree of noise (α = 0.1) in children’s choices. However, model fits are robust to: (1)
different distributions of the reward space; (2) different ranges of reward values;
relative efficacy of instruction versus active learning11,64, and have
raised practical questions in real-world classrooms about whether a con dd e ( 3 an) dd i ff ufe lr l e pn rt e dva iclu tie os n o s f c P anE a bn ed f oα u ( ns dee a S t u hp ttp pl se :m //oen sft .a iory /w N uo nt be q1 / .for details). Model
to teach students or encourage them to figure things out on their
own. The current work provides a different perspective: rather than Participants. We recruited 250 5-, 6- and 7-year-olds (M ± s.d. = 6.29 ± 0.90 years
replacing or hindering exploration, teachers can optimize learn- of age; 55% female; n = 25 per condition for all experiments) for experiments
1–3 from a local children’s museum in the San Francisco Bay Area. Experiment
ing by ensuring that learners acquire knowledge that is important
1 involved 150 participants aged 5, 6 and 7 years (M ± s.d. = 6.35 ± 0.97 years;
yet difficult to learn from exploration, while guiding learners to 53% female). An additional nine children were excluded from the analysis due
explore things that can or should be acquired on their own. Overall, to difficulty understanding English (four), a missing date of birth (two), an
NaturE HumaN BEHaviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles Nature HumaN BeHaviour
inability to learn the mechanism of the extra-high-cost toy (two) or parental Reporting Summary. Further information on research design is available in the
interference (one). Experiment 2 involved 50 participants aged 5, 6 and 7 years Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.
(M ± s.d. = 6.19 ± 0.77 years; 54% female). An additional three children were
excluded from the analysis due to a missing date of birth (one), parental Data availability
interference (one) or experimenter error (one). Experiment 3 involved 50
The data and analysis scripts that support the findings of this study are available at
participants aged 5, 6 and 7 years (M ± s.d. = 6.20 ± 0.79 years; 60% female). An https://osf.io/wunbq/.
additional five children were excluded from the analysis due to experimenter error
(two) or not completing the procedure (three).
Code availability
No statistical methods were used to predetermine sample sizes, but our
sample sizes were pre-set and similar to those reported in previous publications Model code and full predictions can be found at https://osf.io/wunbq/.
on children’s teaching22,29,35. All procedures were approved by Stanford University’s
Institutional Review Board for Human Subjects Research. Informed consent was Received: 7 September 2018; Accepted: 29 August 2019;
obtained from the legal guardians of all child participants. Published: xx xx xxxx
For experiment 1, participants were randomly assigned to the different rewards
and high-cost conflict conditions, followed by the rewards and costs and different
costs conditions. The medium-cost and extra-high-cost conflict conditions were references
added during the review process (participants were randomly assigned to either 1. Piaget, J. The Child’s Conception of the World (Harcourt Brace
condition). See https://osf.io/5dmga/ for preregistration, and Supplementary Jovanovich, 1929).
Results 1 for further statistical analyses of the behavioural results. In experiment 2, 2. Singer, D. G., Golinkoff, R. M. & Hirsh-Pasek, K. Play = Learning: How Play
we first collected data for the play condition, followed by the teach condition Motivates and Enhances Children’s Cognitive and Social-Emotional Growth
(a replication of the high-cost conflict condition in experiment 1). In experiment (Oxford Univ. Press, 2006).
3, we first collected data for the instruction condition, followed by the exploration 3. Schulz, L. The origins of inquiry: inductive inference and exploration in early
condition (a replication of the different costs condition in experiment 1). Data childhood. Trends Cogn. Sci. 16, 382–389 (2012).
collection and analysis were not performed blind to the conditions of the 4. Stahl, A. E. & Feigenson, L. Observing the unexpected enhances infants’
experiments. Children’s responses were recorded offline from the video by S.B. learning and exploration. Science 348, 91–94 (2015).
and a second researcher blind to the experimental hypotheses. See Supplementary 5. Kline, M. A. How to learn about teaching: an evolutionary framework for the
Methods 1 for details. study of teaching behavior in humans and other animals. Behav. Brain Sci.
38, e31 (2015).
Materials. We constructed seven rectangular toys (25 cm × 15 cm × 15 cm) from 6. Caro, T. & Hauser, M. Teaching in nonhuman animals. Q. Rev. Biol. 67,
foam board, felt, push-buttons and electrical circuits. Low-cost toys had one (large) 151–174 (1992).
button that activated the toys’ effects. The medium-cost toy had one large and six 7. Wellman, H. & Cross, D. Theory of mind and conceptual change. Child Dev.
identical small buttons; pressing one of the small buttons activated the toy. The 72, 702–707 (2001).
high-cost toys also had one large and six identical small buttons, but to activate 8. Jara-Ettinger, J., Gweon, H., Schulz, L. E. & Tenenbaum, J. B. The nave utility
these toys, the large button and one particular small button had to be pressed at calculus: computational principles underlying commonsense psychology.
the same time. The extra-high-cost toy had one large button and 11 identical small Trends Cogn. Sci. 20, 589–604 (2016).
buttons, and just like the high-cost toys, to activate this toy, the large button and 9. Csibra, G. & Gergely, G. Natural pedagogy. Trends Cogn. Sci. 13,
one particular small button had to be pressed at the same time. When activated, 148–153 (2009).
low-reward toys played music, whereas high-reward toys had a plastic orb that lit 10. Shafto, P., Goodman, N. D. & Griffiths, T. L. A rational account of
up different colours and spun around (see Fig. 2b for a schematic of the toys used pedagogical reasoning: teaching by, and learning from, examples. Cogn.
in each condition of experiment 1, and Fig. 4 for a schematic of the toys used in Psychol. 71, 55–89 (2014).
experiments 2 and 3). 11. Bonawitz, E. et al. The double-edged sword of pedagogy: instruction limits
spontaneous exploration and discovery. Cognition 120, 322–330 (2011).
Procedure. Children were tested individually in a quiet room separate from the 12. Baker, C. L., Jara-Ettinger, J., Saxe, R. & Tenenbaum, J. B. Rational
main exhibits of the museum. Experiment 1 began with the discovery phase. The quantitative attribution of beliefs, desires and percepts in human mentalizing.
experimenter produced two toys (determined by condition), explained that she Nat. Hum. Behav. 1, 0064 (2017).
did not know how the toys worked, and asked children for help figuring them 13. Lucas, C. G. et al. The child as econometrician: a rational model of preference
out. Children explored both toys until they activated them. Children quickly understanding in children. PLoS One 9, e92160 (2014).
figured out low-cost toys, immediately pressing the single button (experiment 1: 14. Jern, A., Lucas, C. G. & Kemp, C. People learn other people’s preferences
M discovery time ± s.d. = 0.28 ± 1.02 s). Figuring out the medium-cost toy took longer through inverse decision-making. Cognition 168, 46–64 (2017).
(experiment 1: M discovery time ± s.d. = 9.33 ± 6.37 s). Figuring out the high-cost toys 15. Schulz, L. & Bonawitz, E. Serious fun: preschoolers engage in more exploratory
and extra-high-cost toy took much longer (experiment 1: high-cost toys: M play when evidence is confounded. Dev. Psychol. 43, 1045–1050 (2007).
discovery
time ± s.d. = 81.22 ± 49.42 s; extra-high-cost toy: M discovery time ± s.d. = 94.52 ± 61.79 s) 16. Shneidman, L., Gweon, H., Schulz, L. E. & Woodward, A. L. Learning from
and involved pressing many buttons. If children stopped exploring the high-cost others and spontaneous exploration: a cross-cultural investigation. Child Dev.
or extra-high-cost toys before successfully activating them, the experimenter 87, 723–735 (2016).
prompted them to continue, and provided suggestions of what they could try next 17. Gweon, H. & Schulz, L. 16-month-olds rationally infer causes of failed
(for example, “I wonder what would happen if you pressed two buttons at the same actions. Science 332, 1524 (2011).
time.”). These prompts were delivered as though they were spontaneous, and with 18. Was, A. M. & Warneken, F. Proactive help-seeking: preschoolers know when
uncertainty, to keep up the charade that the experimenter did not know how these they need help, but do not always ask for it. Cogn. Dev. 43, 91–105 (2017).
toys worked. Critically, the experimenter never explicitly told or showed children 19. Sobel, D. M. & Kushnir, T. Knowledge matters: how children evaluate the
how to activate the toys. Once children figured out both toys, they were asked reliability of testimony as a process of rational inference. Psychol. Rev. 120,
to demonstrate each toy twice (with the order counterbalanced) to ensure that 779–797 (2013).
they knew how to activate the toys and had the chance to experience the ease of 20. Koenig, M. A. & Harris, P. L. Preschoolers mistrust ignorant and inaccurate
activating them after discovery (i.e., the minimal activation cost). speakers. Child Dev. 76, 1261–1277 (2005).
Next came the choice phase. The experimenter explained that her friend would 21. Gweon, H. & Asaba, M. Order matters: children’s evaluation of
play with the toys later all by herself but knew nothing about them, so beforehand, underinformative teachers depends on context. Child Dev. 89,
the experimenter would help by teaching her how one of the toys worked. The e278–e292 (2018).
experimenter then asked: “Which toy should I teach her?” Children selected a toy 22. Gweon, H., Shafto, P. & Schulz, L. Development of children’s sensitivity
and explained their choice. Children also answered two follow-up questions: (1) to over-informativeness in learning and teaching. Dev. Psychol. 54,
which toy was harder to figure out?; and (2) which effect was cooler? 2113–2125 (2018).
In experiment 2, the teach condition was identical to experiment 1’s high- 23. Sobel, D. M. & Letourneau, S. M. Children’s developing knowledge of and
cost conflict condition. The only difference was in the choice phase of the play reflection about teaching. J. Exp. Child Psychol. 143, 111–122 (2016).
condition; the experimenter said she needed to work on something and asked the 24. Shatz, M. & Gelman, R. The development of communication skills:
children to choose one toy to play with while she was gone. In experiment 3, the modifications in the speech of young children as a function of listener.
exploration condition was identical to experiment 1’s different costs condition. Monogr. Soc. Res. Child Dev. 38, 1–38 (1973).
The only difference was in the instruction condition; a demonstration phase 25. Ziv, M., Solomon, A., Strauss, S. & Frye, D. Relations between the
replaced the discovery phase. Children never interacted with the toys; instead, the development of teaching and theory of mind in early childhood. J. Cogn. Dev.
experimenter taught children how the toys worked: she pressed the appropriate 17, 264–284 (2016).
buttons to generate the effect, and added, “this is the only way to make the toy go” 26. Baer, C. & Friedman, O. Fitting the message to the listener: children
(see Supplementary Methods 1). selectively mention general and specific facts. Child Dev. 89, 461–475 (2018).
NaturE HumaN BEHaviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Nature HumaN BeHaviour Articles
27. Rhodes, M., Gelman, S. & Brickman, D. Children’s attention to sample 53. Magid, R. W., Depascale, M. & Schulz, L. E. Four-and 5-year-olds infer
composition in learning, teaching and discovery. Dev. Sci. 13, 421–429 (2010). differences in relative ability and appropriately allocate roles to achieve
28. Bass, I. et al. Children’s developing theory of mind and pedagogical evidence cooperative, competitive, and prosocial goals. Open Mind 2, 72–85 (2018).
selection. Dev. Psychol. 55, 286–302 (2019). 54. Benson, J. E., Sabbagh, M. A., Carlson, S. M. & Zelazo, P. D. Individual
29. Gweon, H. & Schulz, L. From exploration to instruction: children learn from differences in executive functioning predict preschoolers’ improvement from
exploration and tailor their demonstrations to observers’ goals and theory-of-mind training. Behav. Brain Sci. 49, 1615–1627 (2013).
competence. Child Dev. 90, e148–e164 (2019). 55. Boyette, A. H. & Hewlett, B. S. Teaching in hunter-gatherers. Rev. Philos.
30. Gergely, G., Nádasdy, Z., Csibra, G. & Bró, S. Taking the intentional stance at Psychol. 9, 771–797 (2018).
12 months of age. Cognition 56, 165–193 (1995). 56. Legare, C. H. Cumulative cultural learning: development and diversity.
31. Jara-Ettinger, J., Gweon, H., Tenenbaum, J. B. & Schulz, L. E. Children’s Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 114, 7877–7883 (2017).
understanding of the costs and rewards underlying rational action. Cognition 57. Tomasello, M. Born (and bred) to help. in Why We Cooperate 1–48 (MIT
140, 14–23 (2015). Press, 2009).
32. Liu, S., Ullman, T. D., Tenenbaum, J. B. & Spelke, E. S. Ten-month-old 58. Bruner, J. S., Jolly, A. & Sylva, K. Play: Its Role in Development and Evolution
infants infer the value of goals from the costs of actions. Science 358, (Basic Books, 1976).
1038–1041 (2017). 59. Vygotsky, L. S. Mind in Society: The Development of Higher Psychological
33. Pesowski, M. L., Denison, S. & Friedman, O. Young children infer Processes (Harvard Univ. Press, 1980).
preferences from a single action, but not if it is constrained. Cognition 155, 60. Boyd, R., Richerson, P. J. & Henrich, J. The cultural niche: why social learning
168–175 (2016). is essential for human adaptation. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 108,
34. Liu, S., Gonzalez, G. & Warneken, F. Worth the wait: children trade off 10918–10925 (2011).
delay and reward in self- and other-benefiting decisions. Dev. Sci. 6, 61. Tomasello, M., Carpenter, M., Call, J., Behne, T. & Moll, H. Understanding
e12702–e12708 (2018). and sharing intentions: the origins of cultural cognition. Behav. Brain Sci. 28,
35. Ronfard, S., Was, A. M. & Harris, P. L. Children teach methods they could 691–735 (2005).
not discover for themselves. J. Exp. Child Psychol. 142, 107–117 (2016). 62. Legare, C. H. & Nielsen, M. Imitation and innovation: the dual engines of
36. Repacholi, B. & Gopnik, A. Early reasoning about desires: evidence from cultural learning. Trends Cogn. Sci. 19, 688–699 (2015).
14- and 18-month-olds. Dev. Psychol. 33, 12–20 (1997). 63. Heyes, C. Who knows? Metacognitive social learning strategies. Trends Cogn.
37. Téglás, E. et al. Pure reasoning in 12-month-old infants as probabilistic Sci. 20, 204–213 (2016).
inference. Science 332, 1054–1059 (2011). 64. Klahr, D. & Nigam, M. The equivalence of learning paths in early science
38. Lagattuta, K. H. Linking past, present, and future: children’s ability instruction: effect of direct instruction and discovery learning. Psychol. Sci.
to connect mental states and emotions across time. Child Dev. Perspect. 8, 15, 661–667 (2004).
90–95 (2014).
39. Atance, C. M. & O’Neill, D. K. Episodic future thinking. Trends Cogn. Sci. 5, acknowledgements
533–539 (2001). We thank C. Dweck, M. C. Frank, E. Markman, M. H. Tessler, M. Asaba, K. Weisman
40. Gweon, H., Asaba, M. & Bennett-Pierre, G. Reverse-engineering the process: and N. Vélez for helpful conversations and insightful comments. We thank G. Bennett-
adults and preschoolers’ ability to infer the difficulty of novel tasks. In Proc. Pierre, A. Singh, F. Kramer, A. Garron and N. Chandaria for help with data collection
39th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society 458–463 (Cognitive and coding. We are grateful to the Palo Alto Junior Museum and Zoo, the Tech Museum
Science Society, 2017). of Innovation in San Jose and the children and families who participated in this research.
41. Marr, D. Vision: A Computational Investigation into the Human Representation This work was funded by a John Templeton Foundation Varieties of Understanding
and Processing of Visual Information (MIT Press, 1982). grant (to H.G.), a James S. McDonnell Scholar Award (to H.G.) and an NSF Graduate
42. Camerer, C., Loewenstein, G. & Weber, M. The curse of knowledge in Research Fellowship (to S.B.). In addition, this material is based upon work supported by
economic settings: an experimental analysis. J. Polit. Econ. 97, the Center for Brains, Minds, and Machines (CBMM), funded by NSF-STC award CCF-
1232–1254 (1989). 1231216. The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision
43. Birch, S. & Bloom, P. The curse of knowledge in reasoning about false beliefs. to publish or preparation of the manuscript.
Psychol. Sci. 18, 382–386 (2007).
44. Aboody, R., Velez-Ginorio, J., Santos, L. R. & Jara-Ettinger, J. When teaching
author contributions
breaks down: teachers rationally select what information to share, but
misrepresent learners’ hypothesis spaces. In Proc. 40th Annual Meeting of the S.B. and H.G. conceived of and designed the experiments. S.B. collected and analysed the
Cognitive Science Society 70–75 (2018). data. J.J.-E. designed, implemented and conducted the formal model comparisons, with
45. Gergely, G. & Csibra, G. Teleological reasoning in infancy: the naïve theory assistance from S.B. and H.G. S.B., H.G. and J.J.-E. interpreted the results and wrote and
of rational action. Trends Cogn. Sci. 7, 287–292 (2003). edited the manuscript.
46. Martin, A. & Olson, K. R. When kids know better: paternalistic helping in
3-year-old children. Dev. Psychol. 49, 2071–2081 (2013). Competing interests
47. Wellman, H., Cross, D. & Watson, J. Meta-analysis of theory-of-mind The authors declare no competing interests.
development: the truth about false belief. Child Dev. 72, 655–684 (2001).
48. Goodman, N. D. & Frank, M. C. Pragmatic language interpretation as
additional information
probabilistic inference. Trends Cogn. Sci. 20, 818–829 (2016).
49. Gureckis, T. M. & Markant, D. B. Self-directed learning: a cognitive and Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/
computational perspective. Perspect. Psychol. Sci. 7, 464–481 (2012). s41562-019-0748-6.
50. Inzlicht, M., Shenhav, A. & Olivola, C. Y. The effort paradox: effort is both Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to S.B. or H.G.
costly and valued. Trends Cogn. Sci. 22, 337–349 (2018). Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
51. Dweck, C. S. Mindset: The New Psychology of Success (Random House, 2006).
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
52. Ahl, R. E. & Keil, F. C. Diverse effects, complex causes: children use
published maps and institutional affiliations.
information about machines’ functional diversity to infer internal complexity.
Child Dev. 88, 828–845 (2017). © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2019
NaturE HumaN BEHaviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
1
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Corresponding author(s): Sophie Bridgers and Hyowon Gweon
Last updated by author(s): Aug 21, 2019
Reporting Summary
Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency
in reporting. For further information on Nature Research policies, see Authors & Referees and the Editorial Policy Checklist.
Statistics
For all statistical analyses, confirm that the following items are present in the figure legend, table legend, main text, or Methods section.
n/a Confirmed
The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
A statement on whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided
Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.
A description of all covariates tested
A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
A full description of the statistical parameters including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient)
AND variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)
For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted
Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.
For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated
Our web collection on statistics for biologists contains articles on many of the points above.
Software and code
Policy information about availability of computer code
Data collection No software was used.
Data analysis To visualize and analyze children’s behavior we used R version 3.5.2 and the following packages: tidyverse version 1.2.1, tidyboot 0.1.1,
cowplot 0.9.4, and lubridate 1.7.4
To implement our models and generate predictions, we used Python version 2.7.10.
To visualize our model predictions and conduct formal model comparison, we used R version 3.5.2 and the following packages: tidyverse
version 1.2.1, boot version 1.3-20, and glue 1.3.0
For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors/reviewers.
We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Research guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.
Data
Policy information about availability of data
All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable:
- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets
- A list of figures that have associated raw data
- A description of any restrictions on data availability
All data and analysis scripts will be made available on the Open Science Framework upon publication at the following link: https://osf.io/wunbq/
2
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Field-specific reporting
Please select the one below that is the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.
Life sciences Behavioural & social sciences Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences
For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/documents/nr-reporting-summary-flat.pdf
Behavioural & social sciences study design
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
Study description Quantitative experimental
Research sample We recruited 250 5-, 6-, and 7-year-olds (M(SD) = 6.29(0.90)yrs; 55% female) for Experiments 1-3 from a local children’s museum; we
recruited a separate group of 25 5-, 6-, and 7-year-olds (M(SD) = 6.15(0.93) yrs; 60% female) for the Norming Experiment from local
children's museums. A range of ethnicities proportional to the local population were included. We selected 5 to 7 years as our target age
range for two reasons. First, children this age understand teaching as a process that causes knowledge change (Sobel & Letourneau,
2016), and consider others’ mental states to decide what to communicate as teachers (Gweon, Pelton, Konopka, & Schulz, 2014).
Second, they can infer and integrate the expected costs and rewards of others’ actions in their reasoning (see Jara-Ettinger et al., 2015).
Thus, we expected that children this age might be capable of simulating another person’s utility to make decisions on their behalf.
Sampling strategy We randomly sampled and assigned children to one of two conditions in Experiment 1 (Different Rewards and High Cost Conflict or
Different Costs and Rewards & Costs). The Medium Cost Conflict and the Extra-High Cost Conflict conditions in Experiment 1 were run
during the review process and children were randomly assigned to one of these two conditions. The sample size per condition (n = 25)
was consistent with previous conditions and preregistered along with hypotheses and analyses. The preregistration for these conditions
can be found at: https://osf.io/5dmga/ In Experiment 2, we first collected data for the Play condition, followed by the Teach condition (a
replication of the High Cost Conflict condition in Experiment 1). In Experiment 3, we first collected data for the Instruction condition,
followed by the Exploration condition (a replication of the Different Costs condition in Experiment 1). We pre-set our sample size at 25
children per condition for all experiments. This was based on closely related prior work on children’s ability to teach (e.g., Ronfard &
Corriveau 2016, Gweon & Schulz 2019, Gweon Shafto & Schulz, 2018); our sample size was similar to those used in these studies.
Data collection Data was collected in a room separate from the main exhibits at the museum by either the first author or an undergraduate research
assistant. Although the experimenters were not blind to the study’s hypothesis, they were thoroughly trained to ensure that the
experiment was run without any indication of how children should respond. Children's responses were recorded by video when parent
permission was given. We had parental permission to video record all but 9 children whose responses were recorded using pen and
paper by the experimenter. Sometimes members of the child participant's family were in the room while the experiment was being
conducted.
Timing Experiment 1: 4/15/2015 - 1/15/2016 and 1/12/2019 - 1/27/2019 (preregistered conditions run during the review process); Experiment
2: 5/3/2015-3/25/2017; Experiment 3: 5/8/2016-3/25/2017; Norming Experiment: 4/23/2017 - 6/29/2017. Any breaks are due to school
holidays, museum holidays, and travel.
Data exclusions Seventeen participants were excluded from analysis across our three experiments (see SI). In Experiment 1, 9 children were excluded
from analysis due to difficulty understanding English (4), missing date of birth (2), an inability to learn the mechanism of the extra-high-
cost toy (2), or parental interference (1). In Experiment 2, 3 children were excluded from analysis due to missing date of birth (1),
parental interference (1), or experimenter error (1). In Experiment 3, 5 children were excluded from analysis due to experimenter error
(2) or not completing the procedure (3). No children were excluded from the Norming Experiment. Exclusion criteria were pre-
established and consistent with prior research in the lab.
Non-participation Three participants began the experiment but did not complete it due to being too shy to respond to the experimenter's questions.
Randomization Allocation to experimental conditions was random. We recruited until we had 25 participants per condition per experiment that we could
include in data analyses.
Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods
We require information from authors about some types of materials, experimental systems and methods used in many studies. Here, indicate whether each material,
system or method listed is relevant to your study. If you are not sure if a list item applies to your research, read the appropriate section before selecting a response.
3
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Materials & experimental systems Methods
n/a Involved in the study n/a Involved in the study
Antibodies ChIP-seq
Eukaryotic cell lines Flow cytometry
Palaeontology MRI-based neuroimaging
Animals and other organisms
Human research participants
Clinical data
Human research participants
Policy information about studies involving human research participants
Population characteristics See above.
Recruitment The main experimenter approached families in the museum and asked if they had children between the ages of 5 and 7 years
and if they would be interested in participating in a study exploring children's teaching. The museum has no admission fee, and
attracts visitors from a wide range of SES, ethnic, and cultural backgrounds. Although it is possible that parents who willingly
agreed to have their child participate in research may be somewhat more interested in science, we have no reason to expect
that such a tendency would bias the results of the current study.
Ethics oversight Stanford University's Human Subjects Research and IRB
Note that full information on the approval of the study protocol must also be provided in the manuscript.