Opendata:N/A Editedby:S.R.Martin
Meta-Psychology,2020,vol4,MP.2018.933
Openmaterials:Yes Reviewedby:J.D.Blume,O.L.OlveraAstivia
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2018.933
Openandreproducibleanalysis:Yes Analysisreproducedby:AndréKalmendal
Articletype:OriginalArticle
Openreviewsandeditorialprocess:Yes AllsupplementaryfilescanbeaccessedatOSF:
PublishedundertheCC-BY4.0license
Preregistration:N/A https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/ZP3KF
Equivalence Testing and the Second
Generation P-Value.
Daniël Lakens
Eindhoven University of Technology, The Netherlands
Marie Delacre
Université Libre de Bruxelles, Belgium
Abstract
To move beyond the limitations of null-hypothesis tests, statistical approaches have been developed where the ob-
serveddataarecomparedagainstarangeofvaluesthatareequivalenttotheabsenceofameaningfuleffect. Spec-
ifying a range of values around zero allows researchers to statistically reject the presence of effects large enough
to matter, and prevents practically insignificant effects from being interpreted as a statistically significant differ-
ence. Wecomparethebehavioroftherecentlyproposedsecondgenerationp-value(Blume,D’AgostinoMcGowan,
Dupont, & Greevy, 2018) with the more established Two One-Sided Tests (TOST) equivalence testing procedure
(Schuirmann, 1987). We show that the two approaches yield almost identical results under optimal conditions.
Under suboptimal conditions (e.g., when the confidence interval is wider than the equivalence range, or when
confidenceintervalsareasymmetric)thesecondgenerationp-valuebecomesdifficulttointerpret. Thesecondgen-
erationp-valueisinterpretableinadichotomousmanner(i.e.,whentheSGPVequals0or1becausetheconfidence
intervals lies completely within or outside of the equivalence range), but this dichotomous interpretation does not
requirecalculations. Weconcludethatequivalencetestsyieldmoreconsistentp-values,distinguishbetweendatasets
thatyieldthesamesecondgenerationp-value,andallowforeasiercontrolofTypeIandTypeIIerrorrates.
Keywords: equivalencetesting,secondgenerationp-values,hypothesistesting,TOST,statisticalinference
Totestpredictionsresearcherspredominantlyrelyon cally equivalent to zero. By specifying a range around
null-hypothesis tests. This statistical approach can be thenullhypothesisofvaluesthataredeemedpractically
usedtoexaminewhetherobserveddataaresufficiently equivalent to the absence of an effect (i.e., 0 +- 0.3)
surprising under the null hypothesis to reject an effect the observed data can be compared against an equiv-
that equals exactly zero. Null-hypothesis tests have an alence range and researchers can test if a meaningful
importantlimitation,inthatthisprocedurecanonlyre- effect is absent (Hauck & Anderson, 1984; Kruschke,
ject the hypothesis that there is no effect, while scien- 2018; Rogers, Howard, & Vessey, 1993; Serlin & Lap-
tistsshouldalsobeabletoprovidestatisticalsupportfor sley, 1985; Spiegelhalter, Freedman, & Parmar, 1994;
equivalence. When testing for equivalence researchers Wellek,2010;Westlake,1972).
aimtoexaminewhetheranobservedeffectistoosmall
Second generation p-values (SGPV) were recently
to be considered meaningful, and therefore is practi-
proposedasastatisticthatrepresents“theproportionof
2
data-supported hypotheses that are also null hypothe- Therelationshipbetweenp-valuesfromTOSTand
ses” (Blume et al., 2018). The researcher specifies an SGPVwhenconfidenceintervalsaresymmetrical
equivalence range around a null hypothesis of values
The second generation p-value (SGPV) is calculated
that are considered practically equivalent to the null
as:
hypothesis. The SGPV measures the degree to which |I∩H | (cid:40) |I| (cid:41)
a set of data-supported parameter values falls within p δ = |I| 0 ×max 2|H |,1
0
the interval null hypothesis. If the estimation inter-
val falls completely within the equivalence range, the where I is the interval based on the data (e.g., a 95%
SGPV is 1. If the confidence interval falls completely confidence interval) and H 0 is the equivalence range.
outside of the equivalence range, the SGPV is 0. Oth- The first term of this formula implies that the second
erwise the SGPV is a value between 0 and 1 that ex- generation p-value is the width of the confidence inter-
presses the overlap of data-supported hypotheses and valthatoverlapswiththeequivalencerange,dividedby
the equivalence range. When calculating the SGPV the the total width of the confidence interval. The second
set of data-supported parameter values can be repre- term is a “small sample correction” (which will be dis-
sentedbyaconfidenceinterval(CI),althoughonecould cussed later) that comes into play whenever the confi-
also choose to use credible intervals or Likelihood sup- denceintervalismorethantwiceaswideastheequiva-
port intervals (SI). When a confidence interval is used, lencerange. ToexaminetherelationbetweentheTOST
the SGPV and equivalence tests such as the Two One- p-value and the SGPV we can calculate both statistics
SidedTests(TOST)procedure(Lakens,2017;Meyners, across a range of observed effect sizes. Building on the
2012; Quertemont, 2011; Schuirmann, 1987) appear example by Blume et al. (2018), in Figure 1 p-values
to have close ties, because both tests compare a confi- are plotted for the TOST procedure and the SGPV. The
dence interval against an equivalence range. Here, we statistics are calculated for hypothetical one-sample t-
aimtoexaminethesimilaritiesanddifferencesbetween tests for observed means ranging from 140 to 150 (on
the TOST procedure and the SGPV. We limit our anal- the x-axis). The equivalence range is set to 145 +- 2
ysis to continuous data sampled from a bivariate nor- (i.e., an equivalence range from 143 to 147), the ob-
mal distribution. The TOST procedure also relies on served standard deviation is assumed to be 2, and the
the confidence interval around the effect. In the TOST sample size is 30. For example, for the left-most point
procedurethedataaretestedagainstthelowerequiva- inFigure1theSGPVandtheTOSTp-valueiscalculated
lence bound in the first one-sided test, and against the forahypotheticalstudywithasamplesizeof30,anob-
upper equivalence bound in the second one-sided test served standard deviation of 2, and an observed mean
(Lakens, Scheel, & Isager, 2018). For an excellent dis- of 140, where the p-value for the equivalence test is 1,
cussionofthestrengthsandweaknessesofdifferentfre- andtheSGPVis0.
quentist equivalence tests, including alternatives to the Our conclusions about the relationship between
TOSTprocedure,seeMeyners(2012). Ifbothtestssta- TOSTp-valuesandSGPVholdforsecondgenerationp-
tistically reject an effect as extreme or more extreme valuescalculatedfromconfidenceintervals,andassum-
than the equivalence bound, you can conclude the ob- ingdataissampledfromabivariatenormaldistribution.
served effect is practically equivalent to zero from a Readers can explore the relationship between TOST p-
Neyman-Pearson approach to statistical inferences. Be- valuesandSGPVforthemselvesinanonlineShinyapp:
cause one-sided tests are performed, one can also con- http://shiny.ieis.tue.nl/TOST_vs_SGPV/.
cludeequivalencebycheckingwhetherthe1-2×αconfi- The SGPV treats the equivalence range as the null-
denceinterval(e.g.,whenthealphalevelis0.05,a90% hypothesis,whiletheTOSTproceduretreatsthevalues
CI)fallscompletelywithintheequivalencebounds. Be- outsideoftheequivalencerangeasthenull-hypothesis.
cause both equivalence tests as the SGPV are based on Foreaseofcomparisonwecanplot1-SGPV(seeFigure
whether and how much a confidence interval overlaps 2) to make the values more easily comparable. We see
with equivalence bounds, it seems worthwhile to com- thatthep-valuefromtheTOSTprocedureandtheSGPV
parethebehaviorofthenewlyproposedSGPVtoequiv- followeachotherclosely. Whenwediscusstherelation-
alence tests to examine the unique contribution of the shipbetweenthep-valuesfromTOSTandtheSGPV,we
SGPVtothestatisticaltoolbox. focus on their correspondence at three values, namely
where the TOST p = 0.025 and SGPV is 1, where the
TOST p = 0.5 and SGPV = 0.5, and where the TOST
p = 0.975 and SGPV = 1. These three values are im-
portant for the SGPV because they indicate the values
at which the SGPV indicates the data should be inter-
pretedascompatiblewiththenullhypothesis(SGPV=
3
Figure 1. Comparison of p-values from TOST (black line) and SGPV (grey line) across a range of observed sample
means(x-axis)testedagainstameanof145inaone-samplet-testwithasamplesizeof30andastandarddeviation
of2,illustratingthatwhentheTOSTp-value=0.5,theSGPV=0.5,whentheTOSTp-valueis0.975,1-SGPV=1,
andwhentheTOSTp-value=0.025,1-SGPV=0.
1), or with the alternative hypothesis (SGPV = 0), or
whenthedataarestrictlyinconclusive(SGPV=0.5).
These three points of overlap are indicated by the
horizontal dotted lines in Figure 2 at TOST p-values of
0.975,0.5,and0.025.
When the observed sample mean is 145, the sam-
ple size is 30, and the standard deviation is 2, and we
are testing against equivalence bounds of 143 and 147
using the TOST procedure for a one-sample t-test, the
equivalence test is significant, t(29) = 5.48, p < .001.
Because the 95% CI falls completely within the equiva-
lencebounds,theSGPVis1(seeFigure1). Ontheother
hand, when the observed mean is 140, the equivalence
test is not significant (the observed mean is far outside
Figure 2. Comparison of p-values from TOST (black
the equivalence range of 143 to 147), t(29) = -8.22,
line)and1-SGPV(greyline)acrossarangeofobserved
p = 1 (or more accurately, p > .999 as p-values are
sample means (x-axis) tested against a mean of 145 in
bounded between 0 and 1). Because the 95% CI falls
aone-samplet-testwithasamplesizeof30andastan-
completelyoutsidetheequivalencebounds,theSGPVis
darddeviationof2.
0(seeFigure1).
SGPVasauniformmeasureofoverlap
directly related to the p-value from an equivalence test
It is clear the SGPV and the p-value from TOST are for three values. When the TOST p-value is 0.5, the
closelyrelated. Whenconfidenceintervalsaresymmet- SGPVisalso0.5(notethatthereverseisnottrue). The
ric we can think of the SGPV as a straight line that is
4
Figure 3. Means, normal distribution, and 95% CI for Figure 4. Means, normal distribution, and 95% CI for
three example datasets that illustrate the relationship samples where the observed population mean is 1.5,
betweenp-valuesfromTOSTandSGPV. 1.4,1.3,and1.2.
SGPV is 50% when the observed mean falls exactly on lencetest). TheSGPVsummarizestheinformationfrom
thelowerorupperequivalencebound,because50%of anequivalencetest(andthecomplementaryminimum-
the symmetrical confidence interval overlaps with the effecttest). Thesecanbetworelevantquestionstoask,
equivalencerange. Whentheobservedmeanequalsthe although it often makes sense to combine an equiva-
equivalencebound,thedifferencebetweenthemeanin lence test and a null-hypothesis test instead (Lakens et
thedataandtheequivalenceboundis0,thet-valuefor al.,2018).
theequivalencetestisalso0,andthusthep-valueis0.5 Forexample,inFigure4wehaveplottedfourSGPV’s.
(situationA,Figure3). FromAtoDtheSGPVis0.76,0.81,0.86,and0.91. The
differenceinthepercentageofoverlapbetweenAandB
Two other points always have to overlap. When the
(-0.05)isidenticaltothedifferenceinthepercentageof
95% CI falls completely inside the equivalence region,
overlapbetweenCandDasthemeangets0.1closerto
and one endpoint of the confidence interval is exactly
the test value (-0.05). As the observed mean in a one-
equaltooneoftheequivalencebounds(seesituationB
samplet-testliesclosertothetestvalue,fromsituation
in Figure 3) the TOST p-value (which relies on a one-
AtoD,thedifferenceintheoverlapchangesuniformly.
sided test) is always 0.025, and the SGPV is 1. Note
As we move the observed mean closer to the test value
thatwhensamplesizesaresmallorequivalencebounds
in steps of 0.1 across A to D the p-value calculated for
are narrow, small p-values for the TOST or a SGPV =
normallydistributeddataarenotuniformlydistributed.
1 might not be observed in practice if too few obser-
The probability of observing data more extreme than
vations are collected. The third point where the SGPV
theupperboundof2is(fromAtoD)0.16,0.12,0.08,
and the p-value from the TOST procedure should over-
and0.05. Aswecansee, thedifferencebetweenAand
lap is where the 95% CI falls completely outside of the
B (0.04) is not the same as the difference between C
equivalence range, but one endpoint of the confidence
and D (0.03). Indeed, the difference in p-values is the
intervalisequaltotheequivalencebound(seesituation
largestasyoustartatp=0.5(whentheobservedmean
C in Figure 3), when the p-value will always be 0.975,
falls on the test value), which is why the line in Figure
andtheSGPVis0. Notethatthissituationisinessencea
1 is the steepest at p = 0.5. Note that where the SGPV
minimum-effecttest(Murphy,Myors,&Wolach,2014).
reaches 1 or 0, p-values closely approximate 0 and 1,
The goal of a minimum-effect is not just to reject a dif-
butneverreachthesevalues.
ference of zero, but to reject the smallest effect size of
interest (i.e., the equivalence bounds). An equivalence
When different p-values for equivalence tests yield
test and minimum effect test against the same equiva-
thesameSGPV
lence bound are complementary, and when a TOST p-
valueislargerthan0.975,thep-valuefortheminimum There are three situations where p-values for TOST
effecttestissmallerthan0.05(andthereforethemini- differentiate between observed results, while the SGPV
mumeffecttestprovidesnoadditionalinformationthat does not differentiate. The first two situations were
can not be derived from the p-value from the equiva- discussed before and can be seen in Figure 1. When
5
Figure 5. The relationship between p-values from the Figure 6. Comparison of p-values from TOST (black
TOSTprocedureandtheSGPVforthesamescenarioas line) and SGPV (grey line) across a range of observed
inFigure1. samplemeans(x-axis). Becausethesamplesizeissmall
(n = 10) and with a standard deviation of 2 the CI is
more than twice as wide as the equivalence range (set
the SGPV is either 0 or 1, p-values from the equiva- to -0.4 to 0.4), the SGPV is set to 0.5 (horizontal light-
lence test fall between 0.975 and 1 or between 0 and greyline)acrossarangeofobservedmeans.
0.025. Where the SGPV is 1 as long as the confidence
intervalfallscompletelywithintheequivalencebounds,
the p-value for the TOST continues to differentiate be- then equivalence range is narrow. It is therefore not so
tween results as a function of how far the confidence much a “small sample correction” as it is an exception
intervallieswithintheequivalencebounds(thefurther to the typical calculation of the SGPV whenever the ra-
the confidence interval is from both bounds, the lower tio of the confidence interval width to the equivalence
the p-value). The easiest way to see this is by plotting range exceeds 2:1 and the CI overlaps with the upper
theSGPVagainstthep-valuefromtheTOSTprocedure. andlowerbounds.
The situations where the p-values from the TOST pro- We can examine this situation by calculating the
cedure continue to differentiate based on how extreme SGPV and performing the TOST for a situation where
the results are, but the SGPV is a fixed value are indi- samplesizesaresmallandtheequivalencerangeisnar-
cated by the parts of the curve where there are vertical row, such that the CI is more than twice as large as the
straightlinesatsecondgenerationp-valuesof0and1. equivalence range (see Figure 6). When the two statis-
ticsareplottedagainsteachotherwecanseewherethe
A third situation in which the SGPV remains stable
SGPV is the same while the TOST p-value still differ-
across a range of observed effects, while the TOST p-
entiatesdifferentobservedmeans(indicatedbystraight
value continues to differentiate, is whenever the CI is
lines in the curve, see Figure 7). We see the SGPV is
wider than the equivalence range, and the CI overlaps
0.5 for a range of observed means where the p-value
with the upper and lower equivalence bound. When
fromtheequivalenceteststillvaries. Itshouldbenoted
the confidence interval is more than twice as wide as
thatinthesecalculationsthep-valuesfortheTOSTpro-
the equivalence range the SGPV is set to 0.5. Blume et
cedure are never smaller than 0.05 (i.e., they do not
al. (2018)callthisthe“smallsamplecorrectionfactor”.
get below 0.05 on the y-axis). In other words, we can-
However,itisnotacorrectioninthetypicalsenseofthe
notconcludeequivalencebasedonanyoftheobserved
word, since the SGPV is not adjusted to any “correct”
means. This happens because we are examining a sce-
value. Whenthenormalcalculationwouldbe“mislead-
nario where the 90% CI is so wide that it never falls
ing” (i.e., the SGPV would be small, which normally
completelywithinthetwoequivalencebounds.
would suggest support for the alternative hypothesis,
As Lakens (2017) notes: “in small samples (where
butatthesametimeallvaluesintheequivalencerange
CIs are wide), a study might have no statistical power
are supported), the SGPV is set to 0.5 which according
(i.e., the CI will always be so wide that it is necessarily
to Blume and colleagues signals that the SGPV is “un-
wider than the equivalence bounds).” None of the p-
informative”. Note that the CI can be twice as wide as
values based on the TOST procedure are below 0.05,
theequivalencerangewheneverthesamplesizeissmall
andthus,inthelongrunwehave0%power.
(and the confidence interval width is large) or when
6
Figure 7. The relationship between p-values from the Figure 9. Comparison of p-values from TOST (black
TOSTprocedureandtheSGPVforthesamescenarioas line) and SGPV (grey line) across a range of observed
inFigure6. sample means (x-axis). The sample size is small (n =
10),butbecausethesdishalfasbigasinFigure7(1in-
steadof2)theCIislessthantwiceaswideastheequiv-
The p-value from the TOST procedure still differen- alencerange(setto-0.4to0.4). TheSGPVisnotsetto
tiates observed means, while the SGPV does not, when 0.5(horizontallightgreyline)butreachesamaximum
the CI is wider than the equivalence range (so the pre- slightlyabove0.5acrossarangeofobservedmeans.
cision is low) and overlaps with the upper and lower
equivalence bound, but the CI is not twice as wide as
the equivalence range. In the example below, we see laps with the equivalence range) while the p-value for
thattheCIisonly1.79timesaswideastheequivalence the TOST procedure does vary. We can see this in Fig-
bounds, but the CI overlaps with the lower and upper ure 9 below. The SGPV is not set to 0.5, but is slightly
equivalence bounds (Figure 8). This means the SGPV higherthan0.5acrossarangeofmeans. Howhighthe
is not set to 0.5, but it is constant across a range of ob- SGPV will be for a CI that is not twice as wide as the
served means, while the TOST p-value is not constant equivalencerange,butoverlapswiththelowerandup-
acrossthisrange. perequivalencebounds,dependsonthewidthoftheCI
andtheequivalencerange.
If the observed mean would be somewhat closer to
If we once more plot the two statistics against each
0, or further away from 0, the SGPV remains constant
other we see the SGPV is 0.56 for a range of observed
(the CI width does not change, and it completely over-
meanswherethep-valuefromtheequivalenceteststill
varies, as indicated by the straight section of the line
(Figure10).
To conclude this section, there are situations where
the p-value from the TOST procedure continues to dif-
ferentiate, while the SGPV does not. Therefore, inter-
preted as a continuous statistic, the SGPV is more lim-
itedthanthep-valuefromtheTOSTprocedure.
TherelationbetweenequivalencetestsandSGPVfor
asymmetrical confidence intervals around correla-
tions
So far we have only looked at the relation between
equivalence tests and the SGPV when confidence inter-
valsaresymmetric(e.g.,forconfidenceintervalsaround
mean differences). For correlations, which are bound
Figure 8. Example of a 95% CI that overlaps with the
between-1and1,confidenceintervalsareonlysymmet-
lower and upper equivalence bound (indicated by the
ric for a correlation of exactly 0. The confidence inter-
verticaldottedlines).
val for a correlation becomes increasingly asymmetric
7
Figure 10. The relationship between p-values from the TOST procedure and the SGPV for the same scenario as in
Figure9.
as the observed correlation nears -1 or 1. For example, SGPVof1and0,respectively. Therearetwoimportant
withtenobservations,anobservedcorrelationof0hasa differences,however. Firstofall,theSGPVisnolonger
symmetric 95% confidence interval ranging from -0.63 astraightline,butacurve,duetotheasymmetryinthe
to 0.63, while and observed correlation of 0.7 has an 95% CI. Second, and most importantly, the p-value for
asymmetric95%confidenceintervalrangingfrom0.13 theequivalencetestandtheSGPVdonolongeroverlap
to0.92. Notethatcalculatingconfidenceintervalsfora atp=0.5.
correlation involves a Fisher’s z-transformation, which The reason that the equivalence test and SGPV no
transformsvaluessuchthattheyareapproximatelynor- longer overlap is due to asymmetric confidence inter-
mally z-distributed, which allows one to compute sym- vals. If the observed correlation falls exactly on the
metric confidence intervals. These confidence intervals equivalence bound the p-value for the equivalence test
are then retransformed into a correlation, where the is 0.5. In the equivalence test for correlations the p-
confidence intervals are asymmetric if the correlation value is computed based on a z-transformation which
isnotexactlyzero. better controls error rates (Goertzen & Cribbie, 2010).
This transformation is computed as follows, where r is
Theeffectofasymmetricconfidenceintervalsaround the observed correlation and ρ is the theoretical corre-
correlations is most noticeable at smaller sample sizes. lationunderthenull:
InFigure11weplotthep-valuesfromequivalencetests
andtheSGPV(againplottedas1-SGPVforeaseofcom- log(1 1+ −r r) − log(1 1+ −ρ ρ)
parison) for correlations. The sample size is 30 pairs z= 2
(cid:113)
2
of observations, and the lower and upper equivalence 1
n−3
boundsaresetto-0.45and0.45,withanalphaof0.05.
As the observed correlation in the sample moves from Becausethez-distributionissymmetric,theprobabil-
-.99to0thep-valuefromtheequivalencetestbecomes ity of observing the observed or more extreme z-score,
smaller, as does 1-SGPV. The pattern is quite similar to assuming the equivalence bound is the true effect size,
that in Figure 2. The p-value for the TOST procedure is50%. However,becausetherdistributionisnotsym-
and 1-SGPV are still related as discussed above, with metric, this does not mean that there is always a 50%
TOSTp-valuesof0.975and0.025correspondingtoa1- probability of observing a correlation smaller or larger
8
SGPV is the proportion of values in a 95% confidence
interval that overlap with the equivalence range, but
not the probability that these values will be observed.
In the most extreme case (i.e., a sample size of 4, and
equivalence bounds set to r = -0.99 and 0.99, with a
true correlation of 0.99) 97.60% of the confidence in-
tervaloverlapswiththeequivalencerange,eventhough
inthelongrunonly36%ofthecorrelationsobservedin
thefuturewillfallinthisrange.
It should be noted that in larger sample sizes the
SGPV is closer to 0.5 whenever the observed correla-
tion falls on the equivalence bound, but this extreme
example nevertheless clearly illustrates the difference
between question the SGPV answers, and the question
Figure 11. Comparison of p-values from TOST (black a p-value answers. The conclusion of this section on
line) and 1-SGPV (grey curve) across a range of ob- asymmetric confidence intervals is that a SGPV of 1 or
servedsamplecorrelations(x-axis)testedagainstequiv- 0 can still be interpreted as a p < 0.025 or p > 0.975
alence bounds of r = -0.45 and r = 0.45 with n = 30 in an equivalence test, since the SGPV and p-value for
andanalphaof0.05. the TOST procedure are always directly related at the
values p = 0.025 and p = 0.975. Although Blume et
al. (2018) state that “the degree of overlap conveys
howcompatiblethedataarewiththenullpremise”this
definition of what the SGPV provides does not hold for
asymmetric confidence intervals. Although a SGPV of
1 or 0 can be directly interpreted, a SGPV between 0
and1isnotinterpretableas“compatibilitywiththenull
hypothesis”undertheassumptionofabivariatenormal
distribution, and the generalizability of this statement
needs to be examined beyond normal bivariate distri-
butions. Indeed,Blumeandcolleagueswriteinthesup-
plementalmaterialthat“Themagnitudeofaninconclu-
sive second-generation p-value can vary slightly when
the effect size scale is transformed. However definitive
findings, i.e. a p-value of 0 or 1 are not affected by the
Figure12. Three95%confidenceintervalsforobserved scalechanges.”
effectsizesofr=-0.45,r=0,andr=0.45forn=30.
Onlytheconfidenceintervalforr=0issymmetric. What are the Relative Strengths and Weaknesses of
EquivalenceTestingandtheSGPV?
When introducing a new statistical method, it is im-
than the true correlation. As can be seen in Figure 12,
portanttocompareittoexistingapproachesandspecify
the proportion of the confidence interval that overlaps
its relative strengths and weaknesses. Here, we aimed
withtheequivalencerangeislargerthan50%whenthe
tocomparetheSGPVagainstequivalencetestsbasedon
observedcorrelationsarer=-.45andr=.45,meaning
the TOST procedure. First of all, even though a SGPV
thatthetwosecondgenerationp-valuesassociatedwith
of 1 or 0 has a clear interpretation (we can reject ef-
thesecorrelationsarelargerthan50%. Becausethecon-
fectsoutsideorinsidetheequivalencerange), interme-
fidence intervals are asymmetric around the observed
diate values are not as easy to interpret (especially for
effectsizeof0.45(rangingfrom0.11to0.70)according
effects that have asymmetric confidence intervals). In
to Blume et al. (2018) 58.11% of the data-supported
one sense, they are what they are (the proportion of
hypotheses are null hypotheses, and therefore 58.11%
overlap), but it can be unclear what this number tells
of the data-supported hypotheses are compatible with
us about the data we have collected. This is not too
thenullpremise.
problematic,sincethemainuseoftheSGPV(e.g.,inall
The further away from 0, the larger the SGPV when examples provided by Blume and colleagues) seems to
theobservedmeanfallsontheequivalencebound. The betoexaminewhethertheSGPVis0,1,orinconclusive.
9
As already mentioned, this interpretation of a SGPV is suchacorrectiontopreventmisleadingresults.
verysimilartotheNeyman-Pearsoninterpretationofan
equivalencetestandaminimumeffecttests(whichare
complementary). The difference is that where a SGPV
of 1 can be interpreted as p < .025, equivalence tests
provide exact p-values, and they continue to differen-
tiate between for example p = 0.024 and p = 0.002.
Whether this is desirable depends on the perspective
that is used. From a Neyman-Pearson perspective on
statistical inferences the main conclusion is based on
whetherornot p<α,andthusanequivalencetestand
SGPVcanbeperformedbysimplycheckingwhetherthe
confidence interval falls within the equivalence range,
justasanull-hypothesistestcanbeperformedbycheck-
ing whether the confidence interval contains zero or
not. Atthesametime,itisrecommendedtoreportexact
Figure 13. Comparison of p-values from TOST (black
p-values (American Psychological Association, 2010),
line) and 1-SGPV (grey curve) across a range of ob-
andexactp-valuesmightprovideinformationofinterest
servedsamplecorrelations(x-axis)testedagainstequiv-
toreadersabouthowpreciselyhowsurprisingthedata,
alence bounds of r = 0.4 and r = 0.8 with n = 10 and
or more extreme data, is under the null model. Some
analphaof0.05.
researchers might be interested in combining an equiv-
alencetestwithanull-hypothesissignificancetest. This
allowsaresearchertoaskwhetherthereisaneffectthat
is statistically different from zero, and whether effect As a more extreme example of the peculiar behav-
sizes that are considered meaningful can be rejected. ior of the “small sample correction” as currently imple-
Equivalence tests combined with null-hypothesis tests mentedinthecalculationoftheSGPV,seeFigure13. In
classifyresultsintofourpossiblecategories,andforex- this figure observed correlations (from a sample size of
ample allow researchers to conclude an effect is sig- 10) from -.99 to .99 are tested against an equivalence
nificant and equivalent (i.e., statistically different from range from r = 0.4 to r = 0.8. We can see the SGPV
zero, but also too small to be considered meaningful; has a peculiar shape because it is set to 0.5 for certain
seeLakensetal.,2018). observedcorrelations, eventhoughthereisnoriskofa
“misleading”SGPVinthisrange. Thisexamplesuggests
An important issue when calculating the SGPV is its that the current implementation of the “small sample
reliance on the “small sample correction”, where the correction” could be improved. If, on the other hand,
SGPVissetto0.5whenevertheratiooftheconfidence the SGPV is mainly meant to be interpreted when it is
intervalwidthtotheequivalencerangeexceeds2:1and 0or1, itmightbepreferabletosimplyneverapplythe
the CI overlaps with the upper and lower bounds. This “smallsamplecorrection”.
exception to the normal calculation of the SGPV is in-
troduced to prevent misleading values. Without this Blumeetal. (2018)claimthatwhenusingtheSGPV
correction it is possible that a confidence interval is ex- “Adjustments for multiple comparisons are obviated”
tremely wide, and an equivalence range is extremely (p.15). However,thisisnotcorrect. Giventhedirectre-
narrow, which without the correction would lead to a lationship between TOST and SGPV highlighted in this
very low value for the SGPV. Blume et al. (2018) sug- manuscript(whereaTOSTp=0.025equalsSGPV=1,
gest that under such a scenario “the data favor alter- as long as the SGPV is calculated based on confidence
native hypotheses”, even when a better interpretation intervals,andassumingdataaresampledfromacontin-
would be that there is not enough data to accurately uous bivariate normal distribution), not correcting for
estimate the true effect compared to the width of the multiplecomparisonswillinflatetheprobabilityofcon-
equivalence range. Although it is necessary to set the cludingtheabsenceofameaningfuleffectbasedonthe
SGPVto0.5whenevertheratiooftheconfidenceinter- SGPVinexactlythesamewayasitwillforequivalence
valwidthtotheequivalencerangeexceeds2:1,itleads tests. Whenever statistical tests are interpreted as sup-
to a range of situations where the SGPV is set to 0.5, port for a hypothesis (e.g., SPGV = 0 or SGPV = 1), it
while the p-value from the TOST procedure continues ispossibletodosoerroneously,andifresearcherswant
to differentiate (see for example Figure 6). An impor- to control error rates, they need to correct for multiple
tantbenefitofequivalencetestsisthatitdoesnotneed comparisons.
10
Conclusion References
We believe that our explanation of the similarities AmericanPsychologicalAssociation(Ed.). (2010). Pub-
between the TOST procedure and the SGPV provides lication manual of the American Psychological
context to interpret the contribution of second gener- Association (6th ed.). Washington, DC: Amer-
ation p-values to the statistical toolbox. The novelty icanPsychologicalAssociation.
of the SGPV can be limited when confidence intervals Blume, J. D., D’Agostino McGowan, L., Dupont,
are asymmetrical or wider than the equivalence range. W. D., & Greevy, R. A. (2018). Second-
There are strong similarities with p-values from the generation p-values: Improved rigor, re-
TOST procedure, and in all situations where the statis- producibility, & transparency in statistical
tics yield different results, the behavior of the p-value analyses. PLOS ONE, 13(3), e0188299.
from the TOST procedure is more consistent. We hope doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0188299
thisoverviewoftherelationshipbetweentheSGPVand Goertzen, J. R., & Cribbie, R. A. (2010). Detect-
equivalence tests will help researchers to make an in- ing a lack of association: An equivalence test-
formed decision about which statistical approach pro- ing approach. British Journal of Mathemati-
vides the best answer to their question. Our compar- cal and Statistical Psychology, 63(3), 527–537.
isons show that when proposing alternatives to null- doi:10.1348/000711009X475853
hypothesistests,itisimportanttocomparenewpropos- Hauck, D. W. W., & Anderson, S. (1984). A new statis-
als to already existing procedures. We believe equiva- tical procedure for testing equivalence in two-
lencetestsachievethegoalsofthesecondgenerationp- group comparative bioavailability trials. Jour-
value while allowing users to easily control error rates, nal of Pharmacokinetics and Biopharmaceutics,
andwhileyieldingmoreconsistentstatisticaloutcomes. 12(1),83–91. doi:10.1007/BF01063612
Kruschke, J. K. (2018). Rejecting or Accept-
AuthorsNote ing Parameter Values in Bayesian Estima-
tion. Advances in Methods and Practices
Allcodeassociatedwiththisarticle,includingthere-
in Psychological Science, 1(2), 270–280.
produciblemanuscript,isavailablefromhttps://github.
doi:10.1177/2515245918771304
com/Lakens/TOST_vs_SGPVandhttps://osf.io/8crkg/.
Lakens, D. (2017). Equivalence Tests: A Prac-
The preprint can be found at https://psyarxiv.com/
tical Primer for t Tests, Correlations,
7k6ay/.
and Meta-Analyses. Social Psychological
Correspondenceconcerningthisarticleshouldbead-
and Personality Science, 8(4), 355–362.
dressedtoDaniëlLakens,DenDolech1,IPO1.33,5600
doi:10.1177/1948550617697177
MB, Eindhoven, The Netherlands. E-mail: D.Lakens@
Lakens, D., Scheel, A. M., & Isager, P. M. (2018).
tue.nl
EquivalenceTestingforPsychologicalResearch:
A Tutorial. Advances in Methods and Prac-
OpenSciencePractices tices in Psychological Science, 1(2), 259–269.
doi:10.1177/2515245918770963
Meyners, M. (2012). Equivalence tests A review.
Food Quality and Preference, 26(2), 231–245.
This article earned the Open Materials badge for
doi:10.1016/j.foodqual.2012.05.003
makingthe materialsopenlyavailable. It hasbeenver-
Murphy, K. R., Myors, B., & Wolach, A. H. (2014).
ified that the analysis reproduced the results presented
Statistical power analysis: A simple and gen-
inthearticle. Theentireeditorialprocess,includingthe
eralmodelfortraditionalandmodernhypothesis
openreviews,arepublishedintheonlinesupplement.
tests (Fourth edition.). New York: Routledge,
Taylor&FrancisGroup.
ConflictofInterestandFunding
Quertemont, E. (2011). How to Statistically Show
the Absence of an Effect. Psychologica Belgica,
No conflict of interest and no external funding. This
51(2),109–127. doi:10.5334/pb-51-2-109
work was supported by the NetherlandsOrganization
Rogers, J. L., Howard, K. I., & Vessey, J. T.
forScientificResearch(NWO)VIDIgrant452-17-013.
(1993). Using significance tests to eval-
uate equivalence between two experimental
AuthorContributions
groups. Psychological Bulletin, 113(3), 553–
DL conceptualized the idea, both authors wrote and 565. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0033-
revisedthismanuscript. 2909.113.3.553
11
Schuirmann, D. J. (1987). A comparison of the two K. (1994). Bayesian approaches to random-
one-sided tests procedure and the power ap- ized trials. Journal of the Royal Statistical So-
proach for assessing the equivalence of av- ciety. Series A (Statistics in Society), 357–416.
erage bioavailability. Journal of Pharmacoki- doi:10.2307/2983527
netics and Biopharmaceutics, 15(6), 657–680.
Wellek,S.(2010). Testingstatisticalhypothesesofequiv-
doi:https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01068419
alence and noninferiority (2nd ed.). Boca Ra-
Serlin, R. C., & Lapsley, D. K. (1985). Ratio-
ton: CRCPress.
nality in psychological research: The good-
enoughprinciple. AmericanPsychologist,40(1), Westlake, W. J. (1972). Use of Confidence Intervals
73–83. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0003- in Analysis of Comparative Bioavailability Tri-
066X.40.1.73 als. Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 61(8),
Spiegelhalter, D. J., Freedman, L. S., & Parmar, M. 1340–1341. doi:10.1002/JPS.2600610845