Articles
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-020-0922-x
Knowledge diffusion in the network of
international business travel
Michele Coscia 1,2 ✉, Frank M. H. Neffke 1 and Ricardo Hausmann 1,3
We use aggregated and anonymized information based on international expenditures through corporate payment cards to map
the network of global business travel. We combine this network with information on the industrial composition and export
baskets of national economies. The business travel network helps to predict which economic activities will grow in a country,
which new activities will develop and which old activities will be abandoned. In statistical terms, business travel has the most
substantial impact among a range of bilateral relationships between countries, such as trade, foreign direct investments and
migration. Moreover, our analysis suggests that this impact is causal: business travel from countries specializing in a specific
industry causes growth in that economic activity in the destination country. Our interpretation of this is that business travel
helps to diffuse knowledge, and we use our estimates to assess which countries contribute or benefit the most from the diffu-
sion of knowledge through global business travel.
G
lobalization has led to a tremendous increase in interna- to codify7, let alone transmitted in digital form; it has therefore been
tional business travel. The growth of international business described as tacit8. Although tacit knowledge is typically associ-
travel has outstripped the growth of the world economy by a ated with physical and artisanal skills, sociologists of science have
wide margin; whereas nominal, US$-denominated, global GDP has shown that tacit knowledge also has an important role in science
risen by 0.7% per year between 2011 and 2016 (ref. 1), our data sug- and technology9,10. Moreover, its transfer, which is indispensable in
gest that nominal expenditures related to business travel have grown the training of scientists and engineers, typically involves repeated
at an annualized rate of 8.3% over the same period (see Methods). interaction, imitation and on-the-job training and is often orga-
This growth coincides with substantial improvements in the avail- nized in an apprenticeship-like relationship between the experi-
ability, quality and costs of long-distance communication technolo- enced scientist and the trainee, as evident in common practice in
gies. From conference calls to online collaboration platforms, new doctoral training programs and artfully illustrated by MacKenzie
technologies have made it easier for businesses to connect across and Spinardi’s11 case study on the design of nuclear weapons.
the globe without the need for costly and time-consuming travel. Given that, in modern economies, knowledge about even the
So why do we still need to travel so much? What can face-to-face most mundane production technologies is too complex for any sin-
interaction on business trips achieve that other means of commu- gle individual to comprehend in full, know-how often needs to be
nication cannot? complemented by know-who, that is, knowledge of how and where
Business scholars have argued that, without face-to-face com- to access experts in a field. Know-who is particularly important in
munication, some knowledge is hard to transmit2. Accordingly, interfirm relationships, as it helps to identify and forge alliances
one can think of knowledge as consisting of three components. The with customers and suppliers12. Similar to know-how, know-who
first component is knowledge that is codified in production reci- tends to be more tacit, embedded in people’s understanding of the
pes, algorithms, textbooks, blueprints and so on3. This knowledge social network that surrounds them as well as in the understanding
component consists of know-what and know-why4—knowledge of where in this network reliable and trustworthy expertise can be
about facts, such as the physical dimensions of a product, and about tapped.
well-understood causal mechanisms, such as the laws of physics. In light of this, one plausible explanation for why business travel
The second component consists of knowledge that is embedded in has not just endured, but even expanded, despite the increasing
physical artifacts, such as machines, tools or intermediate products5. availability of substitutes in the form of new communication tech-
Nowadays, either component can be easily transferred. The costs at nologies is that these new technologies are still inadequate when
which machines, tools and semi-finished products can be shipped it comes to transmitting tacit know-how or to establishing the
has never been lower and, with internet-based technology, code and trust-based relationships associated with know-who. By temporar-
textbooks can be transmitted almost instantaneously at high fidelity. ily relocating know-how by moving the individuals who carry it,
However, transmitting the third component of knowledge business travel enables face-to-face contacts through which tacit
is more complex. This component consists of knowing how to know-how can diffuse and trust and social networks can develop.
expertly carry out certain tasks oneself or knowing where to find Here we mapped the pattern of global business travel and investi-
someone who possesses this expertise. The former is often referred gated how it affects the growth of economic activity. Our underlying
to as know-how and the latter as know-who4. This third component hypothesis is that business travel enables the diffusion of know-how
of knowledge resides in people, teams of people and in the relation- and know-who across countries. Our hypothesis is related to pre-
ships between these teams6. Large parts of such knowledge cannot vious research that has used business travel as an explanation for
be easily articulated by its carriers, and it would be extremely costly bilateral trade links13,14, innovation15 and increases in productivity16.
1Center for International Development, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA. 2ITU Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. 3Mastercard Center for
Inclusive Growth, Purchase, NY, USA. ✉e-mail: michele_coscia@hks.harvard.edu
NatuRe HuMaN BeHaviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTure HuMaN BeHavIOur
Our hypothesis is that business travel helps to diffuse tacit assumed that business travellers are drawn at random from the pop-
knowledge. As described by Krugman17, knowledge flows are noto- ulation of establishments in their country of origin. Subsequently,
riously difficult to quantify: “Knowledge flows … are invisible; they we used this estimate to predict how national economies change
leave no paper trail by which they may be measured and tracked.” their mix of economic activities, including which activities grow,
Subsequent authors accepted Krugman’s implicit challenge, uncov- which new activities emerge and which old activities disappear.
ering the imprint that knowledge flows leave in patent citations18 We found that predictions on the basis of business travel compare
or in academic collaborations19. This research has shown that geo- favourably to the predictions based on alternative bilateral rela-
graphical distance is still a formidable impediment to the flow of tionships between countries, such as migrant stocks, foreign direct
knowledge and that knowledge diffuses first locally and only later investments (FDI), trade, and similarities in countries’ histories,
across longer distances. Moreover, when knowledge diffuses spa- cultures or languages. Importantly, we used instrumental variables
tially, it does so primarily through the social networks of mobile (IV) estimation to show that the estimated effects of business travel
skilled individuals20,21. By analysing patents and scientific publi- on economic growth can plausibly be considered to be causal.
cations, these studies focus on knowledge diffusion in the excep-
tionally knowledge-intensive domains of innovation and scientific Results
progress. However, academic debates often operate at some distance Mapping business travel. Expenditures related to international
from the economy and patents shed light on only a subset of indus- business travel have expanded substantially. According to our data,
tries, mostly in the manufacturing sector. Moreover, patents and the value of these expenditures increased by 47% between 2011 and
academic publications mainly reflect codified knowledge, not the 2016, and the number of travellers increased by 38% over the same
tacit know-how and know-who that we hypothesize is transferred period. Among the fastest growing origins of business travel were
through business travel. Research efforts based on patents and sci- China and India; rapidly growing destinations were found in eastern
entific publications are therefore constrained in their scope com- Europe and central America (see Methods). Despite the substan-
pared with the totality of the global economy. tial growth in the volume of business travel, its network structure
However, business travel flows are not necessarily a reflection of has remained extremely stable (Supplementary Information, sec-
knowledge flows. The concern that Krugman raised is still valid— tion 4). To determine this, for each year, we collected the number
by its very nature, it is difficult, if not impossible, to observe tacit of business travellers between each country of origin and each
knowledge directly. However, the presence of tacit knowledge will country of destination in yearly matrices, B, where rows represent
t
be manifest in the goods and services that an economy is able to origins and columns represent destinations. The correlation of the
produce22. As a consequence, knowledge flows should reveal them- log-transformed elements of these matrices is ρ = 0.96 (P < 0.001,
9,485
selves by how they help economies to grow and diversify. Thus, 95% confidence interval (CI) = 0.958–0.962) when comparing con-
instead of trying to measure knowledge flows themselves, we use a secutive years, (B, B ), and still reaches ρ = 0.90 (P < 0.001,
t t + 1 9,485
strategy previously proposed by Bahar and colleagues23 and looked 95% CI = 0.896–0.904) when comparing flows in 2011 with flows in
for indirect evidence for the existence of these flows by studying 2016. To avoid observations with log[0], we added 1 to each element
how business travel relates to changes in the economic structure before log-transforming values.
of a country. In particular, if business travel helps to transfer tacit To minimize noise, we averaged the matrices across years into
know-how, we should observe that countries grow in economic a matrix B. This business-travel matrix is sparse—43% of its ele-
activities that coincide with the economic specializations of the ments are equal to zero and 65% of all business travellers can be
places from which they receive business travellers. accounted for by country pairs in the top 1% of bilateral flows. The
To test this hypothesis, we used aggregated and anonymized sparse structure prompted us to analyse this matrix as a complex
data, which were made accessible for the duration of the research network27,28. To do so, we first extracted a noise-corrected backbone
by the Mastercard Center for Inclusive Growth. These data shed that retained only statistically significant links29. In practice, this
light on corporate credit or debit card (hereafter, card or corporate means that we retained only links with travel intensities that had a
card, respectively) foreign spend in business travel for the period likelihood of less than 1% of having emerged at random. The result
2011–2016. is a business-travel network that contains 667 out of the original
Credit and other payment card data have previously been used to 9,529 non-zero links, (Fig. 1a).
shed light on socioeconomic phenomena24–26. Typically, these stud- The business travel network is far from homogeneous. Its edges
ies are restricted to expenditures in a single city or country. By con- can to some extent be explained by a simple gravity model—coun-
trast, the aggregated and anonymized data that underlie our study tries are strongly connected if they are geographically close and if
relate to foreign expenditures in 127 different countries. they are large in terms of their GDP. In a simple log-linear model,
Each observation in our data consists of the number of trips geographical distance and origin and destination GDP can together
from a country of origin to a country of destination in a given year. account for more than half of the variance in business travel flows
That is, it counts the unique number of cards that were issued in the (R2 = 60.7%, F = 189.8, P < 0.001). However, business travel is also
3,112
country of origin and that made payments in the country of destina- associated with several bilateral relationships between countries.
tion. For the purpose of this research, we refer to these card counts Figure 1b reports the statistical association between the volume of
as the number of business travellers—which in no way relates to business travel and the following bilateral links between countries:
identifiable individuals. As the only cards considered here are issued FDI, cross-ownership of corporations (equity links), trade, migra-
to a company or employer, foreign spend associated with them tion and sharing a colonial history. When we used all of these covari-
generally reflects work-related travel. We use these data to derive ates simultaneously in an ordinary least squares (OLS) regression
a business-travel network that connects 127 different countries. to predict business travel, we obtained an R2 = 73.9% (F = 304.9,
9,112
We found that these travel flows are representative of aggregate P < 0.001; Fig. 1c, Supplementary Information (section 4)). Most
and bilateral flows recorded in official statistics (Supplementary of the variance in business travel was explained by equity and FDI
Information, section 3). relationships (46.4%). The remaining factors, including geography
To infer the most probable industrial content of the know-how and GDP, explain 22.4% of the variation; 26.1% of the variation was
that is transmitted through this network, we used information on left unexplained.
the industrial composition of national economies. To avoid con-
taminating the business-travel information with priors taken from The travel quantity index. Our main question of interest is whether
other sources, we applied the principle of maximum ignorance and business travel can explain the growth of economic activities in a
NatuRe HuMaN BeHaviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTure HuMaN BeHavIOur Articles
106 106 105 105
104 104 103 103 102 102
101 101
100 102 103 104 100 106 106 105 105
104 104
103 103 102 102
101 101 100 100
106 106
105 105 104 104 103 103
102 102
101 101 100 100
country. To investigate this, we needed to assign business travellers To be able to assess how business travel relates to industrial growth
to the industry that they are most likely to represent. We did this by between 2011 and 2016, we used the business-travel matrix of the
decomposing the business-travel flows that emanate from a country base year 2011. Moreover, we restricted industries to industries that
into industry-specific subflows. Given that we have no information produce tradable products, which can export their products beyond
on the industry from which a flow originates, we applied the prin- the national market, and drop natural-resource-based industries
ciple of maximum ignorance and assumed that any establishment (Supplementary Information, section 2). Both restrictions ensured
in a country of origin is equally likely to dispatch a business travel- that the industries we focused on were not limited in their location
ler. That is, we assumed that a business traveller that is observed to choice by the presence of natural resources or of a large local market.
travel from country o to country d is equally likely to come from any Figure 2a shows this operation. The total flow of business travel-
of the establishments in country o. As a consequence, the expected lers from a country of origin (Germany or the United States) to a
size of the business travel flow from a particular industry in a coun- country of destination (Austria, Italy or Portugal) in 2011 is split
try is proportional to the industry’s number of establishments in into three industry-specific subflows—one for cars, one for chemi-
that country. cals and one for agriculture—according to each industry’s share
To be precise, consider an activity matrix A with elements A that of establishments in the economy of the country of origin. In our
ci
record for each country c ∈ C (be it origin or destination)—where C earlier example, if Germany sends six business travellers to Austria,
is the set of countries in our dataset—the share of establishments three of them (6 × 0.5) are assumed to represent car manufacturers.
classified under industry i. In a stylized example in which 50% of Note that this approach does not aim for the most accurate esti-
Germany’s economic establishments produce cars, the correspond- mate of a business traveller’s industry affiliation. In fact, we could
ing entry in this matrix is 0.5. Furthermore, consider a business improve our estimate by adding, for example, industry-specific
travel matrix B with elements B that record the number of busi- information on FDI or trade flows. However, the resulting
od
ness travellers from country of origin o that visit country of desti- industry-specific business travel flows would now mix information
nation d. We now estimate the number of business travellers from on business travel with information from these other flows. This
wan o ri dn sd ,u wst er y g ui e t sh s a at tv ri as vit e lc leo ru ’sn it nry d ud s tb riy a lQ Iod ri ig¼ ins bo y2 C aA sso uiB mo id n. gI n th o at th ae lr l w quo eu nld tl ym ea stk ie m i at t eim d p po as rs ai mbl ee t et ro s u wn ita hm bb uig su ino eu ss sl y tr a avss eo l c ai la ot ne ea , n by u ts u thb es se e-
P
establishments in o are equally likely to have sent the traveller. We parameters would also reflect, as in the examples above, the effects
refer to the elements in matrix Q as the travel quantity index (TQI). of FDI or trade.
srellevart
fo rebmuN
Geographical distance
100101102103104105106107
srellevart
fo rebmuN
Migration stock
100 101 102 103 104 105
srellevart fo
rebmuN
100 101 102 103 104 105
FDI (×106) (US$)
srellevart
fo rebmuN
Equity
10310410510610710810910101011
srellevart
fo rebmuN
Trade (US$)
1010 1011 1012 1013
srellevart fo
rebmuN
a b
Link colour (significance)
PAK
OMN
P = 0 P = 0.01 Geo. dist.Migration FDI Equity Trade GDP
QAT
Node colour (region) PNG BGD BHR JOR Africa LKA THA ZWE RWA ARE KWT NZL
America SGP Asia AUS HKG MAC SWZ GHA KEN SAU LBN IND
Europe MYS IDN
Oceania TCA BHS CHN BRN PHL NGA EGY IRQ BLZ SC LVAN BMU GUM JPNTWN KORVNM AUT ZAF
MLT SVK
HRV SVN SRBBIH
NIC HND GTM USA JAM CYM SYC GBR CZE CYP HUN MKD
MEX CRI PAN DOM TTO KNA BRB AGO MUS IRL UZB ITA KGZ TUR GRC ALB
URY CHL VEN COL GUY HTI DEU KAZ POL BGR
ATG ISR SMB
PRY AR BG
OL
P BER RAECUABW ANT SUR
ESP
ANDPRT FRA CHE TJK AZ GE EO RUS NORUKR B LL TR
U
MDA
Link width BEL NLD ARM LVA
(number of business travelers) GDP (node size) MAR LUX EST
<25 UU SS $$ 21 56 0 t bri il ll li io on n CIV TUN DNK FIN c GDP (origin + destination)
200,000 US1 billion SEN
6 million ISL
0 100
Business travel variance (%)
Fig. 1 | the topology of international business travel. a, Network representation of business-travel structure. The link width is proportional to the number
of business travellers between countries. The arrow represents the direction of the flow. The link colour is proportional to the statistical significance of the
connection when the observed links are set against a random benchmark in which flows are proportional to the nodes’ total in- and outflows of business
travellers. Node size is proportional to the country’s economic size (GDP). Node colour represents the world region in which the country is located.
Node labels (in this and all subsequent figures) follow the ISO 3166-1 alpha-3 code. b, The relationship between the number of business travellers (y axis) and
six possible explanations for business travel (top to bottom, left to right): geographical distance (red), migration (blue), foreign direct greenfield investments
(green), equity links in number of employees (purple) and establishments (brown), and trade (orange). Geo. dist., kilometer distance between countries. The
colour key in b also applies to c. c, The contributors to the R2 (R2 = 73.9%, F 9, 112 = 304.9, P < 0.001) of a regression explaining the network’s connectivity by
each of those elements, as well as by the GDP of the country of origin and destination.
NatuRe HuMaN BeHaviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTure HuMaN BeHavIOur
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
20 21 23 24 26 28 30 32 33 34 35 36 37 394043 48 60 64 73 87
The end result is an estimate of which countries will have access predicts how fast different industries will grow in a country. In these
to which industries’ knowledge bases. To demonstrate this, Fig. 2b analyses, we dropped small countries with a population of less than
shows the degree to which an industry is estimated to be overex- 2.5 million inhabitants from the data, leaving us with a sample of 96
pressed in the incoming business travel flow of China, Mexico and countries. Results for the full set of countries are shown in section 6
Germany. China is estimated to have easy access to manufacturing of the Supplementary Information.
know-how, Mexico to know-how related to business services and Table 1 reports the outcomes of OLS regressions with different
Germany to know-how of a more balanced array of industries. sets of control variables. Observations are composed of industry–
The differences between these three countries are driven by the country pairs. The first model shows the effect of only business travel
fact that China, Mexico and Germany are connected to countries and a mean-reversion term. In the second model, we added vari-
with vastly different industrial specialization patterns. For exam- ables that control for the global size of the industry and the size and
ple, take the three most overexpressed industries in the business wealth of the country, all of which will affect both business-travel
travel flows to China: machinery for paper making, carbon paper flows and economic growth. In the third model, we replaced these
and inked ribbons, and foreign bank branches. These industries control variables with industry and country fixed effects. These
represent the top three economic activities in which the neigh- fixed effects nonparametrically control for any industry or country
bouring Republic of Korea specializes. Similarly, Mexico’s top three specific confounding factors.
can be explained by the specialization pattern of the US economy In all of the regression models, a higher TQI is associated with
(ranks 1, 2 and 7), whereas Germany’s top three consists of the a higher growth rate. Our preferred model is model 3, which con-
top specialization of Poland, the Czech Republic and Denmark. trols for any idiosyncrasies that affect growth rates at the level of
To calculate how specialized a country is in an industry in these the country or of the industry. The point estimates can be inter-
examples, we used the number of establishments in country c and preted as elasticities. In our preferred model, a 10% increase in
industry i, P . To be precise, we defined the degree of specialization the number of incoming business travellers is associated with a
ic
as PPic == i02IP i0c
P
. i0 n.6 c%
re
a( st e95
i
=
n
2 a. n8 6 in, dP
u
=
st
0 ry.0 ’s0 g5 r, oe wff te hc .t
N
s oiz te
e
=
th
0 a. t0 t6 h, e9 e5 s%
tim
C aI
t
= es0 i. n0 2 T– a0 b. l1 e0 1)
DIoc0 esic 0 TP Qi I00 2I c;c0 o02nC tai00 ic n00
information on international knowledge are limited to industries that already existed in the country.
P P
flows? To assess this, we examined whether these flows leave traces However, in section 6 of the Supplementary Information, we show
in the transformation of the industrial composition of the recipient that business travel is also associated with increased entry rates of
country’s economy. In particular, we investigated whether the TQI new industries.
noitatneserper-revo
IQT
a
b
C DH EN U Manufacturing 3554 3955 comT mr ua u tn in lis ti ip c eao str it o/ ns/ 60B 8u 1siness services
MEX
60226361 6515
2385
4214 6722
Industry code
3554: Paper industries machinery 6022: State commercial banks 2385: Waterproof outerwear
3955: Carbon paper and inked ribbons 6361: Title insurance 4214: Local trucking with storage
6081: Branches and agencies of foreign banks 6515: Operators of residential mobile home sites 6722: Management investment offices, open-end
Fig. 2 | Stylized tQi calculation. a, Visual representation of the TQI calculation. The initial colour of each flow represents the country of origin (red,
Germany; orange, United States), and the end colour represents the industry of origin (blue, cars; green, chemicals; purple, agriculture). The width of
the flow is proportional to its intensity. b, Overrepresentation of business travellers by industry for China, Mexico and Germany. Overrepresentation of
industry i in country of destination d is calculated as the share of business travellers attributed to industry i as a percentage of the total inflow of business
travellers in country d, divided by the industry’s share in global business travel
I
d0TT QQ IiI did 0== Pii 00 02 2I I;T d0Q 02I Ci0d TQIi00d00.
P P
NatuRe HuMaN BeHaviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTure HuMaN BeHavIOur Articles
Table 1 | Business travel and industry growth
Model 1 Model 2 Model 3
variables Δlog[no. establishments] Δlog[no. establishments] Δlog[no. establishments]
log[TQI] 0.059* 0.066 0.060
Point estimate (s.e.) 0.016 0.028 0.021
95% two-sided CI 0.03–0.09 0.01–0.12 0.02–0.10
P 0.001 0.023 0.005
log[no. establishments in 2011] −0.033 −0.051 −0.039
Point estimate (s.e.) 0.018 0.021 0.020
95% two-sided CI −0.07–0.00 −0.09 to −0.01 −0.08–0.00
P 0.071 0.017 0.055
log[GDP per capita] −0.090
Point estimate (s.e.) 0.050
95% two-sided CI −0.19–0.01
P 0.078
log[population] 0.080
Point estimate (s.e.) 0.030
95% two-sided CI 0.02–0.14
P 0.010
log[no. establishments in industry] 0.058
Point estimate (s.e.) 0.031
95% two-sided CI −0.00–0.12
P 0.060
country fixed effects No No Yes
industry fixed effects No No Yes
R2 0.014 0.062 0.341
No. of observations 37,596 37,596 37,596
F 8.9 16.0 4.6
d.o.f. F 2,95 5,95 2,95
P 0.000 0.000 0.012
Dependent variable: change in the logarithm of establishments. Independent variables: mean-reversion term (log[estimated in 2011]; models 1–3), logarithms of the country’s GDP per capita and population
and logarithm of the industry’s number of establishments worldwide (model 2), dummy variables for the country of origin and for the country of destination (model 3). A replication of the full model results
is provided in Supplementary Table 25. For s.e. two-way clustered by country and industry, *P < 0.001.
However, as shown in Fig. 1b, business travel is also correlated sectors, such that the estimated coefficients internalize more of the
with a number of alternative bilateral relationships between coun- potential spillovers between narrowly defined industries. In section
tries. To assess the predictive performance of the TQI relative to 6.2 of the Supplementary Information, we show that, as the indus-
these other relations, we constructed a series of indicators analo- try classification coarsens, the point estimates for the effect of TQI
gous to TQI, but based on alternative bilateral relations. To con- become successively stronger. This supports the idea that knowl-
struct these indicators, we use a procedure identical to the one that edge that is diffused by business travel may be shared beyond the
generated TQI, while replacing the business travel matrix B with narrowly defined industries of Table 1.
matrices that capture other bilateral relations. When estimating the Finally, we tested how robust our results are when describing
effects of each indicator separately, TQI features the highest esti- national economies, not in terms of the size of their industries,
mated elasticity. When modelled jointly, the variables are too col- but in terms of the product-specific volumes of their exports. To
linear to enable the inclusion of country and industry fixed effects. do so, we replaced the data on economic establishments with data
However, if we instead use the specification of model 2 in Table 1, on global trade patterns (Supplementary Information, section 6.3).
TQI remains statistically significant at P < 0.05 (t = 2.26, P = 0.025, This exercise shows that TQI not only predicts the evolution of the
93
effect size = 0.08, 95% CI = 0.01–0.14) and outperforms all alterna- industry mix of a country’s economy, but also the change in the
tive indicators (Supplementary Information, section 6). country’s export profile (P < 0.001). That is, business travel asso-
Does the level of industrial aggregation matter? The models in ciated with a certain export product predicts the emergence and
Table 1 assume that there are no spillovers from business travel growth of exports of this product in recipient countries.
across industries. In other words, business travellers from a nar- Together, these analyses document a robust statistical associa-
rowly defined industry, such as envelope-making (SIC 2677), in this tion between business travel and the transformation of a country’s
case, would only affect the growth rate of envelope-making, but not economic activity mix. How should we interpret this finding? It is
of the manufacturing of other stationary products. We can relax this important to note that the uncovered statistical associations do not
assumption by gradually aggregating industries into higher-level necessarily mean that business travel causes economic growth. For
NatuRe HuMaN BeHaviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTure HuMaN BeHavIOur
a
8.8–44.7%
–6.5–8.8%
–16.6% to –6.5%
–36.9% to –16.6%
–57.7% to –36.9% Incoming
No data
b
0.34832–4.87241%
0.02515–0.34832%
0.00182–0.02515%
0.00013–0.00182%
0.00001–0.00013%
0% Outgoing
No data
Fig. 3 | Know-how index. a, The incoming know-how index; the map shows the percentage by which a country’s economy is predicted to be larger or
smaller than what we would have predicted had its industries received their proportional share of incoming business travel. b, The outgoing know-how
index; the map shows the percentage by which the world economy would be predicted to shrink were the country to stop sending business travellers
abroad. The maps were generated using Natural Earth.
example, business travel may be only one among a number of other as we would not expect that randomly dispatched business travel-
steps that firms undertake to find new suppliers or to establish new lers would, by themselves, spur much growth in recipient coun-
branch plants abroad. Moreover, economic growth itself may attract tries. Instead, business travel is more likely to enable economic
business travellers, suggesting that the direction of causation may growth by facilitating other interactions between countries, such as
be reversed. FDI and trade. In line with this, we found that business travel has
To investigate this question more deeply, we applied instru- a strong causal effect on the intensity of bilateral FDI, equity and
mental variables (IV) estimation. Note that TQI represents a trade (Supplementary Information, section 7). In other words, trade
id
weighted sum of the shares of industry i in the economies of origin and investment relationships are typically accompanied by business
countries; it therefore essentially represents the weighted size of travel (Fig. 1b) and depend on it for their success. This, in turn,
the industry in the global economy, where weights are given by suggests that international travel helps to initiate or maintain such
the business-travel flow from origin countries to the destination relationships. Given the substantial monetary and time expendi-
country d. As business travel may both cause and be caused by the tures that are associated with business travel, firms apparently put
growth prospects of industry i in the destination, these weights a high value on the face-to-face interactions that travel buys them.
may be endogenous. We therefore instrument TQI with a variable In light of this, the causal effect of business travel on the growth of
that is based on information on bilateral visa regimes. Given that economic activities related to such travel corroborates our hypoth-
visa-related travel restrictions affect only the flow of people, this esis that business travel helps to transfer know-how and know-who.
provides plausible exogenous variation in the business-travel vol- The mechanism through which business travel achieves this is by
ume between countries. A detailed description of the construction enabling successful investment and trade links.
of these instruments is provided in section 7 of the Supplementary
Information. Know-how index. How valuable is global business travel? To pro-
The IV regressions yield causal effects that are, if anything, even vide an estimate of this, we asked two questions. First, how many
larger than the effects derived from OLS regressions. However, it jobs in a given economy can we attribute to incoming business
is improbable that business travel is an ultimate cause of growth, travel? Second, how much value do these jobs create?
NatuRe HuMaN BeHaviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTure HuMaN BeHavIOur Articles
a b
4.44–10.98% 10.1–19.7%
1.81–4.44% 5.2–10.1%
0.74–1.81% 2.7–5.2%
0.30–0.74% 1.4–2.7%
0.12–0.30% 0.7–1.4%
0% USA 0% DEU
F No oc da al tc aountry ∆OKI: 1.07%% F No oc da al tc aountry ∆OKI: 4.82%%
c d
0.872–3.600% 1.642–5.114%
0.213–0.872% 0.532–1.642%
0.052–0.213% 0.173–0.532%
0.013–0.052% 0.056–0.173%
0.003–0.013% 0.018–0.056%
0% JPN 0% KOR
F No oc da al tc aountry ∆OKI: 0.49%% F No oc da al tc aountry ∆OKI: 0.95%%
e f
0.735–1.778% 0.1912–0.6552%
0.307–0.735% 0.0564–0.1912%
0.128–0.307% 0.0166–0.0564%
0.054–0.128% 0.0049–0.0166%
0.022– 0.054% 0.0014–0.0049%
0% ESP 0% PRT
F No oc da al tc aountry ∆OKI: 0.13%% F No oc da al tc aountry ∆OKI: 0.01%%
Fig. 4 | Distribution of predicted know-how losses associated with the withdrawal of specific countries. a–f, Distribution of predicted know-how losses
associated with the withdrawal of the United States (a), Germany (b), Japan (c), Korea (d), Spain (e) and Portugal (f). The maps were generated using
Natural Earth.
To answer these questions, we made some considerably sim- interindustry productivity ratios in a country are to the ones
plifying assumptions. We first assumed that the effects of business observed in the United States.
travel on job creation are causal. The IV models in section 7 of the We used this procedure to construct two indices. First, we pre-
Supplementary information warrant such an assumption. However, dicted a destination country’s output, once with its current inflow
in this section we used OLS estimates, which are more precisely of business travel and once with the expected inflow, had business
estimated—especially in the presence of country and industry fixed travel been distributed proportionally according to countries’ popu-
effects—and more conservative than the IV estimates. To be pre- lations and industries’ global employment sizes. The ratio of these
cise, we fitted a regression model that predicts the employment of two predictions answers the following question: how much larger
each industry in a country. Next, using the fitted parameters of this or smaller would a country’s economy have been had it received its
model, we estimated how much higher or lower the employment in ‘fair share’ of business travel? We converted this into a percentage by
an industry would have been if the country had received some coun- subtracting 1 from the ratio and multiplying the result by 100. We
terfactual number of business travellers. Second, we used informa- call the resulting quantity the incoming know-how index.
tion on industry differentials in establishments’ sales per worker as Second, for each country of origin, we compared the predicted
a proxy for differentials in productivity per worker. Unfortunately, size of the global economy with and without the country’s business
in our dataset, this information was unreliably captured for estab- travellers. This tells us by how much we would predict the world
lishments outside the United States. We therefore proceeded in two economy to shrink if a country were to withdraw from global busi-
steps. First, we estimated the average sales per worker in an indus- ness travel and stop sending travellers abroad. Again, we converted
try using US figures only. We next corrected for productivity differ- the ratio of the two predictions into a percentage and call the result-
ences between the country and the United States by multiplying this ing quantity the outgoing know-how index (OKI). Details of the cal-
number by the ratio of the country’s GDP per capita to the US GDP culations, as well as full rankings by country, are provided in section
per capita. A country’s predicted output is now the predicted num- 7 of the Supplementary Information.
ber of jobs in an industry multiplied by the predicted productivity Fig. 3 shows the distribution of both indices across countries.
of workers in these jobs, summed across all industries. Note that The predicted benefits of business travel (Fig. 3a) are distributed
the accuracy of this calculation depends on the correlation between unequally across the world. Moreover, they tend to favour rich
value added and sales in an industry and on how similar the countries and their neighbours. This is unsurprising, given that
NatuRe HuMaN BeHaviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTure HuMaN BeHavIOur
business travel follows a law of gravity—it tends to connect each spatial granularity of the business travel flows, as well as their indus-
country to nearby large economies. The origins of global know-how trial origins, could be improved. Knowing in which sectors business
flows are even more concentrated. They are dominated by a small travellers work, as well as between which cities (as opposed to coun-
number of wealthy countries, such as Germany, Canada, the United tries) they travel, would enrich future analyses.
States, the United Kingdom and the Republic of Korea. These coun- However, a robust conclusion is that the network of business
tries not only send the largest number of business travellers abroad, travel is far from egalitarian, favouring a small number of economies
but they also tend to send them from productive industries and to that are already well developed and their geographical neighbours.
other advanced economies. As a result, they are not only predicted This has important consequences for which countries contribute
to create a large number of jobs, but also jobs in highly productive most to the global diffusion of knowledge and which are best posi-
activities and in highly productive economies. tioned to benefit from it. Finally, although the business-travel net-
Figure 4 demonstrates this point by showing how predicted out- work was stable during the period of our study, it is likely to change
put losses due to the withdrawal of specific business-travel origins over longer time horizons. Moreover, the locus of the global tech-
are felt across the globe. The top row compares the withdrawal of nological frontier may shift, as it has repeatedly throughout human
Germany, the top contributor to global know-how flows according history. The evolving business-travel network may offer interesting
to the OKI, with the withdrawal of the United States. Whereas US ways to analyse how such shifts percolate through the social net-
business travel concentrates in North and South America, German work and face-to-face contacts between firms. Further analysis of
business travel is more spread out. By contrast, a withdrawal of this network may therefore yield new insights on the development
Japan or the Republic of Korea has quite similar predicted impacts, path of the world economy.
mostly concentrated in East Asia. Finally, the comparison between
Spain’s and Portugal’s predicted contributions to the global diffusion Methods
of know-how shows the importance of speaking the same language
Here we used two main datasets: an aggregated and anonymized dataset relating to
in business travel—whereas, outside Europe, Spanish business trav- corporate payment card (card) foreign spend, and a dataset containing information
ellers frequent the Spanish-speaking parts of Latin America, the on the location of economic establishments across the world and data on global
most notable destinations for Portuguese business people are Brazil exports. The first aggregated and anonymized dataset was made accessible, subject
to strict privacy and data protection safeguards, by the Mastercard Center for
and Angola. Further investigations into individual countries’ contri-
Inclusive Growth (hereafter, the Center), whereas the second dataset was purchased
bution to the OKI can be accessed through interactive visualizations from Dun & Bradstreet. Owing to the proprietary nature of the data, we make them
available at https://growthlab.cid.harvard.edu/academic-research/ publicly available for result replication only (see Data Availability statement). The
business-travel. third dataset is based on United Nations Comtrade data, which can be downloaded
from http://atlas.cid.harvard.edu/engage#data-download. In this section, we
describe the characteristics of these datasets and how we clean them to build the
Discussion
business-travel network and vectors that describe the industrial composition of
Despite improving communication technologies, firms still rely national economies.
heavily on business travel to establish and maintain the interna-
tional links that keep the global economy connected. Business travel Data on indexed foreign expenditures. The business travel data are based on
has an important impact on economic growth: countries are more indexed expenditures by corporate payment cards in countries other than the
countries in which the cards were issued. That is, they relate to expenditures in
likely to expand existing and enter new industries if these indus-
one country made by cards issued in another country. Below, we will refer to a
tries are already well-developed in places from which they receive country-of-origin × country-of-destination × year combination as a data cell. In
most of their business travellers. However, the causal effect of busi- data cells with less than a certain minimum threshold of recorded cards, the exact
ness travel on economic growth materializes through a variety of number of card holders had been replaced by ranges (see below) as a privacy and
data protection protocol. Moreover, the dollar value of expenditures was indexed,
economic mechanisms, such as international trade and investment.
that is, expressed in a unitless index. However, this index retains the relative
The dependence of trade and investment on business travel suggests
differences between cells across years and countries of origin as well as destination.
that business travellers help to establish and grow relationships in We accessed these data in an aggregated form at the country-of-origin
ways that other forms of communication cannot. This corroborates by country-of-destination level and inflated to correct for variations in the
the hypothesis that countries rely on business travel to connect to data-collaborator’s (undisclosed) market shares. Owing to this adjustment, the
data reflect not only the indexed expenditures by payment cards relating to our
know-how that exists elsewhere in the world.
data-collaborator’s share of the market, but also the indexed expenditures in the
A different but complementary explanation of our findings is
entire payment market.
that business travel helps businesses to identify and connect to a Note that the aforementioned indexed and aggregated expenditures include
local network of suppliers and customers. In this case, business withdrawals by, for example, debit cards from local ATMs. This means that business
travel helps to establish trust and share know-who embedded in travel to predominantly cash-based economies need not be unreliably captured,
provided that business travellers rely on ATMs to withdraw local currency.
personal relationships rather than know-how. We leave the question
Furthermore, the data are not necessarily limited to the data collaborator’s own
of which of these explanations provides the dominant rationale for
payment network, but include international expenditures that were cleared by it for
business travel for future research. other card networks. However, expenditures by business travellers who use personal
There are a number of limitations to this study. First, we mea- instead of corporate cards were not included. It is therefore important to check how
sured business-travel-mediated knowledge spillovers only indi- representative our estimates of global business travel are compared to alternative
sources on this phenomenon; a detailed analysis of this is provided in section 2
rectly, through the relationship between the growth of industries in
of the Supplementary Information. Moreover, the estimated business-travel flows
a destination and the most probable industrial origins of the arriv- are necessarily imperfect. Thus, our business travel variable was measured with a
ing business travellers. Second, owing to the nature of our data, the certain amount of error; further details are provided in the discussion about causal
estimated business-travel network should be regarded as a rough estimation in section 7 of the Supplementary Information.
approximation of actual business-travel connections. For example,
Country list. The first cleaning operation involved creating a list of countries of
lodging and local transportation expenses are increasingly paid
interest. The Center provided access to information on payment cards issued in
through online booking and ride-sharing platforms and are there- 135 countries and territories (hereafter, countries), although indexed expenditures
fore not captured in a traveller’s expenditures abroad. Similarly, our were recorded in 236 countries.
data predominantly capture the know-how and know-who shared We were allowed access to the data for one-year intervals between 2011
by corporations whose employees routinely use corporate payment and 2016. Foreign indexed expenditures by corporate payment cards reflect
the footprint of business travel that forms the basis of our analysis. We focused
cards. As the extent to which business travel initiated by other com-
this analysis on the 135 countries that were observed both as an origin and as a
panies or of employees without such cards differs, its effect will not destination of such international indexed expenditures. Hereafter, we refer to this
be adequately captured in our business travel metrics. Third, the dataset on business travel as the BT data.
NatuRe HuMaN BeHaviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTure HuMaN BeHavIOur Articles
The second dataset was taken from the Dun & Bradstreet index of productive terms of indexed expenditures and number of travellers in our data and compares
establishments (hereafter, D&B). The dataset lists more than 120 million economic this to the growth in global GDP as reported by the World Bank. Although
establishments across the world. For each establishment, it records the corporate the indexed business travel expenditures increased by 49% and the number of
parent (if any), an estimate of the number of employees and up to six economic travellers increased by 38% between 2011 and 2016, global GDP increased by only
activities (industries). We acquired the D&B dataset for the years 2011 and 2016. 3.5% during the same period.
For the latter year, the data also contain information on the dollar value of the
establishments sales (output). However, output figures are consistently available D&B data. To associate business travel with the growth of industries in a country
only for US establishments. In the other countries, this variable is populated more of destination, we relied on the Dun & Bradstreet global industrial index (http://
erratically. Of the 135 origin–destination countries in the BT data, seven do not www.dnb.com/) retrieved in 2011 and 2016. D&B data were derived from official
appear in the D&B data. The seven missing codes are: government sources and by direct investigation by D&B. They have worldwide
• Puerto Rico, US Virgin Islands: aggregated to the United States in the D&B coverage and have been widely used in research on FDI30. Ultimately, we
dataset. aggregated these data to the country–industry level, but here we describe some of
• Mongolia: not covered by D&B. the characteristics of the unaggregated dataset.
• Montenegro: aggregated to Serbia in the D&B dataset. For each establishment, the D&B data record their location, up to six industry
• Netherlands Antilles: converted into Curaçao. codes (SIC codes), as well as an estimate of the number of employees and their
• Turkmenistan: no business travel data before 2015. corporate parent organization. In the 2016 data, for some establishments, we also
• QZZ, ZAR: codes are used by the Center, but they are either outdated or have an estimate of the value of the sales output of the establishments. Industries
custom-defined. are coded at the four-digit level of the SIC87 industrial classification system, which
distinguishes among 1,005 industry codes. We consider only the main activity of
As a result, our final dataset included 127 countries, a full list of which is
the establishment, namely the first SIC code.
provided in Supplementary Table 1. Of these 127 countries, 96 met the 2.5 million
We believe that this main industry code captures most of the operational
population threshold for the main analyses. This list includes most of the largest
know-how embedded in the establishment. Moreover, the average number of
economies in the world and accounts for 87% of the world’s population and 97% of
SIC codes per establishment is low. Supplementary Fig. 4 shows the distribution
global GDP.
of the number of SIC codes per establishment—although more than 100 million
establishments have only one SIC code, fewer than 20 million have two.
Imputing censored cells. Our unit of observation—hereafter, cell—is a
For each establishment, D&B provides either an estimate or the actual number
combination of a country of origin, a country of destination and a year. As a
of employees working in that particular physical location. Supplementary Fig. 5
privacy and data protection control, the Center provided us with an exact card
(left) shows that the distribution of the number of employees per establishment is
count only in cells with more than a minimum threshold of cards. For cells below
broad, spanning five orders of magnitude. For the year 2016, we also estimated the
this threshold, we know only that the number of cards falls into one out of five
total sales value produced in an establishment (Supplementary Fig. 5, right). This
predefined intervals. To still be able to use these cells in our analysis, we imputed
enabled us to calculate the establishment’s productivity. However, sales information
an expected number of cards for each censored interval. We used this estimate in
is mostly missing or less reliable outside the United States; Supplementary Fig.
all cases in which data are censored.
5 (right) shows that the mode of the distribution is zero. For this reason, we
The distribution of the number of cards per cell is heavily skewed
calculated an industry’s average productivity using exclusively US establishments.
(Supplementary Fig. 1, left). As a consequence, using the midpoint of each interval
as an estimate would not be optimal. The number-of-cards distribution is broad
Reporting Summary. Further information on research design is available in the
and exhibits a power-law with exponential cut-off. This makes it challenging
Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.
to find an accurate fit of the entire distribution of cells. However, as we were
interested in filling in only the censored cells, which were located in the head
Data availability
of the distribution, we limited ourselves to small cells for which the power law
approximately holds. The aggregated and anonymized dataset made accessible by the Mastercard Center
Supplementary Fig. 1 (right) shows the cumulative distribution function for Inclusive Growth is available for the duration of this research, after which this
of this subsection of the data. Note that in the censored range, we know only dataset and any existing copies will be permanently destroyed. The aggregated data
the cumulative number of cards at the end of each interval. It was easy to find a used in our growth estimations, along with the data on economic establishments
log-linear curve that accurately fits this distribution (R2 ≈ 99.9%, F 1,27 = 29,270, (from Dun & Bradstreet), are provided as a Supplementary Data ZIP file, hosted by
P < 0.001). We used this fitted curve to interpolate how many cells will contain the Mastercard Center for Inclusive Growth and accessible via https://growthlab.
any of the integer-valued number of cards—ranging from 1 to the start of the cid.harvard.edu/academic-research/business-travel. This archive contains the
uncensored section of the distribution—and estimated the weighted average processed business travel network as shown in Fig. 1, countries’ trade profiles as
number of cards in each of the censored intervals. well as the number of establishments, employment and estimated productivity by
industry and country. We added random noise to the business-travel information
Imputing long-stay cards. One complication of using corporate payment cards to to preserve confidential information held by the data providers. The remaining
understand business travel is that card holders may complete transactions en route publicly available datasets can be downloaded at http://atlas.cid.harvard.edu/
to their final destination. To correct for this, we aimed to base our business-travel engage#data-download and at http://www.michelecoscia.com/?page_id=1612.
network only on cards that stayed in the country of destination for more than 1 day.
On average, two out of three cards stayed only 1 day at their destination, meaning Received: 12 November 2018; Accepted: 1 July 2020;
they were en route. This is high, but not implausible. For example, consider the
Published: xx xx xxxx
case of Dubai, one of the largest transit hubs in the world connecting Europe to
Asia. In our data, 63% of trips to the Arab Emirates only stayed 1 day, which we
interpret as these travellers connecting to go somewhere else. The real number References
of connecting travellers may be higher, given that the legs of connecting flights 1. World Bank. World Development Indicators, https://data.worldbank.org/
may fall in two consecutive days. Counting all those travellers as business people indicator/NY.GDP.MKTP.CD (2016).
visiting the Arab Emirates would clearly be problematic. 2. Nonaka, I. & Takeuchi, H. The Knowledge-Creating Company: How Japanese
Owing to privacy and data protection requirements, for a number of countries, Companies Create the Dynamics of Innovation (Oxford Univ. Press, 1995).
we could not determine how many cards stayed for more than one day. Rather than 3. Auerswald, P. E. The Code Economy: A Forty-Thousand Year History (Oxford
dropping these countries from the analysis—the list is long and includes countries Univ. Press, 2017).
that substantially contribute to the world’s economy such as the Republic of Korea, 4. Johnson, B., Lorenz, E. & Lundvall, B.-Å Why all this fuss about codified and
Austria, Israel, Australia, Turkey and Russia—we decided to impute the most tacit knowledge? Ind. Corp. Change 11, 245–262 (2002).
probable number of cards that stayed for more than 1 day from the available data. 5. Arthur, W. B. The Nature of Technology: What It Is and How It Evolves (Simon
Note that the number of rows we have to impute is high (55%) but they contain and Schuster, 2009).
relatively little traffic (only 13% of the total number of trips). 6. Kogut, B. & Zander, U. Knowledge of the firm, combinative capabilities, and
To do so, we predicted the number of cards that stayed for more than 1 day the replication of technology. Organ. Sci. 3, 383–397 (1992).
from the total number of cards in the cell using a regression model in which the 7. Cowan, R., David, P. A. & Foray, D. The explicit economics of knowledge
dependent and independent variables first undergo a logarithmic transformation. codification and tacitness. Ind. Corp. Change 9, 211–253 (2000).
We fit this model for countries for which the length-of-stay information was 8. Polanyi, M. The Tacit Dimension (Univ. Chicago Press, 1967).
available. The estimated parameter was close to 1 with R2 ≈ 95% (F 1,38,653 = 807,390, 9. Collins, H. M. & Pinch, T. The Golem: What You Should Know About Science
P < 0.001). Given this excellent fit, we used this model to predict out-of-sample (Cambridge Univ. Press, 1998).
how many cards stayed for more than 1 day in the other countries. 10. Collins, H. & Pinch, T. The Golem at Large: What You Should Know About
After making these corrections, we mapped the top origins and destinations of Technology (Cambridge Univ. Press, 1999).
international business travel in our sample of 127 countries (Supplementary Fig. 11. MacKenzie, D. & Spinardi, G. Tacit knowledge, weapons design, and the
2). Moreover, Supplementary Fig. 3 shows the growth of global business travel in uninvention of nuclear weapons. Am. J. Sociol. 101, 44–99 (1995).
NatuRe HuMaN BeHaviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTure HuMaN BeHavIOur
12. Lissoni, F. Knowledge codification and the geography of innovation: the case 30. Alfaro, L. & Charlton, A. Intra-industry foreign direct investment. Am. Econ.
of Brescia mechanical cluster. Res. Policy 30, 1479–1500 (2001). Rev. 99, 2096–2119 (2009).
13. Cristea, A. D. Buyer-seller relationships in international trade: evidence from
US states’ exports and business-class travel. J. Int. Econ. 84, 207–220 (2011). acknowledgements
14. Poole, J. P. Business travel as an input to international trade. in AEA 2010
The authors acknowledge financial support from the Mastercard Center for Inclusive
Annual Meeting (eds Hall, R., et al.) https://www.aeaweb.org/conference/2010/
Growth. The funders had no role in study design, data analysis, decision to publish or
retrieve.php?pdfid=431 (2010).
preparation of the manuscript. The Mastercard Center for Inclusive Growth provided
15. Hovhannisyan, N. & Keller, W. International business travel: an engine of
access to the anonymized and aggregated data on expenditures through foreign corporate
innovation? J. Econ. Growth 20, 75–104 (2015).
cards described in section 1.1 of the Supplementary materials. We thank the following
16. Piva, M., Tani, M. & Vivarelli, M. Business visits, knowledge diffusion and
people for comments and help in preparing the manuscript: A. Stansbury, D. Bahar, B.
productivity. J. Popul. Econ. 31, 1321–1338 (2018).
Zuccolo and S. Ravinutala. The authors.
17. Krugman, P. R. Geography and Trade (MIT Press, 1993).
18. Jaffe, A. B., Trajtenberg, M. & Henderson, R. Geographic localization of
author contributions
knowledge spillovers as evidenced by patent citations. Q. J. Econ. 108,
577–598 (1993). M.C. and F.N. collected the data. M.C. and F.N. developed the model, conducted analyses
19. Hoekman, J., Frenken, K. & Van Oort, F. The geography of collaborative and wrote the manuscript. All three authors (M.C., F.N. and R.H.) conceived and
knowledge production in Europe. Ann. Reg. Sci. 43, 721–738 (2009). designed the study, reviewed and approved the paper.
20. Breschi, S. & Lissoni, F. “Cross-firm” Inventors and Social Networks:
Localized Knowledge Spillovers Revisited. Ann. Econ. Stat. 79/80, 189–209 Competing interests
(2005). The Mastercard Center for Inclusive Growth provided access, subject to strict privacy
21. Agrawal, A., Cockburn, I. & McHale, J. Gone but not forgotten: knowledge and data protection safeguards, to an aggregated and anonymized dataset relating to
flows, labor mobility, and enduring social relationships. J. Econ. Geogr. 6, corporate credit card foreign spend. The Center reviewed the paper to ensure that it
571–591 (2006). complied with these privacy and data protection safeguards. However, the Center did
22. Hausmann, R., et al. The Atlas of Economic Complexity: Mapping Paths to not determine any parts of the design, execution or interpretation of the research: all
Prosperity (Mit Press, 2014). opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this paper and its
23. Bahar, D., Hausmann, R. & Hidalgo, C. A. Neighbors and the evolution of the Supplementary Informationare those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
comparative advantage of nations: evidence of international knowledge views or opinions of Mastercard. R.H. is a senior fellow at the advisory council of the
diffusion? J. Int. Econ. 92, 111–123 (2014). Mastercard Center for Inclusive Growth.
24. Lenormand, M. et al. Influence of sociodemographic characteristics on
human mobility. Sci. Rep. 5, 10075 (2015).
25. Sobolevsky, S. et al. Cities through the prism of people’s spending behavior. additional information
PloS ONE 11, e0146291 (2016). Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/
26. Di Clemente, R. et al. Sequences of purchases in credit card data reveal s41562-020-0922-x.
lifestyles in urban populations. Nat. Commun. 9, 3330 (2018). Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to M.C.
27. Albert, R. & Barabási, A.-L. Statistical mechanics of complex networks. Rev.
Mod. Phys. 74, 47 (2002). Peer review information: Primary Handling Editor: Aisha Bradshaw.
28. Newman, M. E. The structure and function of complex networks. SIAM Rev. Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
45, 167–256 (2003). Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
29. Coscia, M. & Neffke, F. M., Network backboning with noisy data. In Proc. published maps and institutional affiliations.
2017 IEEE 33rd International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE)
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2020
425–436 (IEEE, 2017).
NatuRe HuMaN BeHaviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav