
===== PAGE 1/30 =====
Opendata:Yes
Meta-Psychology,2026,vol10,MP.2021.2914 Openmaterials:Yes Editedby:RickardCarlsson
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2021.2914 Opencode:Yes Reviewedby:DeliahSarahBolesta,EricBonetta
Articletype:FileDrawerReport Openandreproducibleanalysis:Yes Analysisreproducedby:NatalieHyltse
PublishedundertheCC-BY4.0license Openreviewsandeditorialprocess:Yes AllsupplementaryfilescanbeaccessedatOSF:
Preregistration:Yes https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/K8Y36
Norm vigilance in reaction to control threat: A file drawer report
Felix Czepluch1, Philipp Jugert2, and Immo Fritsche1
1DepartmentforSocialPsychology,UniversityofLeipzig,Germany
2InterculturalPsychologyGroup,UniversityofDuisburg-Essen,Germany
Intimesofthreatpeopleoftenturntosocialgroupstofulfillvariousneeds.Insituations
wherethisthreatisrelatedtopeople’spersonalsenseofcontrol,themodelofgroup-
based control provides a social-identity-based account of why thinking and acting in
termsofgroupmembershipshouldbecomemorelikelytooccur. Wesetouttoextend
this perspective to the perception and processing of information about norms. Our
initialhypothesis, thenormvigilancehypothesis, wasthatthreattopeople’spersonal
senseofcontrolshouldinduceastatewherepeoplebecomemorevigilantforinforma-
tionaboutrelevantsocialnorms. Thisshouldbecomeevidentinmoreaccuraterecall
of specifically this type of information under conditions of threat. In a series of four
studies, weinvestigatedthishypothesiswithdifferentparadigms, butwereunableto
findconvincingevidenceforthenotionofnormvigilanceintermsofenhancedaccu-
racy. Inafifthstudy,weinvestigatedanalternativehypothesisofmotivatedintergroup
distortion of information about social norms after threat, but did not find convincing
evidenceforthismechanismeither.
Keywords: socialidentity,controlmotivation,threat,normconformity,vigilance,group
processes
Introduction to stimuli which threaten or directly undermine some
psychologicalneed. Thecorrespondingliteraturecovers
Whenpeoplefeeltheirpersonalcontroltobethreat-
experimentation and theorizing on reactions to threats
ened,theymayrestoretheirsenseofcontrolbydefining
such as mortality salience (Rosenblatt et al., 1989),
themselves, and acting, as members of agentic groups
uncertainty threat (Hogg and Adelman, 2013), mean-
(Fritsche et al., 2013). This way, the helpless “I” can
ing threat (Proulx and Heine, 2008), environmental
turn into an agentic “We”. In fact, when threatened,
threat (Barth et al., 2018), economic threat (Fritsche
peoplehavebeenshowntoconformmoretosocialrules
and Jugert, 2017), as well as control threat (Fritsche
and conventions of their own groups (e.g., Stollberg et
et al., 2013; Kay et al., 2008). Not only may insights
al., 2017). At the same time, non-threatened partici-
from this literature help to identify the motivational
pantsrarelyshowednormconformity(e.g.,Jonasetal.,
circumstances under which norm conformity is most
2008; Fritsche et al., 2010). If norm conformity is use-
likely to arise, the salience of social norms has also
fulforrestoringcontrolasagroupmember,threatened
been proposed and empirically identified as a moder-
people should be highly motivated to detect and learn
ator of such defensive reactions to threat. This deci-
aboutwhattheactualnormsoftheirin-groupare. This
siveroleofsalientsocialnormsisinlinewiththewell-
may lead to personal vigilance for norm information.
established norm focus theory (Cialdini et al., 1991),
The present research investigates the expressions and
which proposes that only norms that are in focus will
mechanisms of people’s presumed norm vigilance fol-
guide behavior. The majority of studies demonstrating
lowingthreat. Specifically, wehypothesizedthatthreat
an interactive effect of threat and norm salience origi-
topersonalcontrolwouldincreasepeople’saccuracyin
nate from the literature on Terror Management Theory
detectingin-groupnorms.
(see Greenberg et al., 1986). In numerous published
studies, participants threatened with mortality salience
MotivationalAccountsofNormConformity
weremorelikelytoconformtosalientsocialnorms(e.g.
Researchershaveproposedanumberofspecificmoti- Routledge et al., 2004; Gailliot et al., 2008; Jonas et
vational models to explain socially defensive reactions, al., 2008; Cox et al., 2009; Rothschild et al., 2009;
suchasnormconformity,toarangeofsituationalstim- Fritscheetal.,2010;Jonasetal.,2013). Controlthreat
uli,commonlyreferredtoaspsychologicalthreat(Jonas (Stollberg et al., 2017), and other types of threat (e.g.,
et al., 2014). Broadly defined, the term threat refers Schumann et al., 2014; Berkowitz and Lepage, 1967)
===== PAGE 2/30 =====
2
havebeenshowntoproducesimilarpatternsdepending tectingcomplexpatterns(ProulxandHeine,2009).
onsalientsocialnormsandrelatedenvironmentalcues.
Note that recently, the robustness and validity of mor- NormConformityasControlStriving
tality salience effects have been the subject of contro-
It has been argued that phenomena previously con-
versialdiscussion(seeKleinetal.,2019;Chatardetal.,
sidered as basic defensive reactions to threat, such as
2020; Schindler et al., 2021). A recent meta-analysis
in-group bias, are in fact dependent on salient social
of mortality salience x norm effects (Schindler et al.,
normsandhencerepresentidentitybasednormconfor-
2023) found evidence for mortality salience increasing
mity effects (Giannakakis and Fritsche, 2011). A large
people’s conformity with salient social norms across 64
proportionofresearchonthemoderatingroleofsalient
studies. While the meta-analytic interaction effect was
socialnormsonreactionstothreathasfocusedonmor-
of small to medium size, correcting for possible publi-
talitysaliencethreat. Thistestedtheassumptionofter-
cation bias or p-hacking arrived at less strong effects,
ror management theory that people strive for symbolic
puttingdoubtonthereliabilityoftheseeffects.
mortality by conforming to the ideals and standards of
their own culture (Jonas et al., 2008). However, social
VigilanceasaReactiontoThreat
identityrelateddefensivereactionstomortalitysalience
Onepossiblemechanismunderlyingnorm-relatedre- might be better explained by a desire to attain control
actions to threat may be found in heightened vigilance andagency(Fritscheetal.,2008). Socialnormsdonot
afterthreat,asthreatandvigilancehavebeenidentified onlyrepresentinformationaboutwhatisconsideredap-
tobecloselyrelatedphenomena. Statesofarousalhave propriateinspecificsituationsbutalsowhatconstitutes
often been associated with a shift in attentional focus thinkingandactinginlinewithmembershipinasocial
tosituationallydominantstimulusfeatures(Kallgrenet group. According to the model of group-based control,
al., 2000). Several models of defensive reactions to groupscanservetomaintainandrestoreperceptionsof
threatassumethatpsychologicalthreat,atleastinitially, control and agency via a process of redefining the self
elicits a state of attentional vigilance. In the literature in terms of group membership (Fritsche et al., 2013;
on unconscious vigilance, reactions to threat are de- Greenaway et al., 2015). This should be the case es-
scribed as states of orientation to stimuli either related pecially in circumstances when personal control seems
to the threat or relevant resources (Holbrook et al., lackingorthreatenedandavailablein-groupsarethem-
2011). Reactive Approach Motivation theory proposes selves perceived as agentic (Stollberg et al., 2015). At
thatthreat(morespecifically,goalconflict)initiallyelic- the same time, thinking and acting in terms of group
itsthebehavioralinhibitionrelatedstateofanxiousun- membership, that is, thinking and acting in line with
certainty, which people are motivated to overcome by salientsocialnorms,maybeapotentstrategyofattain-
engaging in approach motivated behavior (McGregor, ing perceptions of agency and control. When acting as
Nash, Mann, and Phills, 2010). More generally, the group members people demonstrate collective agency.
behavioralinhibitionsystem hasbeenproposedtoplay Giventhatin-groupnormscanbeconceptualizedasin-
animportantroleinimmediatetransientreactionstoa formationaboutsociallyappropriatebehavior,itshould
rangeofpsychologicalthreats(Jonasetal.,2014)andis come as no surprise that reactions to control threat are
describedtobeassociatedwithapsychologicalstateof guidedbysalientsocialnorms(Stollbergetal.,2017).
anxious arousal, avoidance motivation, as well as vigi-
lance(GrayandMcNaughton,2003). Previousresearch ThePresentResearch
has also demonstrated that moderate manipulations of
Building on the model of group-based control and
controlthreatcanfacilitatesubsequentprocessingofin-
the notion of vigilance as a consequence of psycholog-
formation (Pittman and D’Agostino, 1989). A mecha-
ical threat, we proposed that threat to people’s sense
nism like this might also represent a general, mostly
ofcontrolshouldelicitwhatwetermednormvigilance.
unspecificvigilanceinreactiontothreatorageneralac-
Incontrasttothenotionofunspecificgeneralvigilance,
curacy motive. However, some research points toward
we proposed that in the context of norm-related reac-
more specific manifestations of vigilance after threat.
tions to threat, a more specific mechanism may be at
For example, social rejection was shown to enhance
play: Whenpersonalcontrolisthreatened,information
memory performance for relevant social stimuli (Gard-
about appropriate behavior as a member of salient in-
ner et al., 2000), the experience of specifically uncon-
groupsshouldbecomemorerelevant,leadingtopriori-
trollable painful stimuli has been shown to heighten
tized attention for and processing of such cues. Hence,
vigilanceforpain(Crombezetal.,2008),andmeaning
threat to control should not only heighten conformity
threats were shown to enhance both general readiness
with salient in-group norms, but also enhance the al-
toperceivepatternsaswellasaccuracyforcorrectlyde-
location of attention to and processing of relevant nor-
===== PAGE 3/30 =====
3
mative information itself. This would be in line with specifically, we expected control salience to increase re-
previousresearchshowingthatnormprimesrequiredi- callaccuracyspecificallyforinformationaboutin-group
rect attention to be effective (Reno et al., 1993) and norms.
that participants demonstrated conformity with previ-
ously primed norms only when they had been exposed Method
to a threat salience manipulation (Jonas and Fritsche,
Participants
2012). Norm vigilance should become evident in mea-
suresofattentionandcomprehensionsuchasrecallac- We aimed to collect a minimum of 50 participants
curacy. That is, when people become more motivated per cell, because no previous data to estimate effect
to conform to social norms of a group, they should sizes was available. One hundred seventeen partici-
pay more attention to information about those norms, pants (M = 23.06, SD = 3.7) were recruited at a
age age
and hence be more accurate in recalling this informa- German university campus. Out of this group, 68 were
tion. More specifically, we hypothesized the recall of female,47weremale,andtwodidnotspecifyagender.
previously presented information about relevant social Participation was voluntary and participants received a
norms,incontrasttoinformationunrelatedtoin-group chocolatebarascompensation.
norms, to be more accurate after control threat. Con-
ProcedureandMaterials
sequently,suchamechanismmayaidandfacilitateeffi-
cientnormconformity. Aftergivinginitialconsenttoparticipateinthestudy,
However, none of our studies provided evidence for participants worked on the material on a laptop com-
thishypothesisofincreasednormvigilanceafterthreat. puterinapublicuniversityhallway. Materialswerepre-
In four out of five studies, we focused on the concep- sentedusingMediaLabandDirectRT(Jarvis,2016).
tualization of vigilance in terms of improved precision Control Salience Manipulation. Participants were
and accuracy for norm-related information. In one fi- randomly assigned to one of two versions of the con-
nal study, we investigated the alternative conceptual- trol salience manipulation: Participants in the low (vs.
ization of norm vigilance as motivated intergroup dis- high) control condition were asked to think about and
tortion. Over the course of several years, we presented describe two aspects of their lives that made them feel
our ideas, work-in-progress paradigms and preliminary unable to influence and control (vs. able to influence
resultsatconferencesandtocolleaguesinthefieldand andcontrol)importantthingsintheirlifeandthatmade
there appeared to be general consensus that our hy- them feel helpless (vs. efficacious). This task rep-
pothesesareconsistentwithexistingtheories,haveface resented a slightly altered version of established ma-
validity, and deserve further investigation. Hence, we nipulations of control salience (Fritsche et al., 2013;
hope this manuscript serves not only to empty our file Whitson and Galinsky, 2008). Instead of two aspects,
drawerandmakethedataavailabletothefield,butalso Fritscheetal. (2013)askedparticipantstolistthreeas-
to prevent others from unavailingly pursuing identical pects,whileWhitsonandGalinsky(2008)askedpartic-
orverysimilarhypotheseswithoutconsiderationofthe ipantstodescribeoneevent. Toprovideamanipulation
existingnull-findings. check, we then asked participants to indicate to what
extent these aspects signified they had control or had
Study1
no control over their lives on a 7-point scale (1 = very
Toinvestigateournovelhypotheses,weconducteda lowcontrolto7=veryhighcontrol).
first study in which participants learned about the ap- DelayTask. Then,allparticipantscompletedatrans-
propriateness of behaviors in their in-group and two lated version of the mind wander delay task adapted
out-groups. In addition to this, we manipulated the from McGregor, Nash, and Prentice (2010), in which
salience of control, resulting in a 2 × 3 mixed-factorial they were asked to type out their thoughts for a period
designwithcontrolsalienceasabetween-subjectsfactor of three minutes, after which the task ended automati-
with two levels (high control vs. low control) and sur- cally. We included this task as a delay task to allow for
veyed group (i.e., which group did a norm refer to) as effects of the threat salience manipulation to emerge.
a within-subjects factor with three levels. Recall accu- Delay tasks have been shown to increase effect sizes of
racy,asinthenumberofaccuratelyrecalleditems(i.e., defensive reactions to threat (Burke et al., 2010), and
wasthebehaviordeemedeitheracceptableorunaccept- havebeenincludedinmostpreviousexperimentalstud-
able),forallbehaviorsrepresentedourmaindependent iesongroup-basedcontrolphenomena(e.g.,Fritscheet
variablewithatheoreticalrangeof0to6correctitems al., 2008; Fritsche et al., 2013; Stollberg et al., 2015;
per group. In line with our concept of norm vigilance, Stollbergetal.,2017).
wehypothesizedaninteractionofthetwofactors. More
===== PAGE 4/30 =====
4
Group Norm Presentation. Subsequently, we intro- eral potential moderating variables with a 6-item scale
ducedparticipantstoourbogussurveydatataskwhich forperceptionsoftightnessversuslooseness(Gelfandet
served to introduce a range of in-group and out-group al.,2011)regardingGermany(ω=.64),a6-itemscale
norms. WebasedourtaskonasimilartaskbyEriksson for desirability of control (Burger and Cooper, 1979;
et al. (2015). In an introductory text, we told partic- Jacobi et al., 1986; ω = .67), and identification with
ipants we were conducting research on the perception each of the three groups, measured with three single
ofsurveydataandwouldpresentthemwithrealsurvey item measures (Postmes et al., 2013). We asked par-
data from universities in Germany, Poland, and Czech ticipants for basic demographic information, as well as
Republic (to provide an in-group and two out-groups) about their personal connection to Poland and Czechia
concerningtheappropriatenessofarangeofbehaviors. on seven dichotomous items. Finally, participants were
Next, all participants read they had been randomly as- fullydebriefedandthankedfortheirparticipation.
signedtothemodeofpresentationastextandreceived
some additional information about the nature of the Results
task. Theywereinstructedtopaycloseattentiontothe
PlannedAnalyses
presented material, because we would later ask them
about the appropriateness of the mode of presentation To test whether participants had reflected on high
as well as about their personal opinion on some of the vs. low personal control as intended, we conducted
behaviors. During the task, participants saw 18 sub- a Welch’s one-way ANOVA with control salience (high
sequent trials, each containing information about one control vs. low control) as independent variable and
of the three surveyed groups (Germans vs. Poles vs. scoresonourmanipulationcheckitemasthedependent
Czechs)ofwhichamajoritywassaidtohavedeemeda variable. Confirming the viability of the manipulation,
behavior as either acceptable or unacceptable. In real- meanscoresinthehighcontrolcondition(M=5.16,SD
ity, we selected these behaviors on the basis of a small =1.29)wererevealedtobehigherthanmeanscoresin
pretest (n = 21) by excluding items that evoked the the low control condition (M = 3.50, SD = 1.64), F(1,
clearestpreferenceinthesample. Inthefollowingmain 104)=36.7,p<.001,d=–1.13.
taskofourstudy,onethirdofalltrialsreferredtooneof To test our proposed interaction hypothesis, we en-
the three groups, and in half of each group’s trials, the tered recall accuracy, i.e., the number of correctly re-
behaviorinquestionwasdescribedaseitheracceptable called items per surveyed group (with a theoretical
orunacceptable(e.g.,“ThemajorityofGermanstudents range from 0 to 6), as the dependent variable in a 2
thought this behavior was acceptable: Not tipping at a (high control vs. low control) × 3 (Germans vs. Poles
restaurant.”). Exact combinations of behavior, group vs. Czechs) mixed within-between factorial ANOVA.
and majority opinion were randomly assigned by the Theexpectedinteractionofthetwofactorswasnotsta-
computer for each participant to avoid systematic con- tisticallysignificant,F(2,230)=0.308,p=.735,η2 =
p
founding. Individualtrialdurationwasnotlimitedand .003 (f = .055). Neither were the main effects of the
participantswereinstructedtocontinuetothenexttrial twofactorscontrolsalienceandgroup; p=0.819andp
bypressingakey. = 0.135, respectively. The within-between interaction
Measure of Recall Accuracy. Directly following this effect test had a statistical power of .08. A sensitivity
task, participants completed our unannounced recall analysis (WebPower; 2×3 mixed ANOVA; N = 117; α
task. In this task, we asked participants to recall the =.05)indicatedthat.80powerrequiresaneffectofat
majority opinion on each of the 18 behaviors from the leastη2 =.077(f =.248). Figure1Acontainsaplotof
p
previoustask. Thebehaviorswerepresentedinrandom- therequiredpowertodetectwithin-betweeninteraction
ized order and participants were instructed to choose effects between η2 = 0 and η2 = .20 given our design
p p
either acceptable or unacceptable and to guess in case andsamplesize.
they could not remember the corresponding trial from
ExploratoryAnalyses
theprevioustask. Fromtheseanswersintherecalltask,
we computed our dependent variable recall accuracy: As displayed in Table 1, our main dependent vari-
Threeindicesofcorrectlyrecallednormsforeachgroup, able was heavily skewed with skewness values ranging
rangingfrom0to6. from –1.2 to –2.7, cell means were close to the scale
On the following screen, participants were asked to maximumwithmedianvaluesalmostexclusivelyatthe
make a guess about the aims of our research. Next, we highest possible value of 6. We conducted further ex-
askedparticipantsona7-pointscale(1=notatallto7 ploratory analyses including moderation analyses and
=fully)howrepresentativethepresentedsurveyresults exploratory exclusion of participants which are not de-
hadbeenfortheactualgroups. Then,wemeasuredsev-
===== PAGE 5/30 =====
5
Table1
DescriptivestatisticsandskewnessofrecallaccuracybycontrolsalienceandsurveyedgroupforStudy1.
ControlSalience Germannorms Polishnorms Czechnorms
N LowControl 56 56 56
HighControl 61 61 61
Mean LowControl 5.41 5.18 5.30
HighControl 5.43 5.30 5.28
Median LowControl 6.00 5.50 6.00
HighControl 6.00 6.00 6.00
Standarddeviation LowControl 0.949 1.03 0.971
HighControl 1.10 1.10 0.951
Skewness LowControl –1.72 –1.20 –1.52
HighControl –2.70 –1.39 –1.32
tailedherebecausetheydidnotchangetheoverallpic- much salient death implies uncontrollability and simi-
tureofnullfindings. lar reactions could be evoked by manipulating control
salience (Fritsche et al., 2008). Moreover, in addition
Discussion to replicating the design by Jonas and Fritsche (2012),
we decided to add a simple measure of recall accuracy
Wedidnotfindanyevidencefortheproposedmech-
forthenormativeinformationpresentedinthematerial
anismofnormvigilanceinStudy1. Neitherthehypoth-
based on a similar measure by Hellmann et al. (2017).
esized interaction effect, nor main effects of the exper-
Ourstudyhada2×2between-subjectsdesignwiththe
imental manipulation of control salience or the within-
factors control salience (high control vs. low control)
subjectsfactorsurveyedgroupweredetected. Onepossi-
and norm type (optimistic vs. pessimistic odds). We
bleexplanationmaybefoundinpropertiesofourmea-
measuredpersonaloptimismaswellasrecallaccuracyin
sure: Although there was some variability on the re-
termsofabsolutedeviationinrecallfromthepresented
call accuracy scale, mean values close to the scale max-
numbers. We hypothesized an interaction effect of the
imum, median values above those high mean values,
twofactorsonoptimism(i.e.,normfollowing),asfound
pronounced indices of skewness, as well as visual in-
intheoriginalstudy. Inaddition, wehypothesizedthat
spectionofthescaledistributionsallpointedtowardsa
recall accuracy for in-group norms would improve for
ceilingeffect. Accordingly,normvigilanceinreactionto
participantsinthelowcontrol(vs. highcontrol)condi-
threat may have occurred, but the novel paradigm we
tion. Furthermore,wehypothesizedamediationeffect:
constructedforthisstudywasunabletodetectit.
Weexpectedthat,intheoptimisticnormcondition,the
effectofcontrolsalienceonoptimismwouldbemediated
Study2
byrecallaccuracy.
DuringtheongoingFIFAFootballWorldCupin2010,
Jonas and Fritsche (2012) conducted a study on the Method
interactive effect of threat salience and norm salience.
Participants
Theydemonstratedthatparticipantsintheirstudywere
more inclined to follow a group norm, when they had We aimed to collect data from at least 72 partici-
beenexposedtomortalitysaliencethreat(vs. acontrol pants, to match the sample size of the original study.
condition), and that the direction of this effect was de- Onehundredtwenty-fourparticipantswererecruitedat
pendent on the specific norm they had been presented aGermanuniversitycampus. Weexcludedsevenpartic-
with. We decided to take advantage of the, then on- ipantswhostartedbutdidnotcompletetheprocedure,
going, 2016 UEFA European Football Championship to as well as three participants who did not give answers
attempt to replicate their study, but with the alteration on our primary recall accuracy measure. To match the
of administering a manipulation of control salience in- procedure of the original 2010 study, we excluded six
stead of mortality salience threat. A replication of the additionalparticipantswhospecifiedanationalityother
original interaction effect appeared likely, as previous thanGerman,resultinginafinalsampleof108partici-
researchhasdemonstratedthatsociallydefensivereac- pants (M = 23.04, SD = 3.45). Out of this group,
age age
tions to mortality salience threat vary along with how 56 were female and 52 were male. Participation was
===== PAGE 6/30 =====
6
voluntary and participants received a chocolate bar as posed of 14 questions about their sleep habits. We in-
compensation. cluded this task as a filler to increase the task difficulty
ofoursubsequentrecalltaskandtherebypotentiallyin-
ProcedureandMaterials
creasemeaningfulvarianceinthedata.
Measure of Recall Accuracy. Following the distrac-
Aftergivinginitialconsenttoparticipateinthestudy,
tor task, participants were instructed to return the first
participants were randomly assigned to one of four ex-
part of the questionnaire to an experimenter and re-
perimental conditions and received the corresponding
ceived the second part of the questionnaire, which was
firstoftwopartsoftheprintedquestionnaire.
identical for all conditions. On the very first page, they
Control Salience Manipulation. Depending on ex-
wereaskedtorecallandnotethebettingoddsfromtwo
perimental condition, participants completed one of
betting agencies they had been presented earlier. From
two versions of the control salience manipulation task.
thesevalues,wecalculatedtheabsolutedeviationfrom
This task and the corresponding manipulation check
the originally presented numbers as inverse measures
measurewereidenticaltothosedescribedinStudy1.
ofrecallaccuracy. AsthebettingagencylocatedinGer-
DelayTask. Then,allparticipantscompletedthe60-
manyprovidedthein-groupnorm,theaccuracyforthis
item version of the PANAS-X (Grühn et al., 2010; Wat-
information represented our main dependent variable
son and Clark, 1999) which served as a delay task. As
todetectnormvigilance.
inStudy1,weincludedadelaytasktoallowforeffects
Norm Following. Next, we measured participants’
of the threat salience manipulation to emerge. Varia-
own optimism regarding the chances of the German
tionsofthePANAShavebeenknownfornotmediating
team winning the championship with one item by ask-
threateffectsonsymbolicdefenses,suchasresponsesof
ing them to put a cross onto a horizontal line repre-
group-based control restoration (Fritsche et al., 2013),
senting this probability. The endpoints of the line were
cultural worldview defense (Pyszczynski et al., 1999),
labeled with 0% at the leftmost end and 100% at the
or reactive approach motivation (Jonas et al., 2014).
rightmostend. Wemeasuredthedistanceinmillimeters
Accordingly, wedidnotincludethismeasureinfurther
fromtheleftmostendofthescale, whichallowedusto
analysesofourstudies.
calculatethe percentagetheir choicerepresented(with
GroupNormManipulation.
100%at148mm).
Subsequently, participants read one of two versions
Additional Measures. Then, we measured addi-
of the group norm manipulation. We based this ma-
tional variables on 7-point scales (1 = not true at all
nipulation of descriptive norms on similar material by
to7=completelytrue)toconductexploratoryanalyses.
JonasandFritsche(2012). Participantswereinstructed
Three items asked about participants’ commitment to
tocarefullyreadthefollowingtextbecausetheywould
and interest in soccer and the German national team.
later be asked about its contents. In the text, partici-
Two items measured identification with Germans and
pants learned about the nature of betting agencies and
Germansoccerfans. Oneitemaskedtowhatextentthe
bettingodds. Thetextmentionedhowbettingoddsusu-
nationalteamrepresentedGermansintheinternational
ally provided a good indicator of public opinion and
sphere. Forthefinalfiveitems,weusedthesamegraph-
how odds from different betting agencies could vary
icalmeasurewithhorizontallinesrepresentingpercent-
depending on their location. This was illustrated by
agesasforournormconformityitem. Alloftheseitems
the presentation of recent betting odds for the event
asked about perceptions of the group norm on differ-
of the German soccer team winning the finals of the
entlevels. Amongthoseweretheitems“Towhatextent
2016UEFAEuropeanChampionshipfromtwodifferent
do Germans expect the German team to win the finals?”
betting agencies, one located in Germany, and one in-
and “To what extent do German betters expect the Ger-
ternational agency located in London. Depending on
man team to win the finals?”. The latter served as our
participants’ experimental condition, the German odds
manipulation check for the norm manipulation. Partic-
wereclearlymoreoptimisticthantheinternationalodds
ipants were asked for basic demographic information,
(optimistic norm condition) or vice versa (pessimistic
werefullydebriefedandthankedfortheirparticipation.
normcondition). Weadjustedtheexactvaluestomore
On the final page of our questionnaire, additional vari-
closely resemble realistic betting odds at this point in
ableswerecollectedforanunrelatedpilotstudyforcol-
time. To ensure participants had understood this infor-
leaguesatourlab.
mation, we then asked them to indicate which of the
two agencies’ odds predicted a higher chance of win-
ningfortheGermannationalteam.
Distractor Task. Following the group norm manip-
ulation, participants completed a questionnaire com-
===== PAGE 7/30 =====
7
Results
PlannedAnalyses
To test whether participants had reflected on high
vs. low personal control as intended, we conducted a
2(highcontrolvs. lowcontrol)×2(optimisticvs. pes-
simistic norm) ANOVA with scores on our correspond-
ingmanipulationcheckitemasthedependentvariable.
Meanscoresinthehighcontrolcondition(M=5.50,SD
=0.97)wererevealedtobehigherthanmeanscoresin
the low control condition (M = 3.50, SD = 1.70), as
reflected in a significant main effect of control salience,
F(1,100)=48.50,p<.001,η2 =.327.
p
The main effect of norm type and the interaction ef-
fectwerenotstatisticallysignificant;p=0.343andp=
0.499, respectively. To test whether our norm manipu-
lation had successfully manipulated norm perceptions,
weconducteda2(highcontrolvs. lowcontrol)×2(op-
timisticvs. pessimisticnorm)ANOVAwithscoresonour
corresponding manipulation check item (optimism of
Germanbettersin%)asthedependentvariable. Mean
scores in the optimistic norm condition (M = 67.7, SD
=17.2)wererevealedtobehigherthanmeanscoresin
thepessimisticnormcondition(M =56.5,SD=20.0),
as reflected in a significant main effect of norm type,
F(1, 103) = 9.66, p = .002, η2 = .086. The main ef-
p
fect of control salience and the interaction effect were
not statistically significant; p = 0.863 and p = 0.467,
respectively.
To test our prediction that low control would elicit
norm following in the direction of the presented norm,
we conducted a 2 (high control vs. low control) × 2
(optimistic vs. pessimistic norm) ANOVA with personal
optimism scores as the dependent variable. Although,
descriptively, we found more pronounced conformity
with the optimism norm in the low control condition
than in the high control condition (see Table 2), the
predicted interaction was not significant, F(1, 103) =
0.89, p = .347, η2 = .009 (f = .095). The interaction
p
effect test had a statistical power of .16. A sensitivity
analysis (WebPower; 2×2 multiple way ANOVA; N =
107; α = .05) indicated that .80 power requires an ef-
fect of at least η2 = .07 (f = .273). The main effect of
p
control salience and the main effect of norm type were
not statistically significant; p = 0.772 and p = 0.540,
respectively.
Totestourpredictionthatrecallaccuracyforin-group
normswouldimproveforparticipantsinthelowcontrol
(vs. high control) condition, we conducted a 2 (high
control vs. low control) × 2 (optimistic vs. pessimistic
norm) ANOVA with recall accuracy (absolute deviation
fromthepresentedoddsfromaGermanbettingagency)
as the dependent variable. Contrary to our prediction,
2elbaT
.2ydutSniselbairavlartnecrof)DS(snoitaiveddradnatsdna,)M(snaem,)N(sezislleC
snamreGhtiwnoitacfiitnedI
ycneganamreGnoitaivedllaceR
msimitpO
snamreGmroN
srettebnamreGmroN
epyTmroN
ecneilaslortnoC
N
52
52
42
42
42
citsimisseP
woL
82
82
82
82
82
citsimitpO
62
62
62
62
62
citsimisseP
hgiH
92
92
92
92
92
citsimitpO
M
08.2
094.0
9.74
1.55
8.45
citsimisseP
woL
68.2
722.0
2.45
6.66
7.86
citsimitpO
77.3
726.0
9.25
7.85
0.85
citsimisseP
hgiH
38.3
311.0
6.15
0.85
7.66
citsimitpO
DS
17.1
895.0
1.91
2.51
3.12
citsimisseP
woL
88.1
768.0
1.12
1.02
7.91
citsimitpO
12.2
21.1
7.02
2.81
1.91
citsimisseP
hgiH
36.1
191.0
1.22
3.91
7.41
citsimitpO
===== PAGE 8/30 =====
8
therewasnosignificantmaineffectforcontrolsalience, interaction effect were not statistically significant; p =
F(1, 104) < 0.01, p = .939, η2 < .001. The interac- 0.873 and p = 0.999, respectively. In contrast to what
p
tion effect of the two factors was not statistically sig- we found for norm perceptions for German betters, an
nificant, F(1, 104) = 0.72, p = .399, η2 = .007 (f = analysis of the perceived norm of Germans in general
p
.084). Theinteractioneffecttesthadastatisticalpower revealed no significant main effect of norm type, F(1,
of .14. A sensitivity analysis (WebPower; 2×2 multi- 103)=2.33,p=.130,η2 =.022.
p
ple way ANOVA; N = 107; α = .05) indicated that .80 Weconductedfurtherexploratoryanalysesincluding
powerrequiresaneffectofatleastη2 =.07(f =.273). testsformoderationbyidentificationondifferentlevels
p
Figure 2A contains a plot of the required power to de- butdidnotfindanysignificanteffects.
tect interaction effects between η2 = 0 and η2 =.20
p p
given our design and sample size. Unexpectedly, we Discussion
foundastatisticallysignificantmaineffectofnormtype,
As in Study 1, we were unable to find evidence for
F(1, 104) = 6.92, p = .01, η2 = .062. As displayed
p normvigilance followingthreat tocontrol. Participants
in Table 2, participants in the optimistic norm condi-
in the low control condition were not more accurate
tionrecalledtheoddsmoreaccurately(i.e., withlower
in recalling the German betting odds than participants
absolute deviation) than participants in the pessimistic
in the high control condition. We did however find
norm condition. We conducted a mediation analysis to
an unexpected main effect of norm type. Optimistic
testourpredictionthat,forparticipantsintheoptimistic
norms were recalled more accurately than were pes-
normcondition,therewouldbeanindirecteffectofcon-
simistic norms. One possible explanation for this pat-
trolsalienceonnormfollowing(i.e.,personaloptimism)
ternmaybethatoptimisticnormsweregenerallyeasier
via recall accuracy for the German betting odds. Bias-
to recall because they were more in line with existing
correctedbootstrappedconfidenceintervalwith10,000
expectationsourparticipantsmayhavehadaboutreal-
samples included zero for both the direct effect of con-
istic betting odds in different countries. Interestingly,
trol salience on norm following, 95% CI [-7.26, 8.60],
ournormmanipulationsignificantlyinfluencedtheper-
and for the indirect effect via recall accuracy, 95% CI
ceived norm of German betters but not of Germans in
[-8.71,1.63].
general. Thisraisesthequestionwhetherthemanipula-
tioninfluencedtheperceivednormofanin-groupaswe
ExploratoryAnalyses
hadintended. Inadditiontothis,ourmeasureofrecall
Overall, deviation scores on our recall accuracy mea- possessed problematic properties. Almost half of our
surewerequitelow. Normalityisgenerallyunlikelyfor participants recalled the betting odds perfectly. Hence,
measuresofabsolutedeviation,duetotheprocessofre- as in Study 1, the task difficulty of the recall task in
moving directionality from differences scores (i.e., dis- Study2couldbedescribedastooeasy.
tant positive and negative scores may be assigned the Notably, the basic threat effect on norm conformity
same value). For this reason, we investigated the dis- was not significant. However, the descriptive pat-
tribution of difference scores underlying our variable. tern matched the effect of the original study (Jonas &
The mode of these difference scores was 0, and this Fritsche,2012),whichhadbeenconductedwithamor-
was true for all experimental conditions and both the talitysalienceinsteadofcontrolthreatsaliencemanipu-
Germanandinternationalbettingodds. Addingtothis, lation. In-groupoptimismwashigherinthelowcontrol
almost half of all participants in our sample (47,2%) condition than in the high control condition when an
recalledthebettingoddsoftheGermanagencywithout optimismnormwassalientandlowerwhenapessimism
anydeviation. normwassalient. Asonepossibleexplanation,theorig-
JonasandFritsche(2012)foundthatthreatsalience inal effect might be weaker than expected. Alterna-
increasednationalidentificationintheirsample. Totest tively, the specific set-up of the current study may have
whether we could replicate this finding in our sample reduced the chances to detect the effect as, compared
anddesign,weconducteda2(highcontrolvs. lowcon- to the original study, the personal optimism measure
trol)×2(optimisticvs. pessimisticnorm)ANOVAwith was preceded by an additional extended delay ques-
national identification as the dependent variable. Un- tionnaire as well as the recall task. The latter task may
expectedly, a significant main effect of control salience haveworkedasamotivatedaffirmationofgroup-based
revealed a reversed pattern: Identification was higher control, given that optimistic norms were recalled bet-
forparticipantsinthehighcontrolcondition(M=3.80, ter than pessimistic betting odds. Another explanation
SD=1.91)andlowerforparticipantsinthelowcontrol might lie in the comparably low levels of identification
condition (M = 2.83, SD = 1.78), F(1, 104) = 7.27, p with the salient in-group. Interestingly, control threat
=.008,η2 p=.065. Themaineffectofnormtypeandthe ledtoloweridentificationwiththeproposedin-groupin
===== PAGE 9/30 =====
9
our sample. This may point towards specific properties wouldincludeanitemaskingparticipantswhetherthey
of this sample population or the specific historical con- were planning to visit the university library before tak-
text,whichmadenormconformity,aswellasincreased ing part in the study. These exploratory analyses did
normrecallaccuracy,afterthreatunlikely. Identification not yield significant results and were not included in
withGermanyistypicallylowinGermanstudent,rather themanuscript.
left-wing, samples, given the historical association of
Germanidentitywithnationalsocialism. In2016,when Method
thepresentstudytookplace,thecountrywaspolarized
Participants
on the left-right continuum, amplified by the so-called
“refugee crisis” in 2015 (Bock, 2018). This may have Weaimedtocollectdatafrom140studentsfromthe
emphasized rejection of national identification in left- University of Leipzig because an a priori power anal-
wing students. We concluded that, before continuing ysis indicated that this sample size would result in a
with the construction of a novel paradigm to measure statistical power of around 80% for our design and an
normvigilancespecificallyforin-group(vs. out-group) assumed effect size of d = .25. One hundred forty par-
norms, our next study should implement a more estab- ticipantswererecruitedandcompletedourmaterialsat
lished paradigm to possibly establish the basic effect of aGermanuniversitycampusinfrontoftheentranceof
threat on vigilance for normative information in gen- the university’s main library. Ten participants had to
eral. be excluded because their data could not be matched
duetomissingoremptyquestionnairesaswellassome
Study3 casesoferroneousassignmentofsubjectidentifiersdur-
ingdatacollection. Participationwasvoluntaryandpar-
In Study 3, we decided to use a more established
ticipantsreceivedachocolatebarascompensation.
paradigm to test our assumption of norm vigilance in
a more general sense. That is, vigilance for situation-
ProcedureandMaterials
ally relevant norms in general. For this purpose, we
decided to modify an existing paradigm established by Aftergivinginitialconsenttoparticipateinthestudy,
Aarts and Dijksterhuis (2003). The original authors participants were randomly assigned to one of two
of the paradigm demonstrated that the salience of be- experimental conditions and received a corresponding
haviorally relevant social norms enhanced the accessi- printed questionnaire. We told our participants this
bility of related concepts in a subsequent lexical deci- questionnaire represented one of two separate studies,
sion task. That is, correct response times for words the second of which would be taking place at a laptop
related to the norm of being silent were faster than computer.
those for words unrelated to this norm. In line with Control Salience Manipulation. Depending on ex-
more recent theorizing by one of the original authors perimental condition, participants then completed one
Fennis and Aarts (2012), we decided to adapt the oftwoversionsofthecontrolsaliencemanipulationtask.
paradigm and extend the design by including the ad- This task and the corresponding manipulation check
ditional factor of control salience. This resulted in a 2 measurementwereidenticaltothosedescribedinStudy
× 2 mixed-factorial design with the between-subjects 1.
factor control salience and the within-subjects factor DelayTask. Then,allparticipantscompletedthe60-
word type. According to our theoretical ideas about item version of the PANAS-X (Grühn et al., 2010; Wat-
norm vigilance, the enhanced accessibility of norma- son and Clark, 1999) which served as a delay task. As
tive concepts should be further catalyzed by control in the previous studies, we included a delay task to al-
threat, because of the associated heightened motiva- low for effects of the threat salience manipulation to
tion to restore control via appropriate social behavior. emerge.
Accordingly, in addition to replicating the basic effect To aid our cover story of two separate studies, par-
of an advantage for norm-related words, we hypothe- ticipantswerethenaskedforbasicdemographicinfoas
sized a significant interaction effect of the two exper- wellastomakeaguessaboutourresearchaims,before
imental factors. More specifically, we expected partic- being instructed to hand back the questionnaire to an
ipants in the low control (vs. high control) salience experimenter.
condition to demonstrate the fastest correct responses Then, participants were placed in front of a laptop
to stimuli related to the salient social norm (vs. con- computertoworkon,whattheyweretoldwas,asecond
trol words). The pre-registration for Study 3 can be study. We used MediaLab and DirectRT (Jarvis, 2016)
foundathttps://aspredicted.org/g657v.pdf. Inthepre- topresentthefollowingmaterials.
registration,westatedthatforexploratorypurposes,we
===== PAGE 10/30 =====
10
Picture Task. On the first screen, participants were measurewasincludedbecauseithadbeenshowntobe
welcomed and thanked for their participation and re- a potential moderator for the effects of autobiograph-
ceived instructions for the first task. They were told ical recall manipulations (Lammers et al., 2017). We
thatinthefollowingpicturetask,theywouldbeshown then asked whether participants had previously taken
a picture of a place for a duration of 30 seconds and partinsimilarstudies,andifso,howlongagothishad
their task would be to memorize the picture as well as been, andwhethertheyknewthemanipulationofcon-
theycould. Inadditiontothis,wetoldparticipantsthat trol threat from previous participation. Finally, partic-
theywouldlateronbeaskedtovisittheplacedepicted ipants were asked for basic demographic information,
inthepictureinafinalstepofthestudytheywerepar- werefullydebriefedandthankedfortheirparticipation.
ticipatingin. Subsequently, they werepresentedwitha
picturefrominsidethelibrarytheywereinfrontoffora Results
duration of 30 seconds. We based this picture task and
PlannedAnalyses
the following lexical decision task on the experimental
procedurebyAartsandDijksterhuis(2003). To test whether participants had reflected on high
LexicalDecisionTask. Subsequently,allparticipants vs. low personal control as intended, we conducted
were introduced to the lexical decision task and com- an ANOVA with the between-subjects factor control
pletedfourpracticetrialstoensuretheyhadunderstood salienceandscoresonourcorrespondingmanipulation
the task before measurement began. Participants were check item as the dependent variable. Mean scores in
instructedtoindicatewhethertheywerepresentedwith thehighcontrolcondition(M =5.32,SD=1.36)were
real words or non-words and to answer as quickly and revealed to be higher than mean scores in the low con-
correctlyaspossible. Thefollowinglexicaldecisiontask trol condition (M = 3.30, SD = 1.65), as reflected in a
was composed of 48 trials in total. Of 24 real words, significant main effect of control salience, F(1, 125) =
8 were related to the social norm of being silent in 60.7,p<.001,η2 =.327.
p
a library (e.g. still, quiet, silent, whisper), while 16 We conducted a 2 × 2 mixed-factor ANOVA with
were unrelated to said norm (e.g. active, open, flat, thefactorscontrolsalience(between-subjects)andword
shake). These control words were matched to the tar- type (within-subjects) with participants’ IES as the de-
get words in frequency and usage with dlexDB (Heis- pendent variable. Descriptive means of IES by condi-
ter et al., 2011). Twenty-four non-words were gener- tion are displayed in Table 3. The main effect of the
atedbyutilizingapseudowordgenerator(Keuleersand factor word type was not significant, F(1,127) = 1.78,
Brysbaert, 2010). We measured both participants’ re- p > .05, η2 = .014 (f = .119). The within-subjects
p
sponse times (RTs) as well as their correct and incor- maineffecttesthadastatisticalpowerof.27. Themain
rect responses. Prior to further analysis, we identified effect of the factor control salience was not significant,
and excluded extreme individual outliers in each par- F(1,127) = 2.76, p = .099, η2 = .021 (f = .146). The
p
ticipant’s trial reaction times (cutoff set at 1.5 × IQR between-subjectsmaineffecttesthadastatisticalpower
above 3rd or below 1st quartiles of subjects’ individual of .38. The interaction of the factors word type and
RTs). Wethencomputedinverseefficiencyscores(IES= control salience reached significance, F(1,127) = 4.57,
RT / (1 – error rate)) for each factor combination, to p = .034, η2 = .035 (f = .190). The within-between
p
include both information about speed and accuracy in interaction effect test had a statistical power of .57. A
a single measure. For participants with 100% correct sensitivity analysis (WebPower; 2×2 mixed ANOVA; N
responses, the IES represents their RT in ms. For par- = 129; α = .05) indicated that .80 power requires an
ticipants with higher error rates, the IES represents an effectofatleastη2 =.058(f =.249). Inthelowcontrol
p
upward corrected RT in ms (e.g., 1000 ms instead of condition, IES were significantly lower for norm words
900 ms for a 10% error rate). We adapted this method (M = 843) than for control words (M = 907), t(62)
oftransformationfrom(Koranyietal.,2015). =- 2.93, p = .005. In addition, IES for control words
Additional Measures. Next, we asked our partic- were significantly lower in the high control condition
ipants to make another guess about the aims of our (M=762)thaninthelowcontrolcondition(M=907),
research and collected some basic demographic data. t(127)=-2.54, p=.012. Figure3Acontainsaplotof
Then, with three 7-point scale (1 = not at all to 7 therequiredpowertodetectwithin-betweeninteraction
= very strongly) items, we measured participants’ self- effects between η2 = 0 and η2 = .20 given our design
p p
reportedgeneraltendencytofollowsocialnorms. Sub- andsamplesize.
sequently, we measured ease of retrieval regarding the To test for moderation, we entered the mean of our
control threat salience manipulation with two 7-point ease of retrieval items (r = .61,p < .001) as the mod-
scale items (1 = not easy at all to 7 = very easy). This erator and the between-subjects factor control salience
===== PAGE 11/30 =====
11
Table3
Cellsizes,meaninverseefficiencyscores(IES),andstandarderrorsbywordtypeandconditioninStudy3.
ControlSalience Normwords Controlwords
N High 66 66
Low 63 63
MeanIES High 777 762
Low 843 907
Std. errormean High 61.2 38.4
Low 40.9 42.4
as predictor in two separate linear models with IES for Although the hypothesized interaction effect did
both item types as the dependent variables. The inter- emerge, the pattern was largely not in line with our
action effect was not statistically significant for norm predictions. We hypothesized that IES would be low-
words or control words, p = 0.874 and p = 0.926 re- est for norm words in the low control condition. De-
spectively. scriptively, IES were lowest for control words in the
Werepeatedthesameanalyseswiththemeanscores highcontrolcondition–afindingverymuchoppositeto
from our items measuring a self-reported general ten- what we had expected. An isolated look at low control
dency to follow norms (α = .87) as the moderator. participants only did reveal a pattern in line with our
Theinteractioneffectwasnotstatisticallysignificantfor predictions as well as with the original findings of the
normwordsorcontrolwords,p=0.769andp=0.797 paradigm’sauthors: Forthoseparticipants,normwords
respectively. had significantly lower IES than control words. How-
ever, the completely unexpected role of control salience
Discussion in the overall pattern renders an interpretation of this
single difference as norm vigilance after threat diffi-
Descriptively, IES for norm words were generally
cult. Although this pattern was present for partici-
faster than for control words as would be expected
pants previously exposed to control threat, the role of
from the original experiment by Aarts and Dijksterhuis
threat itself was opposite to what we would expect in
(2003). However this main effect of word type was not
terms of norm vigilance, because mean IES were gen-
significant. This non-replication may be due to differ-
erally higher instead of lower for low control partici-
encesinourexperimentaldesign,specificallytheinclu-
pants. Guinote (2007) demonstrated that participants
sion of control salience without a neutral control condi-
primed with powerfulness (vs. powerlessness) showed
tion. The main effect of control salience was not signif-
facilitated and faster goal-directed behavior. This may
icant and the mean difference was in a direction con-
help to explain why people in the high (vs. low) con-
trarytoourprediction: Descriptively,participantsinthe
trol salient condition were generally faster. Hence, fu-
lowcontrolconditionweregenerallyslowertorespond
turestudiesthatusealexicaldecisiontaskmayinclude
thanparticipantsinthehighcontrolcondition. Thispat-
a neutral control condition instead of a high control
terndoesnotsupportthenotionofgenerallyfacilitated
salientconditionasacomparisongrouptopreventpos-
processing of information after threat to control as ob-
sibleeffectsofhighpersonalcontrolfromemerging.
served by Pittman and D’Agostino (1989), but should
not be overinterpreted because it was not statistically
Study4
significant. Notably, some previous research demon-
strated that severe control deprivation (i.e. working When designing Study 4, we decided to investigate
on unsolvable tasks for an extended duration) can also whether the delay previously implemented after the
leadtodecreasesintaskperformancesimilartolearned control salience manipulation in all our studies might
helplessnessphenomena(Sedeketal.,1993). However, havebeenareasonforthelackofthreateffectsonmea-
the mindset priming manipulation employed in our ex- suresofaccuracy. Someresearchershaveclassifiedvig-
periments has previously been demonstrated to elicit ilance as a rapid proximal reaction to threat, however
socially defensive reactions (Fritsche et al., 2013) and this mostly refers to more general, unspecific forms of
its intensity is unlikely to be comparable to unsolvable vigilance(Jonasetal.,2014). Althoughourtheoretical
tasks. conceptionofnormvigilancewasnotgeneralunspecific
vigilance after threat but vigilance specific for norma-
===== PAGE 12/30 =====
12
tive information, we decided to rule out this possible als. The pre-registration for Study 4 can be found at
methodologicalissue. Hence,weincludedthepresence https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/4ABQW.
of a delay task as an exploratory experimental factor
in Study 4. We pre-registered that we would include Method
or omit the factor delay in further analyses, depend-
Participants
ing on the emergence of a three-way interaction. Be-
yond this, we included the experimental factors con- Because no previous data to estimate the effect size
trol salience(between-participants) and surveyed group existed,wepre-registeredthatwewouldcollectasam-
(within-participants)withtwolevelseach. Overall,this ple large enough to ensure a minimum cell size of 50
resulted in a mixed-factorial 2 × 2 × 3 design with the participants after exclusion. This pre-registered plan
exploratoryfactordelay(presentvs. none)andthefac- would have resulted in a (minimum) total sample of
tor control salience (high vs. low) as between-subjects 200 participants after exclusion. However, due to mis-
factors, and the factor surveyed group (in-group vs. an- communication with the research assistants who col-
tagonisticout-groupvs. neutralout-group)asawithin- lected the data, we ended up with a much larger final
subjects factor. Although in-group information should sample of 304 participants. To ensure our logic of in-
beparamountaccordingtoourconceptionofnormvig- groupandout-groupcategorizationwouldapplytothe
ilance, we suspected that, given sufficient cognitive re- analyzed sample, we told participants we were looking
sources, people may strive for distinctiveness from an- for politically left-leaning subjects during recruitment.
tagonisticout-groupsandthereforeallocateattentionto Participation was voluntary and participants received a
informationaboutsuchout-groups. Hence,weincluded chocolatebarascompensation. Duetoatechnicalerror,
three different groups to test whether an antagonistic nodemographicdatawerecollectedfromoursamplein
out-group would yield different reactions than a more this study. Participants were recruited from the same
neutral out-group. We expected information about the student population in the same location as the follow-
latter to be less relevant for our participants’ in-group ing Study 5. We pre-registered specific criteria for ex-
identity and hence less affected by norm vigilance. We clusion: Toqualifyforthefinalsample,participantshad
includedthreedependentvariables,thefirstmeasuring to specify their level of identification with the in-group
norm estimate accuracy (i.e., the accuracy of an aggre- above the scale midpoint, specify their level of identifi-
gate impression of each group’s norms), second a mea- cation with the antagonistic out-group below the scale
sure of recall accuracy for all norm related information midpoint, and indicate their political orientation left of
forallgroups,andthird,ameasureofparticipants’opin- the visually highlighted scale midpoint on a left-right
ion on the topic at hand to assess tendencies of norm scale of political orientation. Based on these strict cri-
conformity. teria,113participantswereexcludedfromfurtheranal-
We included two measures of accuracy in norm per- yses. Eight additional participants were excluded from
ceptions to be able to assess effects that may go be- the data set, because they handed in only one of two
yond mere retrieval of information. For these norm questionnaires and/or did not give final consent. No
perception measures, we hypothesized the following: participantshadtobeexcludedduetoaccuratehypoth-
First,weexpectedamaineffectforcontrolsalience,such esis guesses or an incomplete control salience manipu-
that participants in the low control condition would lation. This resulted in a final sample of 304 partici-
generally be more accurate in recalling and aggregat- pants. Several participants handed in incomplete ques-
ing the normative information. Second, we expected tionnaires with some items left unchecked, and could
an interaction effect, such that the enhanced accuracy thereforeonlybeincludedinsome,butnotallanalyses.
would be most pronounced for information about the
ProcedureandMaterials
in-group and least pronounced for information about
the neutral out-group. Regarding norm conformity, we Aftergivinginitialconsenttoparticipateinthestudy,
hypothesized that participants in the low control con- participants were randomly assigned to one of four ex-
dition would adjust their personal opinion in the di- perimental conditions and received the corresponding
rection of the in-group norm more strongly than those firstoftwopartsoftheprintedquestionnaire.
in the high control condition. To provide an inter- Cover Story. We used an introductory text to es-
group setting that was both applicable to a sufficient tablish our cover story. Participants learned that our
proportion of a convenience sample collected at a lo- research was about known differences in opinions on
cal campus as well as sufficiently relevant to our par- the hot topic of open data (i.e., the growing amount of
ticipants, we decided to use the political left as an data from various domains being made publicly avail-
in-group (vs. the antagonistic right) in our materi- able)betweenthepoliticalleftandright. Furthermore,
===== PAGE 13/30 =====
13
we told participants that we were interested in differ- of each group’s norm as our measure of norm estimate
ences in people’s reasoning and would hence ask them accuracy.
to write a short essay later on in the procedure. To in- MeasureofRecallAccuracy. Next,participantswere
crease the motivational relevance of the topic, we in- asked to recall and note as numbers the nine percent-
formed them that some of these essays would later be agestheyhadbeenpresentedattheendofthefirstpart
madepublic. of the questionnaire and indicate on a 7-point scale (1
Control Salience Manipulation. Depending on ex- = not difficult at all to 7 = extremely difficult) how dif-
perimental condition, participants completed one of ficult they had found this task. From the percentages
two versions of the control salience manipulation task. given by participants, we calculated nine scores of ab-
This task and the corresponding manipulation check solute deviation from the presented number and then
measurementwereidenticaltothosedescribedinStudy averagedthesevaluesforthethreegroups, resultingin
1. three mean recall deviation scores as an inverse mea-
Delay Task. Then, depending on experimental con- sureofrecallaccuracy.
dition, half of our participants completed the 60-item Norm Conformity Measure. We measured partici-
versionofthePANAS-X(Grühnetal.,2010;Watsonand pants’attitudestowardsopendatawithtwoitems(e.g.,
Clark, 1999) which served as a delay task. For partic- “All in all, open data will bring more good than bad.”)
ipants in the no delay condition, this task was not in- on 7-point scales (1 = not true at all to 7 = completely
cludedinthequestionnaire. true) each. We then computed the mean of those two
Group Norm Presentation. Subsequently, partic- items to serve as our measure of norm conformity. Be-
ipants read a text meant to introduce the topic of cause the in-group was portrayed as generally more in
opendataandincreaseplausibilityofthefollowingsur- favorofthetopic(whiletheantagonisticout-groupwas
vey results. The text underlined the relevance of the portrayed as opposed to it), higher values represented
topicbyexplaininghowopendatawasbecomingahot greaterconformitywiththein-groupnorm.
topic with consequences for individuals and democra- Additional Measures. Then, on 7-point scales (1 =
cies alike and was bound to polarize political camps. nottrueatallto7=completelytrue),wemeasuredpar-
Then, they were presented with a table of survey re- ticipants’ identification with the three groups with one
sults with nine different percentages in total represent- itemeach(Postmesetal.,2013),perceivedreliabilityof
ing agreement to three different statements on open thesurveyresultsfromthein-groupwithoneitem,and
data from three different groups. A political left lean- collectiveefficacyofthein-groupregardingthegroup’s
ing sample served as in-group, a political right leaning goalsintheareaofopendatawithoneitem. Withone
sampleservedasout-group,whilethethirdgroup’sde- final item, we measured participants’ political orienta-
scriptionwasintentionallykeptvagueandunspecificto tionbyaskingthemtoputacrossontoahorizontalline
minimizechancesofcategorizationandhighidentifica- with endpoints labeled left at the leftmost end, right at
tion with this group. In general, the left leaning sam- the rightmost end and a vertical marking representing
ple was portrayed as more in favor of open data than themidpointofthescale. Wemeasuredthedistancein
therightleaningsample,whilethethirdgroup’sprefer- millimeters of participants’ marking from the leftmost
enceswereinconsistent. point of the scale, with 48 millimeters representing the
Measure of Group Norm Estimate Accuracy. Fol- visuallyhighlightedscalemidpoint. Finally,participants
lowing the group norm presentation, participants were were asked to make a guess regarding the aim of our
instructed to return the first part of the questionnaire research, fully debriefed and thanked for their partici-
to an experimenter and then received the second part pation.
of the questionnaire, which was identical for all condi-
tions. On the first page, they were asked to indicate Results
their general impression of positive attitudes towards
PlannedAnalyses
open data for all three groups with one item each, by
asking them to put a cross onto a horizontal line rep- To test whether participants had reflected on high
resenting percentages. The endpoints of the line were vs. low personal control as intended, we conducted a
labeledwith0%attheleftmostend,50%inthecenter, 2(highcontrolvs. lowcontrol)×2(delayvs. nodelay)
and 100% at the rightmost end and had vertical mark- ANOVAwithscoresonourcorrespondingmanipulation
ingsrepresentingincrementsof10%. Wemeasuredthe check item as the dependent variable. Mean scores in
distanceinmillimetersofparticipants’markingfromthe thehighcontrolcondition(M =5.29,SD=1.17)were
leftmostpointofthescaleandthencalculatedtheabso- revealed to be higher than mean scores in the low con-
lutedeviationfromthetheoreticallyaccurateaggregate trol condition (M = 3.20, SD = 1.19), as reflected in a
===== PAGE 14/30 =====
14
significant main effect of control salience, F(1, 300) = Discussion
236.52, p < .001, η2 = .441. The main effect of delay
p Forthemeasureofgroupnormestimateaccuracy,we
and the interaction effect were not statistically signifi-
foundaninteractionofcontrolsalienceandthepresence
cant;p=0.733andp=0.836,respectively.
of a delay task, which was not specific for the in-group
Toanalyzeourtwomeasuresofnormperception,we
oranyofthetwoout-groups. Thisfindingisinlinewith
conducted two separate mixed-factorial ANOVAs with
thenotionofgenerallyimprovedprocessingofinforma-
groupasawithin-subjectsfactorandcontrolsalienceand
tion after control threat, i.e. unspecific vigilance, oc-
delayasbetween-subjectsfactors.
curringdirectlyafterthreat(Jonasetal.,2014;Pittman
For our measure of estimate accuracy, we found no
and D’Agostino, 1989). However, it does not support
significant three-way interaction of the factors group,
our hypothesis of norm vigilance, as there was no vigi-
controlsalience, anddelay, F(2, 598) =0.66, p=.519,
lancespecificforin-groupnorms,regardlessofthepres-
η2 = .002 (f = .045). The test had a statistical power
p ence of a delay task. Interestingly, we found that ex-
of .15. A sensitivity analysis (WebPower; general lin-
act recall and processing in terms of aggregation was
ear model; α = .05) indicated that .80 power requires
least accurate for the neutral out-group in both mea-
an effect of at least η2 = .016 (f = .130). Figure 4A
p sures. This could indicate that our reasoning of includ-
contains a plot of the required power to detect three-
ing a neutral out-group alongside with an antagonis-
way interaction effects between η2 = 0 and η2 = .2
p p tic out-group had merit. Quite possibly, the latter was
given our design and sample size. Furthermore, the
more informative about in-group norms than the neu-
interaction of the within-subjects factor group and the
tral group. However, remembering inconsistent infor-
between-subjects factor control salience was not signifi-
mationmayalsogenerallyhavebeenmoredifficultthan
cant, F(2, 598) = 0.40, p = .67, η2 = .001. However,
p remembering consistent norms. Importantly, we found
when ignoring the within-subjects factor, there was a
no systematic effects of control salience, regardless of
significant between-subjects interaction of the factors
theinclusionofadelay. Contrarytoourhypothesesand
control salience and delay across all three levels, F(1,
previousresearchoncontrolthreat,wealsodidnotfind
299) = 6.15, p = .014, η2 = .02. In tendency, the
p heightened norm conformity after threat, regardless of
descriptivepatternrepresentedmoreaccuraterecallaf-
the presence of a delay task. One possible explanation
ter control threat across all groups when no delay was
may lie in the deviation from previous research inves-
present. Inaddition,wefoundasignificantmaineffect
tigating norm conformity after threat to control: Our
of the within-subjects factor group, F(2, 598) = 16.05,
participants worked on the norm perception and recall
p < .001, η2 = .05. Descriptively, norm estimates were
p measures before giving their own preference regarding
generally least accurate for the neutral out-group, fol-
opendata. Thismayhaveactivatedananalyticalmind-
lowedbythein-group,andmostaccuratefortheantag-
set in participants, preventing automatic motivational
onistic out-group. For our measure of recall accuracy,
effectstooccur(Simonetal.,1997).
therewasnosignificantthree-wayinteractionofgroup,
controlsalience,anddelay,F(2,578)=0.57,p=.566,
Study5
η2 = .002 (f = .045). The test had a statistical power
p
of.15. Asensitivityanalysis(WebPower;generallinear Groups need agreed-upon rules and goals to appear
model; α = .05) indicated that .80 power requires an agentic and to enable group members to enact group-
effect of at least η2 = .016 (f = .130). Furthermore, based action. Thus, people should desire such norms
p
the interaction of the within-subjects factor group and when membership in agentic groups becomes impor-
thebetween-subjectsfactorcontrolsaliencewasnotsig- tantforthem. Ourinitialtheorizingwasthatweshould
nificant, F(2, 578) = 0.02, p = .98, η2 = .000. How- expectimprovedaccuracyforinformationaboutbehav-
p
ever, we found a significant main effect of the within- iorallyrelevantnormsafterthreattocontrol. Duetothe
subjectsfactorgroup,F(2,578)=57.88,p<.001,η2 = lackofempiricalsupportforthishypothesis,wedecided
p
.167. Descriptively, recall was generally least accurate toinvestigateapossiblealternativemechanismofmoti-
for the neutral out-group, followed by the antagonistic vated norm perception. As self-categorization research
out-group,andmostaccurateforthein-group. (Hogg, 2010; Turner et al., 1987) has shown, people
Toanalyzescoresonourmeasureofnormconformity, perceive an in-group norm when intragroup consensus
weconductedanANOVAwiththebetween-subjectsfac- is high but at the same time strong intergroup differ-
tors control salience and delay. Here, we found no sig- encesareneededforpeopletodetectanormthatistyp-
nificant interaction, and no significant main effects, all ical for the in-group. Although information about rele-
Fs<1. vant norms should become more behaviorally relevant
after threat, people may be so motivated to perceive
===== PAGE 15/30 =====
15
Table4
Meansandstandarddeviations(SD)forthecentraldependentvariablesofStudy4bydelayandcontrolsalience. Note
thatlowerdeviationscoresrepresenthigheraccuracy.
NormEstimateDeviation NormRecallDeviation
Left Right Neutral Left Right Neutral
Mean
NoDelay HighControl 13.4 9.68 16.4 15.6 16.0 22.3
NoDelay LowControl 10.0 8.64 12.6 14.4 16.5 21.8
Delay HighControl 11.3 10.8 13.4 15.3 17.8 23.0
Delay LowControl 12.2 11.7 14.9 14.0 15.8 21.0
SD
NoDelay HighControl 9.74 6.71 11.7 9.34 9.69 9.57
NoDelay LowControl 9.51 8.39 11.5 8.63 10.6 10.1
Delay HighControl 11.0 9.59 9.82 10.4 9.20 10.7
Delay LowControl 9.69 8.91 11.7 9.14 8.31 10.3
strong and distinct in-group norms, that motivated in- betweennormsoftherelevantgroups(i.e.,tomaximize
tergroup distortion of this information could trump ac- distinctiveness),butonlywhenthisdifferencewaspor-
curacy and precision. In other words, accurately mem- trayedtoexistbetweenthein-groupandtheantagonis-
orizing survey results may be less useful for thinking tic out-group. Furthermore, we expected low control
and acting in terms of group membership than men- (vs. high control) participants to perceive stronger and
tally maximizing norm strength and distinctiveness in more prevalent norms for the in-group and antagonis-
the proper direction. Hence, in Study 5, we modified ticout-groups,butnotforthemoreneutralout-groups.
the paradigm of Study 4 to be able to test this hypoth- Due to the high exclusion rate in Study 4, we did not
esisofmotivatedintergroupdistortionofnormativein- setexclusioncriteriaforStudy5andinsteaddecidedto
formation. Insteadofprovidingexactnumbersandask- testformoderationbypoliticalorientation.
ing participants to accurately recall them, we modified
our material and the recall measure to be intention- Method
ally vague. For this purpose, instead of three groups,
Participants
we now included four: The political left to serve as
our in-group, the political right to serve as an antag- Because no previous data to estimate the effect size
onistic out-group, and two neutral out-groups we ex- existed,weaimedtocollectasampleof50participants
pected to be less relevant to participants. Survey re- percell. Participantswererecruitedinfrontofauniver-
sults for all groups were presented to all participants, sity library building. Participation was voluntary and
but we manipulated whether strong norm differences participants received a chocolate bar as compensation.
were present between the in-group and the antagonis- To ensure our logic of in-group and out-group catego-
ticout-group(highrelevancecondition)orbetweenthe rization would apply to the analyzed sample, we told
moreneutralout-groups(lowrelevancecondition). We participants we were looking for politically left-leaning
included this factor to rule out the possibility of an un- subjects during recruitment. After exclusion of six par-
specific effect. As in the previous studies, we manipu- ticipantswhoabortedtheprocedureand/ordidnotgive
latedhighorlowcontrolsalience. Hence,thestudyhad final consent, the total sample consisted of 194 partic-
a 2 × 2 between-subjects design with the factors con- ipants (M = 25.6, SD = 5.55). Out of this group,
age age
trolsalienceandnormrelevance. Ourcentraldependent 113 specified their gender as female, 55 as male and
variable was a measure of perceived norm tendency 9 specified other or no gender. Several participants
for each group, from which we computed the within- handed in incomplete questionnaires with some items
subjectsfactorintergroupcontrastwithtwolevelsrepre- leftunchecked,andcouldthereforeonlybeincludedin
senting the contrast between the in-group and antago- some,butnotallanalyses.
nisticout-group,andthecontrastbetweenthetwomore
neutral out-groups. We expected low control (vs. high
control) participants to perceive the greatest distance
===== PAGE 16/30 =====
16
ProcedureandMaterials tion,wecounterbalancedwhichofthetwogroupswith
strongpreferenceswasportrayedtoprefertransparency
Aftergivinginitialconsenttoparticipateinthestudy,
overdataprotectionandviceversa. Hence,eachpartici-
participantswererandomlyassignedtooneofeightver-
pantsawoneoffourpossibleversionsofthisgraph. Im-
sionsofthequestionnaireandreceivedthecorrespond-
portantly, the graph was designed to be slightly cut off
ingfirstoftwoparts.
at the lower end and did not include a scale, to ensure
Cover Story. We used an introductory text to estab-
participantswouldhavenonumericalreferenceregard-
lish our cover story. Participants learned that our re-
ingthevisualizeddata,besidestheirgeneralimpression
search was about known differences in opinions on the
ofthemagnitudeofthebars.
topic of open data. Contrary to the introductory text
Plausibility Checks. Following the group norm pre-
usedinStudy4wedidnotspecifythesedifferencesfur-
sentation, participants returned the first part of the
ther. Furthermore, we informed participants that we
questionnaire to an experimenter and received the sec-
were interested in differences in people’s reasoning on
ond part of the questionnaire, which was identical for
the topic and would hence ask them to write a short
all conditions. On the first page, they were asked to
essaylateronintheprocedure. Tofurtherincreasethe
answerfive7-pointscaleitems(1=nottrueatallto7
motivational relevance of the topic, we informed them
=completelytrue)concerningthereliabilityandquality
thatsomeoftheseessayswouldlaterbemadepublic.
ofthearticletheyhadjustread.
Control Salience Manipulation. Depending on ex-
Group and Norm Perception Measures. On the
perimental condition, participants completed one of
following four pages, they answered nine items sepa-
two versions of the control salience manipulation task.
rately for each of the four groups from the previously
This task and the corresponding manipulation check
presented bar graph. First, we asked about the group’s
measurementwereidenticaltothosedescribedinStudy
tendencytowardseithertransparencyoropendata. For
1.
this measure, participants were asked to place a cross
Delay Task. Then all participants completed the 60-
onahorizontallinelabeledtransparencyattheleftmost
item version of the PANAS-X (Grühn et al., 2010; Wat-
end and data protection at the rightmost end, as well
sonandClark,1999)whichservedasadelaytask.
as a vertical line representing the midpoint of the line.
Group Norm Presentation. Subsequently, partici-
We measured the distance from the leftmost point of
pants read a text meant to introduce the topic of open
thescale,fromwhichwecomputedtwocontrastscores
data and underline its relevance. Crucially, the text in-
asourmaindependentvariableatthetwolevelsofthe
troduced the notion that opinions on the topic of open
within-subjects factor intergroup contrast: One for the
data were largely divided by exclusive preferences for
absolutedeviationbetweenthein-groupandtheantag-
either transparency or data protection. The text was
onisticout-groupestimates,andonefortheabsolutede-
designed to resemble a printout from the official web-
viation between the two neutral out-groups. Next, we
site of the German Federal Agency for Civic Education
asked participants to indicate the proportion of group
to increase plausibility. At the bottom of the page, they
members that had a clear preference by writing down
werepresentedwithahorizontalbargraph(seeFigure
a percentage. Then, on 7-point scales, we asked how
1)representing,inthisorder,bogussurveyresultsfrom
strong the preference of the group was (1 = not strong
four different groups: A politically left leaning sample
at all to 7 = extremely strong), how unified in its pref-
served as the in-group, a politically right leaning sam-
erence the group was (1 = not unified at all to 7 =
ple served as an antagonistic out-group, and employ-
completely unified), and how reliably the survey results
ees of two different government agencies (the urban
reflected the group’s opinion (1 = not reliable at all to
greenspaceplanningofficeandthelocalauthorityreal
7 = completely reliable). With four 7-point scale items
estate office) served as two out-groups with relatively
(1 = not true at all to 7 = completely true), we mea-
lowrelevancetoparticipants’salientsocialidentity. For
suredourparticipants’impressionofthegroup’sgeneral
participants in the low relevance condition, the first
agency based on a scale by (Stollberg et al., 2015). Af-
two groups were portrayed as undecided and without
terevaluatingeachofthefourgroupsseparately,partic-
strong preference for either transparency or data pro-
ipants were then asked about their general impression
tection, while the two less relevant groups were por-
of how clearly all groups had positioned themselves on
trayed as having strong and opposing preferences. For
a7-pointscale(1=notunambiguousatallto7=com-
participants in the high relevance condition, the first
pletelyunambiguous).
two groups were portrayed as having strong and op-
Norm Conformity Measure. Next, we asked partic-
posing preferences, while the two less relevant groups
ipants to indicate their personal preference by placing
wereportrayedasundecidedandwithoutstrongprefer-
another cross on a horizontal line labeled transparency
enceforeithertransparencyordataprotection. Inaddi-
===== PAGE 17/30 =====
Open Data | bpb http://www.bpb.de/politik/hintergrund-aktuell/689241/open-data
URL: http://www.bpb.de/politik/hintergrund-aktuell/689241/open-data
Pfad: Politik | Hintergrund aktuell | Open Data
Open Data
Der Umgang mit den „offenen Daten“ könnte schon bald zum Streitpunkt werden. 1.2.2017
Open Data – Der Umgang mit öffentlich zugänglichen Daten (bzw. die Nutzbarmachung solcher Daten, die bisher noch nicht
zugänglich sind) wird momentan immer häufiger als eines der großen Zukunftsthemen gehandelt. Kaum überraschend, denn
in vernetzten Gesellschaften betrifft das Thema praktisch jeden, der Daten generiert oder nutzen möchte: Öffentliche
Einrichtungen, Unternehmen sowie Privatpersonen.
Auf Hochtouren beraten derzeit Expertenkommissionen in Deutschland und der gesamten Europäischen Union über den
Umgang mit den anstehenden Umwälzungen. In einem Punkt scheinen sich dabei alle bereits einig zu sein: Die Umsetzung
von Open Data birgt das Potenzial, unser gesellschaftliches Zusammenleben in erheblichem Maße umzukrempeln. Die große
Frage lautet daher nicht länger, ob Open Data für einzelne Bürgerinnen und Bürger relevant werden wird, sondern wie der
Umgang reguliert und ausgestaltet werden soll. Mögliche Chancen und Risiken sind immens. Die Debatte wird schon in naher
Zukunft immer mehr an Brisanz zunehmen – und die Gesellschaft in Lager spalten. Dies dürfte nicht weiter überraschen, betrifft
das Thema doch zahlreiche ideelle Grundsatzfragen. Die Liste der diskutierten Schlagworte und Themen ist bereits lang:
Demokratisierung durch Daten, der Kampf gegen Zensur und „Fake News“, die Offenlegung von Nebeneinkünften von
Politikern, die Schaffung neuer Geschäftsfelder durch Open Data, die Verbesserung der Überprüfbarkeit von Forschung, der
potenzielle Missbrauch von Daten durch Privatwirtschaft und Politik, neue Formen der digitalen Kriminalität, der „gläserne
Mensch“ im Internetzeitalter, sowie die fortschreitende Aufweichung von Urheberrechten.
Konfliktlinien
Inhaltlich verlaufen die Konfliktlinien dabei nach einem überraschend eindeutigen Muster: Gesellschaftliche Akteure und
Gruppen müssen sich einigen, welcher Wert höher zu gewichten ist – Datenschutz oder Transparenz. Tatsächlich lässt sich
dieser Trend auch in Meinungsbefragungen beobachten. Das deutsche Umfrageinstitut ICO hat seit Anfang 2016 Fragen zum
Thema Open Data in den standardisierten Fragenkatalog aufgenommen. Befragungen unterschiedlicher Bevölkerungsgruppen 17
zeigen: Die Meinungsbilder weisen bereits jetzt interessante Unterschiede auf. Den Anfang machten im 3. Quartal 2016
Befragungen unter den Beschäftigten der kommunalen Grünflächen- und Liegenschaftsämtern in Deutschland. Es folgten Ende
Figure1
des Jahres deutschlandweit repräsentative Befragungen mit gezieltem Fokus auf unterschiedliche politische Orientierungen.
Die untenstehenden Abbildungen zeigen die zusammengefassten Ergebnisse dieser Studien (differenziert entsprechend der
Oneoffüfnofu Brevfreargsuionngssreogfiothneenb doegsu IsCgOr)a. phshowntoparticipantsinStudy5.
Umfrage: Prioritätensetzung beim Thema Open Data
Daten aus unterschiedlichen Befragungen des ICO, separat nach Befragungsregionen*
Transparenz Datenschutz
Politische Orientierung:
Links
(12/2016)
Politische Orientierung:
Rechts
(12/2016)
Beschäftigte der
Kommunalverwaltungen
(Liegenschaftsämter)
(09/2016)
Beschäftigte der
Kommunalverwaltungen
(Grünflächenämter)
(09/2016)
1 von 2 08.02.2017 10:43
attheleftmostendanddataprotectionattherightmost ters of participants’ marking from the leftmost point of
end,aswellasaverticallinerepresentingthemidpoint the scale, with 48 millimeters representing the visually
of the line. We measured the distance from the left- highlighted scale midpoint. Finally, we asked partici-
most point of the scale from which we computed a dif- pants for some basic demographic data, and to make a
ference score relative to the scale midpoint with neg- guess regarding the aim of our research. At the end of
ative values representing values closer to the left and theprocedure,allparticipantswerefullydebriefedand
vice-versa. Next,weadjustedthedirectionalityofthese thankedfortheirparticipation.
values according to the directional in-group norm they
hadbeenpresentedwith. Inresult,positivevaluesindi- Results
catedastrongerpreferenceinthedirectionoftheprevi-
PlannedAnalyses
ouslypresentedin-groupnorm. Notethatthismeasure
couldonlybecomputedforparticipantsinthehighrel- To test whether participants had reflected on high
evance norm condition, i.e., those who had been pre- vs. lowpersonalcontrolasintended,weconducteda2
sentedwithacleardirectionalin-groupnorm. (highcontrolvs. lowcontrol)×2(normrelevancehigh
Additional Measures. With a one item measure vs. low) ANOVA with scores on our corresponding ma-
of identification (Postmes et al., 2013), we assessed nipulationcheckitemasthedependentvariable. Mean
identificationwithallfourgroupsseparatelyon7-point scores in the high control condition (M = 5.26, SD =
scales. Then, with an additional 7-point scale item, we 1.09) were revealed to be higher than mean scores in
asked participants to rate their own knowledge about the low control condition (M = 3.18, SD = 1.52), as
the topic of open data. With one final item, we mea- reflected in a significant main effect of control salience,
sured participants’ political orientation by asking them F(1, 189) = 116.11, p < .001, η2 = .381. The main
p
to put a cross onto a horizontal line with endpoints la- effect of norm relevance and the interaction effect were
beled left at the leftmost end, right at the rightmost not statistically significant; p = 0.854 and p = 0.770,
end and a vertical marking representing the midpoint respectively.
of the scale. We measured the distance in millime- To investigate our main hypothesis of motivated in-
tergroupdistortionafterthreat,weconducteda2×2×
===== PAGE 18/30 =====
18
2mixed-factorialANOVAwiththebetween-subjectsfac- effectsorinteractioneffectsweresignificant.
torscontrolsalienceandnormrelevanceandthewithin- Toinvestigateeffectsonperceivednormstrength,we
subjects factor intergroup contrast. As the two levels conducted a 2 × 2 × 4 mixed-factorial ANOVA with the
of the within-subjects factor, we entered the contrast between-subjects factors control salience and norm rele-
scoreforthein-groupvs. theantagonisticout-groupas vance and the within-subjects factor group. As the four
wellasthecontrastscorebetweenthetwoneutralout- levels of the within-subjects factor, we entered the rat-
groups. The outcome measure was the difference be- ings of the corresponding items measuring perceived
tweentheperceivednormsofthetworespectivegroups. norm strength for each group. The three-way interac-
Neitherasignificantthree-wayinteraction,F(1,177)= tiondidnotreachsignificance, F(3, 531)=0.291, p=
0.04,p=.850,η2 =.000,noratwo-wayinteractionof .832,η2 =.002. Thetwo-way-interactionofthewithin-
p p
the within-subjects factor intergroup contrast with con- subjects factor and norm relevance was significant, F(3,
trolsalience,F(1,177)=1.26,p=.262,η2 =.007,nor 531) = 140.865, p < .001, η2 = .443, indicating that
p p
an overall main effect of control salience, F(1, 177) = participants had adjusted their estimates according to
0.244, p = .622, η2 = .001, or of norm relevance, F(1, the materials they had been presented, i.e., depending
p
177) = 1.52, p = .221, η2 = .008, were present. The onwhichgroupshadbeenportrayedtohavedirectional
p
testhadastatisticalpowerof.05. Asensitivityanalysis norms and which had not. No other main effects or in-
(WebPower; general linear model; α = .05) indicated teractioneffectsweresignificant.
that .80 power requires an effect of at least η2 = .042 To investigate effects on perceived intragroup con-
p
(f = .211). Figure 5A contains a plot of the required sensus, we conducted a 2 × 2 × 4 mixed-factorial
power to detect three-way interaction effects between ANOVA with the between-subjects factors control
η2 =0andη2 =.2givenourdesignandsamplesize. A salienceandnormrelevanceandthewithin-subjectsfac-
p p
significantinteractionofthewithin-subjectsfactorinter- tor group. As the four levels of the within-subjects
group contrast and norm relevance, F(1, 177) = 233.8, factor, we entered the ratings of the corresponding
p < .001, η2 = .569, revealed that greater differences items for each group. The three-way-interaction did
p
betweenthegroupswereperceiveddependingonnorm notreachsignificance,F(3,537)=0.076,p=.973,η2
p
relevance,i.e.,whichwereportrayedtodifferfromeach =.000. Thetwo-way-interactionofthewithin-subjects
other. Themaineffectofthewithin-subjectsfactorinter- factor and norm relevance was significant, F(3, 537) =
group contrast, F(1, 177) = 9.26, p = .003, η2 = .050, 67.89,p<.001,η2 =.275,indicatingthatparticipants
p p
reachedsignificance,indicatingthatonaveragegreater had adjusted their estimates according to the materi-
differences were perceived between the more relevant als they had been presented, i.e., depending on which
groupsthanbetweentheneutralgroups. groups had been portrayed to have directional norms
Weinvestigatedapossiblemoderationeffectbypolit- and which had not. The main effect of norm relevance
icalorientationbyexaminingathree-wayinteractionof was significant, F(1, 179) = 5.694, p = .018, η2 =
p
political orientation and the two between-subjects fac- .031, indicating that participants in the low norm rel-
tors on both levels of the within-subjects factor inter- evance condition had generally rated consensus within
group contrast in a general linear model, but no signif- group preferences to be higher than those in the high
icant three-way interactions emerged (p = .23 for rele- relevance norm condition. No other main effects or in-
vantgroupsandp=.08forirrelevantgroups). teractioneffectsweresignificant.
To investigate effects on the perceived proportion of Welimitedtheanalysesofournormconformitymea-
group members with a clear preference, we conducted sure to the high relevance norm condition, as partic-
a 2 × 2 × 4 mixed-factorial ANOVA with the between- ipants in the low relevance norm condition had not
subjects factors control salience and norm relevance and been presented with a directional in-group preference.
the within-subjects factor group. As the four levels of Hence, we conducted an ANOVA on the appropriate
the within-subjects factor, we entered the percentages sub-sample with the between-subjects factor control
estimated by participants for each group. The three- salience as the sole predictor. Descriptively, means gen-
wayinteractiondidnotreachsignificance,F(3,378)= erally tended in the direction of the group norm on
0.158,p=.924,η2 =.001. Thetwo-way-interactionof both factor levels, however, the directional preference
p
the within-subjects factor and norm relevance was sig- was stronger in the high control condition. The corre-
nificant, F(3, 378) = 121.23, p < .001, η2 = .491, in- sponding main effect of the factor control salience was
p
dicating that participants had adjusted their estimates not significant, F(1, 96) = 1.69, p = .196, η2 = .017.
p
accordingtothematerialstheyhadbeenpresented,i.e., Weinvestigatedapossiblemoderationeffectbypolitical
dependingonwhichgroupshadbeenportrayedtohave orientation by examining a two-way interaction of po-
directional norms and which had not. No other main litical orientation and the between-subjects factor con-
===== PAGE 19/30 =====
19
trolsalienceinagenerallinearmodel,butnosignificant Again, we found no evidence for norm vigilance af-
interactioneffectemerged,p>.05. ter threat. This may have been due to lacking catego-
rization and identification with the in-group employed
ExploratoryAnalyses
in our paradigm and resulting low chances of getting
any group-based effect. Supporting this reading, a de-
Because our measure of identification was positively
scriptive pattern of norm conformity after threat was
correlated with our measure of norm conformity in the
notstatisticallysignificant. Interestingly, wefoundthat
high relevance condition, r = .38, p < .001, we re-
optimistic norms were recalled better than pessimistic
peated the analysis of possible norm conformity effects
norms, although independently from control salience.
within-groupidentificationasthemoderator. However,
In Study 3, we decided to apply the more established
therewasnosignificantinteractioneffect,p>.05.
silence-in the library paradigm for measuring vigilance
Discussion for norms, and extended this design by manipulating
control salience. For the first time, we did find an ef-
In Study 5, we set out to address a possible alterna-
fect involving control salience. However, the pattern
tivemechanismofnormperceptionaftercontrolthreat.
underlyingthiseffectwasonlypartlyinlinewithourex-
We hypothesized that threatened participants would
pectations: Supporting our hypothesis, only those par-
strivetomaximizethestrengthanddistinctivenessofin-
ticipants who were exposed to low (vs. high) control
group norms. However, we did not find effects of con-
saliencewerefasterinaccurateresponsestonormative
trolthreatspecifictoin-groupnormsonanyofourmea-
than non-normative stimuli. However, this effect has
sures. Accordingly, the novel hypothesis was not sup-
previously been demonstrated several times to be the
ported. Duetothisstudybeingthefirsttotestthisspe-
baselinereactionforthispartoftheparadigmandthus,
cifichypothesis,itshouldbenotedthatthisnull-finding
thepresentpatternofaneliminatedeffectundersalient
shouldnotbeoverinterpreted. Notably,wealsodidnot
high control speaks rather for an effect of control ele-
find a tendency of norm conformity after threat in this
vation instead of control threat. Relatedly, high control
Study. Onepossiblereasonforthisnon-replicationofan
participants generally performed better than low con-
established effect may lie in the nature of our measure
trol participants. In the design of Study 4, we explic-
of norm conformity. In line with our hypothesis that
itly investigated two possible boundary conditions pre-
threatenedparticipantswouldstrivetomaximizenorm
viously not addressed in our paradigms: First, we de-
strength, we operationalized norm conformity in terms
cidedtomanipulatetheinclusionofadelaytasktode-
of the strength of people’s own preference in the direc-
terminewhethereffectsonnormvigilancemaybemod-
tion of the presented in-group norm. However, due to
erated by temporal dynamics. Second, we introduced
thelackofanabsolutescaleduringnormpresentation,
thedistinctionbetweenanantagonisticandamoreneu-
thismayhavecreatedtheissuethataproportionofpar-
tral out-group, to rule out the possibility that informa-
ticipantsdidnotconsiderextremepreferenceratingsto
tionaboutout-groupnormsmayalsobecomemorerele-
representnormconformitywiththein-group.
vantafterthreatinordertomaximizedistinctivenessof
group-related behavior. Indeed, we did find that infor-
GeneralDiscussion
mation about the neutral out-group was recalled least
Inaseriesoffourstudies,weinvestigatedthehypoth- accurately, whileaccuracyforthein-groupandantago-
esis that threat to personal control facilitates a vigilant nistic out-group was quite similar to each other. How-
state specifically for information about relevant social ever, regardless of the presence of a delay task, we did
norms. In Study 1, we tested our norm vigilance hy- notfindaninteractionpatternresemblingspecificnorm
pothesisbyinvestigatinghowmanyacceptableandun- vigilanceafterthreat. However, wedidfindaninterac-
acceptablebehaviorsattributedtodifferentgroupspar- tion of delay and control salience, indicating a pattern
ticipants could correctly recall, and whether there was of unspecific vigilance for the norms of all groups af-
a specific advantage for in-group norm for participants ter threat when no delay was present. Once more, we
in the low control condition. We were unable to detect didnotfindthatcontrolsalienceinfluencedconformity
such a pattern, possibly due to the non-sufficient dif- with in-group norms. Study 5 was a modified version
ficulty of the recall measure developed specifically for of Study 4, in which we adjusted the paradigm to test
thisstudy. InStudy2,wemodifiedtheexistingfootball- analteredhypothesisofmotivatedintergroupdistortion
bettingoddsparadigminwhicheffectsofthreatoncon- insteadofaccuracyfornormsaftercontrolthreat. How-
formitywithsalientnormshadpreviouslybeendemon- ever,wefoundnoindicationofthisdistortionoccurring
strated, and extended the paradigm by adding a mea- fornormativeinformationonseveralmeasures. Amore
sure of recall accuracy for the normative information. general possible explanation of lacking control salience
===== PAGE 20/30 =====
20
effectsonnormrecallandpersonalpreferencesinboth precision across four studies) and consistently failed to
Study 4 and Study 5 might lie in the nature of the find convincing evidence for it. Plausible explanations
groups we used. Left-wing and right-wing people dif- fornull-findings,suchasboundaryconditionsthatmay
fer on various prominent normative features (e.g., atti- not have been met, can almost always be found post
tudestowardsimmigration,nationalidentity,etc.) that hoc. Accordingly, we cannot rule out that norm vigi-
should have been highly salient for participants. Thus, lancedoesexistoroccursonlyunderspecificconditions.
perhaps, the left-leaning participants of this study did It is possible that vigilance for normative information
not need intergroup differentiation on open data poli- does occur after threat, but that it does not manifest in
ciestodeterminewhattheimportant,orcentral,norms terms of improved recall accuracy or improved perfor-
oftheirleft-wingin-groupidentitywere. mance in a lexical decision task. Moreover, some true
effectsmaybesosmallthatourstudieswereunableto
TheAbsenceofNormConformity detect them due to insufficient statistical power. After
fourstudiesfocusingonprecisionandaccuracy,ourini-
The bulk of our studies focused on identifying vigi-
tialhypothesisbegantoseemunlikelyandwearrivedat
lant reactions to threat specific to in-group norms, in-
the conclusion that the accumulated null-findings had
stead of the full process of how this mechanism may
rendered it too implausible to justify further empirical
then relate to norm conformity reactions in terms of
investigationwithoutmodifyingourunderlyingtheoret-
mediation. However, we specifically set out to inves-
ical assumptions. It should be noted that this decision
tigatenormvigilanceasaphenomenonoccurringinsit-
wasnotmerelypragmaticanddatadriven,butalsoac-
uationswherecontrolthreatelicitsnormconformity. In
companied and influenced by ongoing internal debate
those studies where we did include some operational-
aboutpossibleflawsinourtheoreticalreasoning.
ization of norm conformity, we did not find effects of
control salience on them. This was surprising, as norm
Motivated Intergroup Distortion as an Alternative
conformity reactions after threat, and also specifically
Mechanism
after control threat, have been previously observed nu-
merous times (e.g., Stollberg et al., 2017). Notably, Accuracy and precision may not be the only plausi-
however, reported effect sizes for these norm confor- ble manifestations of a vigilant state specific to group
mity effects were typically rather small and designing norms. Thus, in our final study, we adjusted our hy-
studies specifically for conceptual replication would re- pothesis away from the notion of enhanced accuracy
quire large sample sizes to achieve appropriate statisti- specific to information about relevant norms to investi-
cal power. Although known boundary conditions and gate the alternative possibility of motivated intergroup
potential moderators of norm conformity were consid- distortion of such information. Perceiving strong and
ered while designing our experiments, we did not fo- distinctin-groupnormsmayrepresentamorelikelyand
cusonthesedownstreameffectswhiledesigningthem. powerful strategy to think and act in accordance with
Thisiswhynormconformitywasalwaysmeasuredafter a salient in-group identity when perceptions of control
participants had been exposed to the recall tasks and arethreatened. Foramechanismlikethis,whereavail-
norm estimations. This may have primed an analyti- able information about in-group norms is exaggerated
calmindset. Assymbolicthreatdefenses,suchasnorm to enable a more efficient group-based reaction, accu-
conformity, can be assumed to occur under conditions racy may only be of secondary importance or largely
of experiential thinking (Simon et al., 1997), this may irrelevant. However, theresultsofStudy5didnotpro-
havepreventedtheseeffectstooccur. Atthesametime, vide support for this alternative account. It should be
the norm estimation tasks may have primed a personal noted that in recent work by Potoczek et al. (2018),
assessment of norm prevalence that may have counter- effects of control threat on the exaggerated perception
acted,andthusattenuated,theexperimentalnormma- of in-group norms did emerge. In their experiment,
nipulation. Thesecircumstancesshouldbekeptinmind threatened participants (vs. high control participants)
whenconsideringtheimplicationsofour(null)findings showedanincreasedtendencytoclassifynormativein-
on norm perception after threat and the failure to con- formation, which they had never seen before, as pre-
ceptuallyreplicatetheeffectshouldbeinterpretedcau- viously presented norms of a potential in-group. This
tiously. findings points towards a similar mechanism to what
we proposed: A tendency to distort reality in order to
EvaluatingtheNormVigilanceHypothesis perceive group norms after threat. Similarly, unpub-
lishedworkbyCzepluchetal. (2018)demonstratesthat
Across five studies, we directly tested the norm vig-
threat, in this case mortality salience threat, may lead
ilance hypothesis with varying operationalizations (al-
to enhanced social projection, i.e., ambiguous norms
thoughwithaconsistentlystrongfocusonaccuracyand
===== PAGE 21/30 =====
21
being recalled as more pronounced in the direction of https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4313-0596, Immo
participants’ own preference. Similarly, Fritsche et al. Fritsche: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-6022-8021
(2008; Study 1) found that estimates of in-group so-
cial consensus were elevated after death-related threat ConflictofInterestandFunding
to control. Accordingly, this hypothesis of motivated
Theauthorshavedeclarednoconflictofinterest.
intergroup distortion of information about norms after
The reported research and preparation of this paper
threat may not be disqualified by a single null-finding,
was supported by a grant from the German Research
although little published research on the phenomenon
Foundation(DFG;FR20678-1&JU29024-1).
existsatthispointintime.
AuthorContributions
TheRoleofPre-ExistingAssumptionsAboutNorms
FelixCzepluch: Conceptualization,Methodology,In-
Inmostinstanceswheregroupsmayprovideamean-
vestigation, Data Curation, Formal Analysis, Writing–
ingful social identity, it could be assumed that people
Original Draft, Visualization, Project Administration.
who identify with those groups are not naive to what
Philipp Jugert: Conceptualization, Funding Acquisi-
constitutes appropriate behavior as a group member.
tion, Supervision, Writing– Review & Editing. Immo
Accordingly,weshouldassumethatpeoplewilloften,if
Fritsche: Conceptualization, Funding Acquisition, Su-
not most times, operate with existing and more or less
pervision,Writing–Review&Editing.
malleable assumptions, or personal hypotheses, about
Authororderreflectsrelativecontribution.
thenormsof relevantin-groups. Thisconstitutesama-
jorlimitationofournormvigilancehypothesisandmay
OpenSciencePractices
be crucial for identifying phenomena related to norm
vigilance. This issue was also reflected in one of the
mainpracticalchallengeswefacedwhiledesigningour
studies: How can a meaningful but not trivial social
norm of a meaningful in-group be convincingly por-
This article earned the Preregistration, Open Data,
trayed and manipulated experimentally? Indeed, this
Open Materials, and Open Code badge for preregister-
caveatrepresentsbothapracticalproblemforconstruct-
ing the hypothesis and analysis before data collection,
ing appropriate experimental paradigms, and a basic
and for making the data, materials, and code openly
theoreticalone: Ifsituationswherepeoplehavenoprior
available. It has been verified that the analysis repro-
expectations about important social norms are difficult
ducedtheresultspresentedinthearticle. Theentireed-
tocreate,whyshouldvigilanceplayanimportantrolein
itorialprocess,includingtheopenreviews,ispublished
explaining real-world normative behavior? Even if the
intheonlinesupplement.
proposed process existed, and we simply failed to find
evidenceforitforonereasonoranother,theecological
References
validity of the process should prove to be rather small.
Hence, we would now argue that a more viable strat- Aarts, H., & Dijksterhuis, A. (2003). The silence of the
egy to explore the process underlying the relationship library:Environment,situationalnorm,andso-
between control threat and norm conformity, should cial behavior. Journal of Personality and Social
be the deliberate investigation of situations where peo- Psychology, 84(1), 18–28. https://doi.org/10.
ple do have prior assumptions about appropriate social 1037/0022-3514.84.1.18
behavior. This would shift the focus away from mere Barth, M., Masson, T., Fritsche, I., & Ziemer, C.-T.
search for previously unknown information, possibly a (2018). Closing ranks: Ingroup norm confor-
largelyartificialsetting,towardsabetterunderstanding mityasasubtleresponsetothreateningclimate
of how available normative information is handled in change. Group Processes Intergroup Relations,
more realistic settings where pre-existing ideas about 21(3), 497–512. https://doi.org/10.1177/
what constitutes appropriate behavior may play an im- 1368430217733119
portantrole. Berkowitz, L., & Lepage, A. (1967). Weapons as
aggression-elicitingstimuli.JournalofPersonal-
AuthorContact ity and Social Psychology, 7(2, Pt.1), 202–207.
https://doi.org/10.1037/h0025008
Correspondence should be addressed to Felix
Czepluchviafelix.czepluch@uni-leipzig.de.
ORCiD: Felix Czepluch: https://orcid.org/0000-
0003-4199-9773, Philipp Jugert:
===== PAGE 22/30 =====
22
Bock, J.-J. (2018). Polarisation, and minority engage- of Social Psychology, 42(7), 824–831. https://
ment in germany’s refugee crisis. International doi.org/10.1002/ejsp.1887
Journal of Politics, Culture, and Society, 31(4), Fritsche, I., Jonas, E., Ablasser, C., Beyer, M., Kuban,
375–396. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10767- J., Manger, A.-M., & Schultz, M. (2013). The
018-9288-8 power of we: Evidence for group-based con-
Burger,J.,&Cooper,H.(1979).Thedesirabilityofcon- trol. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology,
trol. Motivation and Emotion, 3(4), 381–393. 49(1), 19–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jesp.
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF0099405 2012.07.014
Burke, B., Martens, A., & Faucher, E. (2010). Two Fritsche, I., Jonas, E., & Fankhänel, T. (2008). The role
decadesofterrormanagementtheory:Ameta- of control motivation in mortality salience ef-
analysis of mortality salience research. Per- fects on ingroup support and defense. Jour-
sonality and social psychology review, 14(2), nal of Personality and Social Psychology, 95(3),
155–195. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 524–541.https://doi.org/10.1037/a0012666
108886830935232 Fritsche,I.,Jonas,E.,Kayser,D.,&Koranyi,N.(2010).
Chatard,A.,Hirschberger,G.,&Pyszczynski,T.(2020). Existential threat and compliance with pro-
Awordofcautionaboutmanylabs4:Ifyoufail environmentalnorms.JournalofEnvironmental
to follow your preregistered plan, you may fail Psychology, 30(1), 67–79. https://doi.org/10.
tofindarealeffect.https://doi.org/10.31234/ 1016/j.jenvp.2009.08.007
osf.io/ejubn Fritsche, I., & Jugert, P. (2017). The consequences of
Cialdini, R., Kallgren, C., & Reno, R. (1991). A focus economic threat for motivated social cognition
theory of normative conduct: A theoretical re- and action. Current Opinion in Psychology, 18,
finementandreevaluationoftheroleofnorms 31–36. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.copsyc.
inhumanbehavior.InM.Zanna(Ed.),Advances 2017.07.027
in experimental social psychology. advances in Gailliot, M., Stillman, T., Schmeichel, B., Maner, J., &
experimental social psychology (pp. 201–234, Plant, E. (2008). Mortality salience increases
Vol. 24). Academic Press. https://doi.org/10. adherence to salient norms and values. Per-
1016/S0065-2601(08)60330-5 sonality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 34(7),
Cox, C., Cooper, D., Vess, M., Arndt, J., Goldenberg, 993–1003. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 /
J., & Routledge, C. (2009). Bronze is beauti- 0146167208316791
ful but pale can be pretty: The effects of ap- Gardner, W., Pickett, C., & Brewer, M. (2000). So-
pearance standards and mortality salience on cial exclusion and selective memory: How the
sun-tanningoutcomes.HealthPsychology:Offi- need to belong influences memory for social
cialJournaloftheDivisionofHealthPsychology, events. Personality and Social Psychology Bul-
AmericanPsychologicalAssociation,28(6),746– letin, 26(4), 486–496. https://doi.org/10.
752.https://doi.org/10.1037/a0016388 1177/0146167200266007
Crombez, G., Eccleston, C., De, V., Van, D., & De, C. Gelfand,M.,Raver,J.,Nishii,L.,Leslie,L.,Lun,J.,Lim,
(2008). Is it better to have controlled and lost B.,Duan,L.,Almaliach,A.,Ang,S.,Arnadottir,
thannevertohavecontrolledatall?anexperi- J., Aycan, Z., Boehnke, K., Boski, P., Cabecin-
mentalinvestigationofcontroloverpain.Pain, has,R.,Chan,D.,Chhokar,J.,D’Amato,A.,Fer-
137(3). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pain.2007. rer,M.,Fischlmayr,I.,&Yamaguchi,S.(2011).
10.028 Differences between tight and loose cultures:
Czepluch,F.,Masson,T.,&Jugert,P.(2018).Psycholog- A 33-nation study. Science, 332(6033), 1100–
ical threat increases social projection (Talk). 51. 1104. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.
Kongress der Deutschen Gesellschaft für Psy- 1197754
chologie,FrankfurtamMain,Germany. Giannakakis,A.,&Fritsche,I.(2011).Socialidentities,
Eriksson, K., Strimling, P., & Coultas, J. (2015). Bidi- groupnorms,andthreat:Onthemalleabilityof
rectional associations between descriptive and ingroup bias. Personality and Social Psychology
injunctive norms. Organizational Behavior and Bulletin,37(1),82–93.
Human Decision Processes, 129, 59–69. https: Gray, J., & McNaughton, N. (2003). The neuropsychol-
//doi.org/10.1016/j.obhdp.2014.09.011 ogyofanxiety.OxfordUniversityPress.https://
Fennis, B., & Aarts, H. (2012). Revisiting the agentic doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780198522713.
shift:Weakeningpersonalcontrolincreasessus- 001.0001
ceptibilitytosocialinfluence.EuropeanJournal
===== PAGE 23/30 =====
23
Greenaway, K., Haslam, S., Cruwys, T., Branscombe, and Social Psychology, 101(3), 451–466. https:
N., Ysseldyk, R., & Heldreth, C. (2015). From //doi.org/10.1037/a0024033
“we” to “me”: Group identification enhances Jacobi,C.,Brand-Jacobi,J.,Westenhöfer,J.,&Weddige-
perceived personal control with consequences Diedrichs, A. (1986). Zur erfassung von selb-
for health and well-being. Journal of Personal- stkontrolle. entwicklung einer deutschsprachi-
ityandSocialPsychology,109(1),53–74.https: gen form des self-control-schedule und der de-
//doi.org/10.1037/pspi0000019 sirability of control scale. Diagnostica, 32(3),
Greenberg, J., Pyszczynski, T., & Solomon, S. (1986). 229–247.
The causes and consequences of a need for Jarvis, B. G. (2016). MediaLab & DirectRT (Computer
self-esteem: A terror management theory. In software; Version 2016.1.108). Empirisoft Cor-
R. Baumeister (Ed.), Public self and private self poration. New York, NY. https : / / www.
(pp.189–212).SpringerNewYork.https://doi. empirisoft.com/
org/10.1007/978-1-4613-9564-5_10 Jonas,E.,&Fritsche,I.(2012).Followthenorm!Social
Grühn, D., Kotter-Grühn, D., & Röcke, C. (2010). Dis- Psychology, 43(1), 28–32. https://doi.org/10.
creteaffectsacrosstheadultlifespan:Evidence 1027/1864-9335/a000077
formultidimensionalityandmultidirectionality Jonas, E., Martens, A., Kayser, D., Fritsche, I., Sullivan,
of affective experiences in young, middle-aged D.,&Greenberg,J.(2008).Focustheoryofnor-
andolder adults.Journal ofResearchin Person- mativeconductandterror-managementtheory:
ality, 44(4), 492–500. https://doi.org/10. Theinteractiveimpactofmortalitysalienceand
1016/j.jrp.2010.06.003 norm salience on social judgment. Journal of
Guinote, A. (2007). Power and goal pursuit. Per- PersonalityandSocialPsychology,95(6),1239–
sonality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 33(8), 1251.https://doi.org/10.1037/a0013593
1076–1087. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / Jonas,E.,McGregor,I.,Klackl,J.,Agroskin,D.,Fritsche,
0146167207301011 I., Holbrook, C., Nash, K., Proulx, T., & Quirin,
Heister,J.,Würzner,K.-M.,Bubenzer,J.,Pohl,E.,Han- M. (2014). Chapter four - threat and defense:
neforth, T., Geyken, A., & Kliegl, R. (2011). From anxiety to approach. In J. Olson & M.
Dlexdb – eine lexikalische datenbank für die Zanna (Eds.), Advances in experimental social
psychologische und linguistische forschung. psychology (pp. 219–286, Vol. 49). Academic
Psychologische Rundschau, 62(1), 10–20. https: Press. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-
//doi.org/10.1026/0033-3042/a000029 800052-6.00004-4
Hellmann, D., Dickel, N., Bohner, G., & Erb, H.-P. Jonas,E.,Sullivan,D.,&Greenberg,J.(2013).Generos-
(2017). Mind over matter: Target states, not ity, greed, norms, and death – differential ef-
stimuluscharacteristics,determineinformation fects of mortality salience on charitable behav-
processing in minority influence. In S. Papas- ior. Journal of Economic Psychology, 35, 47–57.
tamou, A. Gardikiotis, & G. Prodromitis (Eds.), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joep.2012.12.005
Currentissuesinsocialpsychology.majorityand Kallgren,C.,Reno,R.,&Cialdini,R.(2000).Afocusthe-
minority influence: Societal meaning and cogni- oryofnormativeconduct:Whennormsdoand
tive elaboration (pp. 137–157). Routledge, an do not affect behavior. Personality and Social
imprintoftheTaylor FrancisGroup. Psychology Bulletin, 26(8), 1002–1012. https:
Hogg,M.(2010).Influenceandleadership.InS.Fiske, //doi.org/10.1177/01461672002610009
D. Gilbert, & G. Lindzey (Eds.), Handbook of Kay, A., Gaucher, D., Napier, J., Callan, M., & Laurin,
social psychology (pp. 1166–1207). John Wi- K. (2008). God and the government: Testing a
ley Sons, Inc. https://doi.org/10.1002/ compensatory control mechanism for the sup-
9780470561119.socpsy002031 port of external systems. Journal of Personality
Hogg, M., & Adelman, J. (2013). Uncertainty-identity and Social Psychology, 95(1), 18–35. https://
theory: Extreme groups, radical behavior, and doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.95.1.18
authoritarian leadership. Journal of Social Is- Keuleers,E.,&Brysbaert,M.(2010).Wuggy:Amultilin-
sues, 69(3), 436–454. https://doi.org/10. gual pseudoword generator. Behavior Research
1111/josi.12023 Methods, 42(3), 627–633. https://doi.org/10.
Holbrook, C., Sousa, P., & Hahn-Holbrook, J. (2011). 3758/BRM.42.3.627
Unconscious vigilance: Worldview defense Klein, R., Cook, C., Ebersole, C., Vitiello, C., Nosek, B.,
withoutadaptationsforterror,coalition,orun- Chartier, C., & Ratliff, K. (2019). Many labs
certainty management. Journal of Personality 4: Failure to replicate mortality salience effect
===== PAGE 24/30 =====
24
with and without original author involvement. Anextensionofterrormanagementtheory.Psy-
https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/vef2c chologicalReview,106,835–845.
Koranyi, N., Schreckenbach, F., & Rothermund, K. Reno, R., Cialdini, R., & Kallgren, C. (1993). The
(2015).Theimplicitcognitionoflying:Knowl- transsituationalinfluenceofsocialnorms.Jour-
edgeabouthavingliedtoaquestionisretrieved nal of Personality and Social Psychology, 64(1),
automatically. Social Cognition, 33(1), 67–84. 104–112. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-
https://doi.org/10.1521/soco.2015.33.1.67 3514.64.1.104
Lammers, J., Dubois, D., Rucker, D., & Galinsky, A. Rosenblatt, A., Greenberg, J., Solomon, S., Pyszczyn-
(2017). Ease of retrieval moderates the effects ski, T., & Lyon, D. (1989). Evidence for terror
of power: Implications for the replicability of management theory: I. the effects of mortal-
powerrecalleffects.SocialCognition,35(1),1– ity salience on reactions to those who violate
17.https://doi.org/10.1521/soco.2017.35.1.1 orupholdculturalvalues.JournalofPersonality
McGregor, I., Nash, K., Mann, N., & Phills, C. (2010). and Social Psychology, 57(4), 681–690. https:
Anxiousuncertaintyandreactiveapproachmo- //doi.org/10.1037//0022-3514.57.4.681
tivation (ram. Journal of Personality and Social Rothschild, Z., Abdollahi, A., & Pyszczynski, T. (2009).
Psychology, 99(1), 133–147. https://doi.org/ Does peace have a prayer? the effect of mor-
10.1037/a0019701 tality salience, compassionate values, and reli-
McGregor,I.,Nash,K.,&Prentice,M.(2010).Reactive gious fundamentalism on hostility toward out-
approach motivation (ram) for religion. Jour- groups. Journal of Experimental Social Psychol-
nal of Personality and Social Psychology, 99(1), ogy,45(4),816–827.https://doi.org/10.1016/
148–161.https://doi.org/10.1037/a0019702 j.jesp.2009.05.016
Pittman, T., & D’Agostino, P. (1989). Motivation and Routledge, C., Arndt, J., & Goldenberg, J. (2004). A
cognition: Control deprivation and the nature timetotan:Proximalanddistaleffectsofmor-
of subsequent information processing. Journal tality salience on sun exposure intentions. Per-
of Experimental Social Psychology, 25(6), 465– sonality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 30(10),
480. https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-1031(89) 1347–1358. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 /
90001-2 0146167204264056
Postmes,T.,Haslam,S.,&Jans,L.(2013).Asingle-item Schindler, S., Hilgard, J., Fritsche, I., Burke, B., &
measure of social identification: Reliability, va- Pfattheicher,S.(2023).Dosalientsocialnorms
lidity, and utility. The British Journal of Social moderate mortality salience effects? a (chal-
Psychology, 52(4), 597–617. https://doi.org/ lenging) meta-analysis of terror management
10.1111/bjso.12006 studies. Personality and social psychology re-
Potoczek, A., Bukowski, M., Ja´sko, K., & Jamróz, K. view : an official journal of the Society for
(2018). Influence of threat to personal control Personality and Social Psychology, Inc, 27(2),
onnorminterest,detection,andfollowing:So- 195–225. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 /
cial and cognitive underpinnings. Talk given at 10888683221107267
20th European Social Cognition Network (ES- Schindler, S., Reinhardt, N., & Reinhard, M.-A. (2021).
CON)TransferofKnowledgeConference. Defending one’s worldview under mortality
Proulx, T., & Heine, S. (2008). The case of the salience: Testing the validity of an established
transmogrifyingexperimenter:Affirmationofa idea.JournalofExperimentalSocialPsychology,
moral schema following implicit change detec- 93, 104087. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jesp.
tion.PsychologicalScience,19(12),1294–1300. 2020.104087
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9280.2008. Schumann, K., McGregor, I., Nash, K., & Ross, M.
02238.x (2014). Religious magnanimity: Reminding
Proulx,T.,&Heine,S.(2009).Connectionsfromkafka: people of their religious belief system reduces
Exposure to meaning threats improves implicit hostility after threat. Journal of Personality and
learning of an artificial grammar. Psychological Social Psychology, 107(3), 432–453. https://
Science,20(9),1125–1131.https://doi.org/10. doi.org/10.1037/a0036739
1111/j.1467-9280.2009.02414.x Sedek, G., Kofta, M., & Tyszka, T. (1993). Effects of
Pyszczynski, T., Greenberg, J., & Solomon, S. (1999). uncontrollability on subsequent decision mak-
A dual-process model of defense against con- ing: Testing the cognitive exhaustion hypothe-
sciousandunconsciousdeath-relatedthoughts: sis.JournalofPersonalityandSocialPsychology,
===== PAGE 25/30 =====
25
65(6), 1270–1281. https://doi.org/10.1037/
/0022-3514.65.6.1270
Simon, L., Greenberg, J., Harmon-Jones, E., Solomon,
S., Pyszczynski, T., Arndt, J., & Abend, T.
(1997). Terror management and cognitive-
experiential self-theory: Evidence that terror
managementoccursintheexperientialsystem.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
72(5), 1132–1146. https://doi.org/10.1037/
0022-3514.72.5.1132
Stollberg, J., Fritsche, I., & Bäcker, A. (2015). Striving
for group agency: Threat to personal control
increases the attractiveness of agentic groups.
FrontiersinPsychology,6,649.https://doi.org/
10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00649
Stollberg,J.,Fritsche,I.,&Jonas,E.(2017).Thegroupy
shift: Conformity to liberal in-group norms
as a group-based response to threatened per-
sonalcontrol.SocialCognition,35(4),374–394.
https://doi.org/10.1521/soco.2017.35.4.374
Turner,J.,Hogg,M.,Oakes,P.,Reicher,S.,&Wetherell,
M.(1987).Rediscoveringthesocialgroup:Aself-
categorizationtheory.BasilBlackwell.
Watson, D., & Clark, L. (1999). The panas-x. https://
doi.org/10.17077/48vt-m4t2
Whitson, J., & Galinsky, A. (2008). Lacking control
increases illusory pattern perception. Science,
322(5898), 115–117. https://doi.org/10.
1126/science.1159845
===== PAGE 26/30 =====
26
Appendix
PowerAnalysesforAllStudies
FigureA1
Plot of the estimated required power to detect a within-between interaction effect of the factors control salience and
surveyedgrouponrecallaccuracybetweenη2 =0andη2 =.20giventhedesignandsamplesizeofStudy1. Thefilled
p p
circlerepresentstheeffectsizeη2 andpowerobtainedfromoursample. Theunfilledcirclerepresentstheestimatedeffect
p
sizerequiredtoobtainapowerof.80.
0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20
0.1
8.0
6.0
4.0
2.0
Effect size h 2
p
)borp
rre
b
-1(
rewoP
===== PAGE 27/30 =====
27
FigureA2
Plotoftheestimatedrequiredpowertodetectaninteractioneffectofthefactorscontrolsalienceandnormtypeonrecall
accuracy as well as on optimism between η2 = 0 and η2 = .20 given the design and sample size of Study 2. The filled
p p
circle represents the values obtained for recall accuracy obtained from our sample. The triangle represents the values
obtained for norm conformity in terms of optimism. The unfilled circle represents the estimated effect size required to
obtainapowerof.80.
0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20
0.1
8.0
6.0
4.0
2.0
Effect size h 2
p
)borp
rre
b
-1(
rewoP
===== PAGE 28/30 =====
28
FigureA3
Plot of the estimated required power to detect within-between interaction effects on IES between η2 = 0 and η2 = .20
p p
given our design and sample size in Study 3. The filled circle represents the effect size and power obtained from our
sample. Theunfilledcirclerepresentstheestimatedeffectsizerequiredtoobtainapowerof.80.
0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20
0.1
8.0
6.0
4.0
2.0
Effect size h 2
p
)borp
rre
b
-1(
rewoP
===== PAGE 29/30 =====
29
FigureA4
Plot of the estimated required power to detect three-way interaction effects between η2 = 0 and η2 = .20 given the
p p
degrees of freedom in Study 4. The filled circle represents the effect size and power obtained for the measure estimate
accuracy. Theunfilledtrianglerepresentstheeffectsizeandpowerobtainedforthemeasurerecallaccuracy. Theunfilled
circlerepresentstheestimatedeffectsizerequiredtoobtainapowerof.80.
0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20
0.1
8.0
6.0
4.0
2.0
Effect size h 2
p
)borp
rre
b
-1(
rewoP
===== PAGE 30/30 =====
30
FigureA5
Plot of the estimated required power to detect a three-way interaction effect between ²p = 0 and ²p = .20 given the
degrees of freedom in Study 5. The filled circle represents the effect size and power obtained from our sample. The
unfilledcirclerepresentstheestimatedeffectsizerequiredtoobtainapowerof.80.
0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20
0.1
8.0
6.0
4.0
2.0
Effect size h 2
p
)borp
rre
b
-1(
rewoP