
===== PAGE 1/12 =====
Opendata:NotApplicable Editedby:RickardCarlsson
Meta-Psychology,2026,vol10,MP.2023.3963 Openmaterials:NotApplicable Reviewedby:RebeccaWillén,MichaelHöfler
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2023.3963 Openandreproducibleanalysis:NotApplicable Analysisreproducedby:NotApplicable
Articletype:Tutorial Openreviewsandeditorialprocess:Yes AllsupplementaryfilescanbeaccessedatOSF:
PublishedundertheCC-BY4.0license Preregistration:No https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/7EK4A
The Open Empirical Cycle for Hypothesis Evaluation in Psychology
Herbert Hoijtink1, Jonathan de Bruin1, Sascha Duken1, Jacques Flores1, Willem E.
Frankenhuis2, and Caspar J. Van Lissa3
1UtrechtUniversity
2UtrechtUniversity/UniversityofAmsterdam
3TilburgUniversity
In the last decade it has become clear that replicability of empirical psychological re-
search should be better. Open science practices aim to enhance the transparency and
accessibilityofresearchtherebybothenablingotherstoreproducetheresultspresented
inapaperandincreasingthereplicabilityoftheseresults. Examplesofthesepractices
includepreregistration,publicationofdataandanalyses,openaccesspublications,and
replication research. Although open science practices are gaining traction, they have
rarelybeenplacedinabroaderepistemologicalcontext. Toaddressthisshortcoming,
thispaperintroducestheopenempiricalcycle. ItdrawsuponDeGroot’sempiricalcy-
cle,amodelofcumulativeknowledgegenerationviascientificresearchandaddsopen
sciencepractices. Adheringtotheopenempiricalcycle,ifonlypartly,willstructurethe
scientific workflow and create awareness of the adverse consequences of deviations.
Followingtheopenempiricalcycleincreasesthetransparency,quality,trustworthiness,
andreplicabilityofresearch.
Keywords: EmpiricalCycle,FAIRData,OpenAccess,Preregistration,Replication
Research
Introduction cuted before the data are collected. The last two steps
arepost-hocandconcerntheexecutionoftheplansfor-
This paper introduces the open empirical cycle, in
mulatedinthefirstthreesteps.
which open science practices are integrated in the em-
In several fields of science the replicability of pub-
pirical cycle of de Groot (1961). De Groot’s empirical
lished research is rather poor (e.g., see reproducibil-
cycle is a model of cumulative knowledge acquisition
ity project psychology1, Open Science Collaboration,
through scientific research. It consists of a repeating
2012,2015,andreproducibilityprojectcancerresearch,
sequenceoffivesteps: observationofphenomenatobe
Errington, Mathur, et al., 2021). The empirical cycle
explained; induction of an explanatory theory; deduc-
can help to diagnose the current meta-scientific repli-
tion of testable predictions, that is, in this paper, hy-
cation crises in these fields. As was already alluded to
potheses deduced from a theory; testing these predic-
byDeGroot(see, deGrootetal., 2014, Annotationsto
tions in empirical data; and evaluation, that is, reflect-
Section 1), deviations from the cyclical process of the
ingbackonthetheorybasedontheresultsofthestudy
empirical cycle risk introducing questionable research
thathasbeenexecuted. AsishighlightedinFigure1,De
practices (QRPs, Wicherts et al., 2016). QRPs increase
Groot’scyclebecomesopenbyintegratingtheopensci-
the probability of false positive results, thereby under-
ence practices replication, preregistration or registered
mining replicability. One example of deviation from
reports, FAIR data and analyses, and open access pub-
the empirical cycle is moving backwards from testing
lication. As will be elaborated in this paper, an impor-
in the fourth step to deduction in the third step. This
tant feature of the open empirical cycle is that, in the
introduces the QRP known as "hypothesizing after the
firstthreesteps,researchquestionsareformulated,data
results are known". This happens, for example, when
collectionandanalysesplansaredetermined,andpub-
researchersanalyzedatawithoutanexplicithypothesis
lished in the form of a preregistration or a registered
(for example by adding or removing covariates) until
report. These steps can be called pre-hoc, that is, exe-
theyfindaninteresting(orsignificant)effect,andthen
write a paper that presents this effect as if it were a
test of an a-priori specified hypothesis. Another devi-
WearegratefultoLoekBrinkmanforprovidingreferences
topapersandmaterialsandgivingfeedbackonthispaper.
1https://osf.io/ezcuj/
===== PAGE 2/12 =====
2
ation is moving backwards from testing in the fourth Theopenempiricalcycle
steptoinductioninthesecondstep. Forexample,after
Step1: Observationofphenomenatobeexplained,
observing that a scale score only rendered insignificant
thatis,preparetheresearchproject
results,researchersmayspeculatethatsubscalesofthe
total scale will show the expected effect. These phe- In this step any of a number of activities can be ex-
nomenawerealreadydescribedbyIoannides(2005)in ecuted: reconsideration of previous research results;
his seminal paper "Why most published research find- studying and summarizing existing literature address-
ings are wrong", and can be framed in the context of ingtheresearchareaofinterest;(re)analysisofexisting
the(open)empiricalcycle(Wagenmakersetal.,2018). data; evaluation and (re)formulation of theories; and
Thesedeviationsmayoccurbecauseresearchersareun- naturalisticobservations. Theresultingsummaryofthe
aware of the consequences, adhere to the research cul- stateofaffairsintheresearchareaofinterestcansubse-
ture in their group, or because of opportunistic behav- quentlybeaugmentedwiththeresearcher’sobservation
ior. Itisourhopethatincreasedawarenessoftheopen ofgapsintheliterature,additionalvariablesthatshould
empirical cycle will help researchers avoid deviations, be considered, or questions with respect to the validity
oratleastnoticeanddisclosenecessarydeviations. Do- orgeneralizabilityofresearchoutcomes.
ingsowillhelptoavoidQRPs,therebymakingresearch It is tempting to keep a mental record of the sum-
lesserrorproneandthusincreasingitsqualityandrepli- mary and to move on to the next step. However, actu-
cability(Gopalakrishnaetal.,2021;Makeletal.,2021; allywritinguptheliteraturereviewandtheorysections
Xieetal.,2021). oftheenvisagedpaperandcreatingareferencelistwill
What furthermore became clear from the repro- enforceclarityandwillbeveryusefulwhenregistering
ducibility projects psychology and cancer research is the research plans in Step 3. One of the outcomes of
that a lack of transparency by the authors of the orig- thisstepareverbaldescriptionsofthevariablesthatare
inal studies often makes it difficult to impossible to de- relevant to explore the research area of interest. An-
sign and execute replication studies (Errington, Denis, other outcome are the research questions, expressed in
et al., 2021). It may, for example, be that the data terms of the relevant variables, accompanied by an ar-
fromtheoriginalstudyareunavailableorinsufficiently gumentwhyitaddstothecurrentknowledge,andwill
documented, that analysis codes are lacking, that de- beimpactfulandrelevant.
scriptives,effectsizes,and/orp-valuesarenotreported, At least three different situations can be distin-
or that information about experimental setup, coding guished. First and rather common, is the study of re-
schemes or questionnaires is lacking. While de Groot’s search questions using existing knowledge as the point
empirical cycle does provide an epistemological basis ofdeparture. Thesestudieshaveaconfirmatorynature,
forresearch,itdoesnotaddressthetransparencyofre- to formulate it in the Groot’s terms: the "observations"
search. Transparency is addressed by integrating open collectedinthisstepleadto"induced"expectationsand
sciencepracticessuchasreplicationstudies,preregistra- theoriesinStep2,fromwhichinStep3testableconse-
tion or registered reports, FAIR data and analyses, and quences will be "deduced". Second and gaining impor-
open access publications into de Groot’s empirical cy- tanceistheexecutionofareplicationstudy(Nosekand
cle. Public distrust in science (van den Broek-Honingh Errington, 2020) in order to verify the outcomes of an
and de Jonge, 2018) can be alleviated by increasing earlier "original" study. Replications can be direct, that
transparency (Rathenau Instituut, 2021). Distrust in is,copyingtheoriginalstudyascloselyaspossible. The
science may cause significant harm to individuals and goal can be to determine whether two studies agree or
societies when scientific evidence is neglected. For ex- are in conflict with each other, or, to meta-analytically
ample, politicians and policy makers may not receive summarizetheresultsofthetwostudiesintooneover-
thesupportforstrategiesthatcouldclearlymitigatecli- all conclusion. Direct replications can be extended by
mate change, and individuals may choose not to use addinganewfeature,e.g.,byconsideringanadditional
safevaccinesforthemselvesortheirchildren. experimental group, other populations, and/or addi-
This paper will continue with a discussion of De tional confounders. Replications can also be concep-
Groot’s empirical cycle. Each step will be elaborated tual, that is, compared to the "original" study, designed
followed by a discussion of the open science practice with new experimental manipulations, different oper-
belonging to that step. The paper will conclude with ationalizations of variables, etc, but, still investigating
a discussion highlighting implications of the open em- thesameunderlyingresearchquestion. Third,research
pirical cycle not for science (that will be covered in the areasmayalso,astoyet,be(relatively)unexplored. In
paper)butforscientists. these cases exploratory studies can be executed to ob-
tainafirstimpressionofaresearchareaandgeneration
===== PAGE 3/12 =====
3
Figure1
Theopenempiricalcycle,thatis,theempiricalcycleofdeGroot(1961),integratedwithfouropensciencepractices. The
pre-hoc(beforecollectingthedata)phaseisingreen,thepost-hocphaseinred. Inthepre-hocphaseearlierstepscanbe
revisitedasindicatedbythearrows.
Step 1: Observation of phenomena to be explained,
that is, prepare the research project
Open Science Practice: Replication study
Step 2: Induction of an explanatory theory,
Step 5: Evaluation that is, formulate expectations and theory
Open Science Practice: Write an open
access report/complete the registered
report
Step 3: Deduction of testable predictions,
that is, formulate hypotheses,
plan data collection and analysis
Step 4: Testing, that is, collect Submit the research proposal to a
and analyze data (medical) research ethics committee
Open Science Practice: FAIRlypublish Open Science Practice: Preregistration
data and analyses or registered report
of explananda, that is, phenomena that have to be ex- withCOVIDornot)improvesifvariablescharacterizing
plained. For a discussion of exploratory research in the a persons social network are used in addition to demo-
contextoftheempiricalcycle,seevanLissa(2022)and graphic variables like gender, age, and income. In an
Höfleretal.(2022). experimenttheexpectationcouldbethat"theimprove-
ment" is smallest in the control group larger in the tra-
Step2: Inductionofanexplanatorytheory,thatis, ditional treatment group and largest in the new treat-
formulateexpectationsandtheory ment group. The competing expectation could be that
thisisnotthecase. Theinterestedreaderisreferredto
Based on the observations from Step 1, in this step
Fried (2020), who thoughtfully reflects on theory for-
a theory is induced and expectations (possibly compet-
mulation.
ing) with respect to the answers to the research ques-
Again, it is tempting to keep a mental record of the
tionsareformulated. Inasurvey,theexpectationcould
(lack of) expectations and theory and to move on to
be that prediction of an outcome (e.g., being infected
===== PAGE 4/12 =====
4
the next step. However, writing them down will again a power analysis (for starters read Cohen, 1992, and
enforce clarity and will be very useful in the next step. Lakens, 2022) and in Bayesian hypothesis evaluation
AfterStep2itispossibletoreturntoStep1(seeFigure (Hoijtink et al., 2019) an updating plan (for starters
1),re-evaluatetheliterature,readadditionalliterature, readRouder,2014,andElseyetal.,2021);and,howto
and/orre-thinkbeforere-enteringStep2oncemore. deal with missing data (see, for example, van Buuren,
2018) and data exclusion criteria. Each of these issues
Step3: Deductionoftestablepredictions,thatis, isrelevantwhenhavingaresearchprojectevaluatedby
formulatehypotheses,plandatacollectionand a (medical) research ethics committee and when regis-
analysis tering.
While addressing these issues, it can help to test a
A very short characterization of deduction in terms
data collection protocol with procedural pilot partici-
of de Groot’s empirical cycle is "deriving testable con-
pants. These pilot participants are not meant to eval-
sequences from the theory that has been formulated"
uate the hypotheses of interest or to be included in the
. Testable consequences, that is in this paper, statisti-
final sample, but to test and refine the data collection
cal hypotheses, are not formulated in a void, but in a
protocol. It may also be helpful to create or simulate
context that clarifies what data are to be collected and
a data set with the desired sample size and containing
which type of analyses are going to be executed. This
thevariablesusedintheresearchprojectbeingplanned
will be elaborated in the next subsection followed by a
(see, Peikert and Brandmaier, 2021). Creation of such
subsection on privacy and data storage, topics that are
a data set requires a clear research design and clarity
relevant when having a research project evaluated by
about the variables and their scoring (which helps to
a research ethics committee. Subsequently, the open
avoidambiguityandthenecessityofpost-hocdecisions
science practices preregistration and registered reports
later in the empirical cycle). Furthermore, it supports
will be introduced. Both entail the publication of data
the creation of analysis scripts, that is, how will data
collection protocols and analysis plans before executing
bepreprocessed(e.g.,missingdataanalysisandoutlier
them. This is an important step in the open empirical
removal) and which analysis will subsequently be exe-
cycle. As can be seen in Figure 1, before registration
cuted in what order (again helping to avoid the neces-
it is allowed to move back and forth between the first
sity of post-hoc analysis decisions that should be made
threesteps,thatis,inthepre-hocphasethereisfreedom
a priori). An alternative for a simulated data set is to
during the creation of the research design, to recon-
execute a pilot study. As can be seen in Figure 1, while
sider, modify and redesign, whereas after registration,
planning data collection and analysis, it is allowed to
the plans are fixed and should as straightforwardly as
return to Step 1: Observation or Step 2: Induction and
possible be executed. The interested reader is referred
continue from there. This may, for example, happen if
toWagenmakersetal.(2018)whodistinguishthesame
thepoweranalysisshowsthattherequiredsamplesizes
two phases in the empirical cycle: the creativity phase
are unattainable and research questions and research
(pre-hoc)andtheverificationphase(post-hoc).
hypotheseshavetobemodifiedsuchthatasimplersta-
Planningdatacollectionandanalysis tisticalmodelcanbeused.
Throughout this paper we will refer to Duken et al.
The main issues to consider when planning data (2024) for examples of the implementation of certain
collection and analysis, are: the population of inter- open research practices. This is not to say that these
est; the research design, e.g., a randomized controlled examples are the gold standard of the open empirical
trial or a survey (see, for example, Burkholder et al., cycle, butithelpstoillustrateopensciencepracticesin
2019); whether the data collection is computerized thecontextoftheempiricalcycle. Relatedtothepoints
(e.g., web-based questionnaires or lab-based computer above,thepaperincludesapilotstudyinwhichthegen-
tasks)and/orinvolveshumaninteractions;thedatacol- eral procedure was tested and that provided data with
lection protocols (which steps are necessary to collect whichitwaspossiblewriteadetailedanalysisplan.
the data) including all questions, tasks, and computer
code (annotatedsuch thatit isclear foreach sectionof Getting approvalfrom the (medical) researchethics
code what it does); how the variables of interest are committeeandformulatedatamanagementplan
measured and coded (see Flake and Fried, 2020, for a
Before registration, that is, publication of the re-
paper on questionable measurement practices); which
search plans, it is required to obtain approval from a
variables (e.g. sum-scores) will be computed from the
(medical)ethicalresearchcommittee. Importantinthe
measured variables; which statistical models will be
context of the open empirical cycle are research ethics
usedandwhichhypotheseswithrespecttotheparame-
questions in relation to data management. Therefore
tersofthesemodelswillbetested;inclassicalstatistics
===== PAGE 5/12 =====
5
intheinformedconsentform2 (whichshouldbepartof such a repository) where all of data collection protocol
thedatacollectionprotocol)itisimportanttoannounce andmaterials,data,analyses,report,andothermateri-
the intention to publish the data in line with the FAIR alsrelatedtotheresearchprojectwillbestored. When
principles (the open science practice connected to Step writing the preregistration the data collection protocol
4 of the open empirical cycle). Participants should be should be finished and enable anyone to understand
askedwhichdatamayandmaynotbeshared,how,and precisely how the data will be collected. All the ma-
with whom, after the study is completed. Additionally terials used for data collection (e.g., questions asked,
a data management plan3 has to be created, detailing questionnaires provided, experimental manipulations,
howsecuredatastorageduringandafterdatacollection computer code) should be made available. Preferably,
willbeensured. these materials are constructed using open software.
However, also when using licensed software, the code
Preregistrationandregisteredreport canoftenbesharedopenly, eitherinitsoriginalformat
or as a simple text file. The more researchers use and
Theprobabilityoffalsepositivesincreasesifresearch
shareopenmaterialsfordesigningtheirstudies,theeas-
plans are modified while collecting and analyzing the
ier and faster it will become to modify or create tasks
data (QRPs) in Step 4 of the empirical cycle. Wicherts
basedonpubliclyexistingmaterials.
etal.(2016)provideataxonomyofdifferentQRPs. Ex-
Anotheremergingpracticeistoforegotheuseofpre-
amples in addition to those presented earlier are: ex-
registrationtemplates, andinstead, writeafulldraftof
cluding one of the treatment groups because the treat-
the planned paper, including all planned analyses and
mentremovedisnoteffective;modifyingthecriteriafor
placeholder results, using simulated data. The advan-
outlier removal; adding and removing covariates, and,
tages of such a "Preregistration-As-Code" are that au-
increasing the sample size in order to obtain a p-value
thors are not required to write two parallel documents
smaller than .05. De Groot himself already alluded to
(apreregistrationtemplateandamanuscript),andthat
theopensciencepracticepreregistration(see,deGroot
specifyingplannedanalysesandresultsincoderemoves
etal., 2014, AnnotationstoSection1)andWagenmak-
allambiguitythatarisesfrominterpretingplain-textde-
ers et al. (2012) were among the first to explicitly rec-
scriptionsofplannedanalyses(Peikertetal.,2023;van
ommendpreregistration,thatis,publishresearchplans
Lissa,2022).
in a repository such that the plans cannot be altered,
Whatisaregisteredreport? Analternativeforpre-
can not be deleted, and will remain publicly available,
registration is a registered report (Chambers, 2019).
thatis,persistentlyaccessibleviaaDOI(adigitalobject
This is a complete research paper only lacking: a para-
identifier4 which is persistent and uniquely links to the
graph about data collection, the analyses results, their
preregistration). Relatively recent Nosek et al. (2019)
interpretation, and the discussion. Registered reports
arguedthatpreregistrationis"hardandworthwhile"be-
canbesubmittedtoanincreasingnumberofjournals7,
cause it forces researchers to stick to their plans and to
these are reviewed as usual and only after the paper is
highlight deviations in their research report. Peikert et
accepted for publication the data are collected and an-
al. (2023) argue that preregistration increases the per-
alyzed, and the missing sections are added. After the
suasiveness of research results. An additional benefit
actual execution of the study the journal will verify ad-
is that it may very well be that data collection takes a
herence to the research plans and whether or not they
couple of years, and without a write-up it may be hard
can agree with possible deviations that are highlighted
to impossible to recollect what the plans were. Prereg-
in the research report. If their verification is positive,
istration is relevant both for research projects in which
thereportwillbepublishedirrespectiveoftheoutcome
datawillactuallybecollectedandforresearchprojects
of the analyses. Therefore while preregistrations help
usingexistingdatasets(see,Westonetal.,2019,foran
to avoid questionable research practices, registered re-
elaborationofthelatter).
What is a preregistration? One common approach 2https://www.uu.nl/en/research/
topreregistrationistocompletea"preregistrationtem- research-data-management/guides/legal-considerations/
plate": a structured document that requires authors to how-to-write-an-informed-consent-form
specify their planned analyses in written text. Prereg- 3https://www.uu.nl/en/research/
istrations can be published at, and templates and ex- research-data-management/guides/
amples can be found at, for example, the OSF5 or AS- data-management-planning
PREDICTED6 and additional information is provided in 4https://www.doi.org/the-identifier/what-is-a-doi/
Bakkeretal.(2020)andBosnjaketal.(2021). Include 5https://help.osf.io/article/330-welcome-to-registrations
in the preregistration the DOI to a repository (for ex- 6https://aspredicted.org/
ample,everypreregistrationattheOSFisconnectedto 7https://www.cos.io/initiatives/registered-reports
===== PAGE 6/12 =====
6
portsadditionallyhelpjournalstoavoidpublicationbias are tentative and require verification by restarting the
(Nikolopoulou, 2022) because they decide about ac- open empirical cycle in Step 1 and collecting new data
ceptingorrejectingapaperbeforethedataareanalyzed intheensuingStep4. ThisisinlinewithdeGrootwho
and the results are known. An example of a registered stressed the importance of distinguishing the planned,
reportisDukenetal.(2021). confirmatory, part of a research project from a possible
exploratory part (de Groot et al., 2014). An example
Step4: Testing,thatis,collectandanalyzedata of exploratory analyses can be found in Duken et al.
(2024).
ThetransitiontoStep4demarcatesthepre-hocfrom
the post-hoc phase of a research project and should
FAIRlypublishdataandanalyses
therefore be documented and reported clearly, for ex-
ample through time-stamped preregistrations and re- TheopensciencepracticebelongingtoStep4further
porting of the date of data collection. It is also crucial increasestransparencybypublishingdata,analysesout-
thatanypriorexposuretothedataisdisclosed,includ- put, and analyses interpretations in a FAIR8 way such
ing indirect exposure via collaborators orviewing sum- thatthesecanbe"F"ound,"A"ccessed,"I"nterpreted,and
marystatistics. Step4comprisesthreesub-steps: collect "R"eusedwithoutanyobstructions(whetherfinancialor
data,analyzedata,andexploratoryanalyses. copyright). FAIRlypublishingdataallowsotherstocrit-
Collect data as planned in Step 3. However, unex- icize and accordingly modify analyses to determine if
pectedcircumstancesoftenoccurduringdatacollection and how this changes the conclusions in the research
(Nosek et al., 2019). Therefore, it is sometimes nec- paper; the data can be reused in a meta-analysis or
essary to adjust the data collection during Step 4. For research synthesis that combine the results of multi-
example,apriorirecruitmentstrategiesforparticipants plestudiesaddressingthesameresearchquestion;and,
mightnotbesuccessfulandneedtobeupdatedtoreach others can reuse the setup of the analyses if they have
thetargetsample,ortaskinstructionsmightnotbeclear a similar research design (van Lissa et al., 2021). Each
toallparticipantsandneedtobeimproved. Makeare- "letter"ofFAIRwillnowshortlybeelaborated. Forelab-
search note of such deviations and present and discuss orations see, for example, Wilkinson, B., et al. (2016)
themintheresearchreport. andZondergeldetal.(2020).
Analyze dataasplannedinStep3andhighlightde- The "F" in FAIR denotes Findable. To FAIRly pub-
viations the plans in the report. Make research notes lish data collection protocols, data, and analyses these
of deviations from the original plan and present and should be placed in a repository linked to the preregis-
discuss them in the research report. Interpretations of trationviaaDOIandcomingwithitownDOIsuchthat
the analyses should stay true to the theory as formu- itcaneasilybereferredtoandaccessed. Suchreposito-
latedintheintroduction. Atthisstage,weshouldavoid riescan,forexample,easilybecreatedattheOpenSci-
any temptation to re-interpret the theory more expan- ence Foundation9. Include in the repository a readme
sively to absorb data outside of the scope of the orig- filewiththecontactdetailsoftheauthors,adescription
inal claim (theory stretching), or more narrowly so it of what can be found in the repository, the link to the
appears more precisely aligned with the data (post-hoc preregistration,whenfinishedalinktotheresearchre-
precision, Frankenhuis et al., 2023). Any updating of port, and a license (further discussed below under "R")
the theory should occur, transparently, in Step 5 Evalu- describing how data and analyses can be reused. Data
ation. andanalysescan,forexample,bepublishedintheform
Exploratory analyses When executing research of a JASP10 file, R users can achieve the same using an
plans, it is almost inevitable to get ideas for additional RMarkdownfile11 ortheRpackageworcs(vanLissaet
analyses. It may, for example, be of interest to explore al.,2021)whichbringsdownthelearningcurvebyau-
the effect of deleting additional outliers or doing addi- tomatingmanystepsinvolvedincreatingFAIRresearch
tionalnon-preregisteredanalyses. Theinterestedreader repositories in R. All of these are free, that is, can be
is also referred to Wigboldus and Dotsch (2016), who usedwithoutlicensesorfees.
"encourageplayingwithdata",Höfleretal.(2022)who However, being able to find the files does not yet
discuss the blending of confirmatory and exploratory imply that these can be opened. Therefore, the "A"
analyses, and van Lissa (2022) who highlights the im- in FAIR denotes Accessible, that is, the files included
portance of delineating the scope of exploration and
8https://www.go-fair.org/fair-principles/
the inferential procedure used to detect effects . Ex-
9https://osf.io/
ploratory analyses can be presented in a separate sec-
10https://jasp-stats.org/
tion "Exploratory Analyses" in the research report in
11https://rmarkdown.rstudio.com/
which it should be highlighted that exploratory results
===== PAGE 7/12 =====
7
in the repository can be opened with FAIR (read open from January 1st till January 31st 2023 made by the
and free) software on various operating systems (Win- author. What is copyrighted is not any single datum
dow,MAC,Linux)suchthatanybodycanaccessthefiles inthedataset,buttheeffortplacedtocompilethedata
withoutencountering(financialortechnical)obstacles. intoonefileordatabasewithallthenecessarymetadata
The data can be made accessible as soon as these are andsoon.
available. However, if researchers are hesitant to pub- It may very well be that researchers do not yet want
lish data before their report is accepted for publication to publish their data because they have additional re-
inajournal,theycanfirstmakethedataavailableonly search ideas and do not want to be scooped. Also in
for the reviewers and publish FAIRly after their paper these cases, a big step towards transparency and re-
hasbeenacceptedforpublication. producibility can be made. First of all, only analysis
Being able to open the data and analyses files does codes and annotated results could be published. With
not yet imply that the content of the files can be un- the latter summaries like correlation matrices, means,
derstood. The "I" in FAIR denotes Interoperable, that variances, and sample sizes could be published, that
is, those who download data and analyses should be cantosomeextendbeusedtocorroborateanalysesre-
able to interpret them. This implies there should be a sults. Secondly, the part of the data that is or can be
code book explaining what can be found in the data thoroughly and completely anonimized could be pub-
file and the analyses should be annotated such that it lished. Finally, a synthetic dataset could be generated
isclearwhichanalysesareexecuted, whichhypotheses thatallowsthirdpartiestoverifythecomputationalre-
areevaluated,andwhattheinterpretationoftheresults producibilityofanalysescodes,eveniftheexactresults
is. cannot be reproduced (see, for example, the R worcs
The "R" in FAIR denotes Reusable, which means that package,vanLissaetal.,2021).
data are licensed12 in such a way that third parties can An example of FAIRly published data and analyses
use them to reproduce the results, include them in a fromDukenetal.(2024)canbefoundatOSF17.
meta analyses, or reuse them to explore new research
questions. It is common practice to use creative com- Step5: Evaluation
mon licenses13. A CC0 license will allow for maximum
Thisstepcorrespondsto"evaluation"fromdeGroot’s
permissiveness,whereasaCCBYlicensewillensurethat
empirical cycle in which the research report is written.
whoeverdecidestousethematerialsmustcitetheau-
It should be based on the theory and expectations for-
thors via a reference. FAIRly publishing data requires
mulated in Step 2, the hypotheses, data collection and
careful preparation. It should always be made certain
analyses design formulated in Step 3, and the actual
that data are thoroughly anonimized (not traceable to
data collection and analysis executed in Step 4. If the
individual persons) and, if researchers are located in
researchprojectispreregistered,thepreregistrationcan
Europe,inagreementwiththeGeneralDataProtection
be the point of departure for writing the research re-
Regulations14. Anonimizationmaytosomeextendlead
port. In case of a registered report, only the sections
to modifications of the data. In these cases it is good
on data collection, data analyses, interpretation of the
practice to highlight how the data were anonimized in
outcomes, and a discussion have to be added. Devia-
areadmefilelinkedtothedata. Ifdatacontainsensitive
tions from the research plans presented in preregistra-
information (e.g. about rare diseases, intimate details,
tionorregisteredreport,shouldbehighlightedandex-
orspecificdemographics)publicationisonlypossibleif
plained. Strong arguments for highlighting deviations
the research participants have explicitly provided con-
are: transparency, making analyses reproducible, and
sentforpublicationandreusebyothers. Whenworking
allowing investigation of the impact of deviations on
with personal data however, creative common licenses
analysis results (Peikert et al., 2021). In case of ma-
will not suffice and a data transfer agreement15 detail-
jorchangestoaregistration,aresearchreportbecomes
ingwhatcanandcannotbedonewiththedatamustbe
exploratory in the sense that hypotheses are generated
customizedandusedwhensharingdata.
instead of evaluated. It would be "open" to highlight
It should be noted16 that data as facts, cannot be
copyrighted, thus what is in fact being licensed is the 12https://www.openaire.eu/how-do-i-license-my-research-data
collected dataset as a whole. The idea is that the data 13https://creativecommons.org/about/cclicenses/
itselfreferstothefactdepictedbythedatasuchas“the 14https://gdpr-info.eu/
temperature in Cancun on January 1st, 2023 is 27 C” 15https://utrechtuniversity.github.io/
whereas the collection of the dataset is the entire com- dataprivacyhandbook/data-sharing-reuse.html
pilationofdatastoredinadatabase(fileorother)that 16https://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?
contains all the temperature measurements of Cancun uri=CELEX:31996L0009:EN:HTML
17https://osf.io/y7346/
===== PAGE 8/12 =====
8
this in the research report. An example of highlighting ample, at psyarxiv19 where it comes with its own DOI.
deviationscanbefoundinDukenetal.(2024)whodo This "green open access" ensures that anyone can ob-
thisinSupplementaryNote9oftheirsupplementaryin- tain and read the report without costs being involved.
formation18. Of course researchers also want to publish their report
In the discussion of the research report, the actual in a journal. On openaccess.nl20 arguments in favor
evaluation takes place. It concerns re-evaluation of the of and information about open access publication can
theory based on the empirical results. Research results be found. In addition to green open access there are
may support the theory, may require reformulation of "gold open access" which requires authors to pay for
the theory, or, may lead to rejection of the theory and their publication and "diamond or platinum open ac-
formulation of a better theory. van Lissa et al. (2025) cess" (see, for example, the journal Meta-Psychology21)
describe an open science workflow for the iterative im- wherebothpublicationandaccessofscientificpapersis
provement of FAIR theories. It is important to high- completelyfree.
light that although writing the discussion finalizes the Incaseofpreregisteredresearch,reviewerswillread
researchreport,itdoesnotendtheempiricalcycle. Ac- in the introduction of the research report where re-
tually, finalization of the research report leads to a re- search plans have been registered, and that deviations
entry Step 1 of the open empirical cycle with a state of from the plans have been highlighted. This will enable
affairsthatisupdatedusingtheknowledgerenderedby them to compare plans to what has actually been ex-
the research project that has been executed. It is now ecuted. If data and analyses are published FAIRly, re-
timetostepbackandreconsiderthenewstateofaffairs viewers can make their review even more thorough by
and decide if, what, and why would be valuable fur- reproducing analyses and while doing so, evaluate the
therresearchprojects. Exactlythis"ReturntoStep1"is adequacy of the codes used. When a completed regis-
whatmakestheopenempiricalcyclecyclicinthesense tered report is submitted to a journal it is reviewed be-
thatitofferstheoptiontocontinuouslyaccumulateand fore and after adding sections on data collection, data
update knowledge. An example of explicitly returning analyses, interpretation of the outcomes, and a discus-
to Step 1 can be found dispersed in the Discussion of sion. Stated otherwise, when using open science prac-
Duken et al. (2024). There the theories under inves- ticesreviewersareenabledtoprovideamorethorough
tigation are primarily interpreted in the context of the evaluationoftheresearchreport,whichshouldincrease
confirmatory analysis results. However, our data also the trustworthiness of the research executed. An exam-
inspired new ideas, which lead to exploratory analyses pleofreviewsofboththeregisteredreportandthefinal
and the consideration of a different theory that we did reportcanbefoundinthe"PeerReviewFile"22.
notincludeapriori. Returningtostep1meansthatthe
ideas derived from our data and exploratory analyses Discussion
canbethestartingpointfornewconfirmatoryresearch
The open empirical cycle should be viewed as a tool
projects. Our shared materials and data may further
that supports transparent scholarly workflows in the
help other researchers to built on our project. Rather
pursuit of cumulative knowledge acquisition. It is a re-
thanstartingformscratch,theycanuseourtaskorthey
minder of the most important research steps that have
canuseourdataandanalysisscriptsfortheirownstud-
to be considered, decisions that have to be made, and
ieswithourdata.
issues that have to be considered. The structured ap-
Theopensciencepracticeassociatedwithevaluation
proachtoscienceadvocatedbytheopenempiricalcycle
ispublicationofresearchresultsintheformofanopen
may actually save time because it protects from having
access publication. Publishing open access is an im-
todoublebackorconstructad-hocreparationsbecause
portant feature of open science. Being able to unob-
earlierintheresearchprocesssomethingwasforgotten.
structedlyobtaineverything(alsothereport)relatedto
Additionally,FrankenhuisandNettle(2018)arguethat
a research project will enable anyone to: benefit from
opensciencepracticesarenotaburden,butpsycholog-
the research, reuse (parts) of the research, and to en-
ically liberating. They reward research quality (which
gage in a fully informed discussion. Furthermore, it
is under a researchers control) instead of (significant)
avoids that null findings disappear in the "file drawer"
research outcomes (which is not under a researchers
(Rosenthal,1979)andensuresthatanybody(alsonon-
academic audiences) can access the publication. Re- 18https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-45203-4
leasing a preprint (Bourne et al., 2017) of the research 19https://psyarxiv.com
report may increase attention and citations (Fu and 20https://www.openaccess.nl/en
Hughey, 2020; McKiernan et al., 2016). This can be 21https://open.lnu.se/index.php/metapsychology/index
done by adding it to the research repository, or, for ex- 22https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-45203-4
===== PAGE 9/12 =====
9
control),and"fostercreativitybecausetheycultivatean AuthorContact
openandflexiblemind-set, createamorecollaborative
Herbert Hoijtink. Department of Methods and
and constructive climate, and generate more accurate
Statistics, Utrecht University, P.O.Box 80140 3508TC
informationandmakeitmoreaccessible(p. 439)".
Utrecht, The Netherlands. e-mail: h.hoijtink@uu.nl.
However, being open may lead to feelings of vulner-
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8509-1973
ability. To phrase this differently, "what if someone de-
tects a mistake?", "will such a mistake influence the fu-
ConflictofInterestandFunding
tureof(early)careerscientists?"Oneoftheadvantages
ofbeingopenisthateditorsandreviewerscannotonly HerbertHoijtinkwassupportedbytheConsortiumon
read the research report, but also verify what was ac- IndividualDevelopment(CID)whichisfundedthrough
tually done. Consequently, it is more likely that mis- the Gravitation program of the Dutch Ministry of Ed-
takes will be detected, and if any remain, it escaped ucation, Culture, and Science and the Netherlands Or-
notonlytheauthorsattention,butalsotheattentionof ganizationforScientificResearch(NWOgrantnumber:
editorandreviewers. Furthermore,oneofthepurposes 024.001.003). Sascha Duken was supported by a Re-
of being open is to allow others to scrutinize research search Talent Grant from the Dutch Research Council
work, compare preregistration to report, express their (NWO, grant number: 406.17.564). Caspar van Lissa
support or disagreement, provide alternative analyses was supported by an NWO Veni Grant (NWO Grant
and interpretations, and, possibly, detect mistakes. It Number: VI.Veni.191G.090).
isimportanttonotethatcriticismshouldbedirectedat
theresearch,nottheresearchers. Itisequallyimportant AuthorContributions
tonotethatifothersscrutinizeandevaluatearesearch
Herbert Hoijtink conceptualized the article. All au-
project this can be seen as a compliment because ap-
thors were involved in writing, reviewing, and editing
parently the research is interesting and worthwhile to
thearticle. HerbertHoijtinkandSaschaDukentookthe
them.
leadinrewritingthearticleafterreceivingreviews.
It is important to highlight that open science is not
an all-or-nothing game. It may very well be necessary
OpenSciencePractices
to employ certain open science practices while not em-
ploying others. Stated otherwise, research projects are This article is conceptual and was not eligible for
locatedonacontinuumfromopentoclosed. Registered Open Science badges. The entire editorial process, in-
reportswithpubliclyavailablematerials,code,anddata cludingtheopenreviews,ispublishedintheonlinesup-
are probably the highest standard of open science at plement.
the moment, but even employing only one of the open
References
sciencepracticeswillalreadyincreasethetransparency
andtrustworthinessofresearch. Bakker, M., Veldkamp, C. L. S., van Assen, M. A. L. M.,
Thebenefitofusingopensciencepracticesarethree- Crompvoets, E. A. V., Ong, H. H., Nosek, B. A.,
fold. First, having an open track record is an advan- Soderberg, C. K., Mellor, D., & Wicherts, J. M.
tagebecausefundingagenciesincreasinglyrequireopen (2020). Ensuring the quality and specificity of
publicationsandopendatafromtheprojectstheyfund. preregistrations. PLOS Biology, 18, e3000937.
Second, doing good quality transparent research is val- https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.
ued higher than having many publications. The inter- 3000937
ested reader is also referred to the Declaration of Re- Bosnjak, M., Fieback, C. J., Mellor, D., Mueller, S.,
search Assessment23 which is signed by a steadily in- O’Connor, D. B., Oswald, F. L., & Sokol-Chang,
creasing number of individuals and organizations. Ad- R. I. (2021). A template for preregistration of
hering (if only partly) to the open empirical cycle, is a quantitative research in psychology: Report of
preparationforthisshiftinperspective. Third, alsoim- the joint psychological societies preregistration
portant,usingopensciencepracticesmayincreaseyour task force. AmericanPsychologist, 77, 602–615.
own trust in your own research (the interested reader is https://eprints.whiterose.ac.uk/174294/
referredtoRohreretal.,2021thatcontainsstatements Bourne, P. E., Polka, J. K., Vale, R. D., & Kiley, R.
of researchers that did lose the trust in their own re- (2017). Ten simple rules to consider regarding
search). preprint submission. PLoS Computational Biol-
ogy,13.https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.
1005473
23https://sfdora.org/
===== PAGE 10/12 =====
10
Burkholder, G. J., Cox, K. A., Crawford, L. M., & Hitch- 456–465. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 /
cock, J. (2019). Research Design and Methods: 2515245920952393
AnAppliedGuidefortheResearcherPractitioner. Frankenhuis,W.E.,&Nettle,D.(2018).Openscienceis
SAGE. liberating and can foster creativity. Perspectives
Chambers,C.D.(2019).What’snextforRegisteredRe- on Psychological Science, 13, 439–447. https://
ports? Nature, 573, 187–189. https://doi.org/ doi.org/10.1177/1745691618767878
10.1038/d41586-019-02674-6 Frankenhuis,W.E.,Panchanathan,K.,&Smaldino,P.E.
Cohen, J. (1992). A power primer. Psychological Bul- (2023). Strategic ambiguity in the social sci-
letin, 112, 155–159. https://doi.org/10.1037/ ences. Social Psychological Bulletin, 18, e9923.
0033-2909.112.1.155 https://doi.org/10.23668/psycharchives.8381
de Groot, A. D. (1961). Methodologie. Grondslagen van Fried, E. I. (2020). Theories and Models: What They
onderzoek en denken in de gedragswetenschap- Are, What They Are for, and What They
pen [Methodology. Foundations of research and Are About. Psychological Inquiry, 31, 336–344.
thinking in the behavioral sciences]. https:// https://doi.org/10.1080/1047840X.2020.
www.dbnl.org/tekst/groo004meth01_01/ 1854011
deGroot,A.D.,Wagenmakers,E.-J.,Borsboom,D.,Ver- Fu, D. Y., & Hughey, J. J. (2020). Meta-Research: Re-
hagen, J., Kievit, R., Bakker, M., Cramer, A., leasingapreprintisassociatedwithmoreatten-
Matzke, D., Mellenbergh, D., & van der Maas, tionandcitationsforthepeer-reviewedarticle.
H. L. J. (2014). The meaning of "significance" eLife, 8, e52646. https://doi.org/10.7554/
for different types of research. Acta Psycholog- eLife.52646
ica, 148, 188–194. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. Gopalakrishna, G., ter Riet, G., Cruyff, M., Vink, G.,
actpsy.2014.02.001 Stoop, I., Wicherts, J., & Bouter, L. (2021).
Duken,S.B.,Keessen,L.,Hoijtink,H.,Kindt,M.,&van Prevalence of questionable research practices,
Ast, V. A. (2021). Episodic and affective mem- research misconduct and their potential ex-
orydistortionsindysphoria:Bayesiantestingof planatoryfactors:asurveyamongacademicre-
diverging theories [Registered Report Stage 1 searchers inThe Netherlands. https://doi.org/
Protocol].NatureCommunications.https://doi. 10.1371/journal.pone.0263023
org/10.6084/m9.figshare.14605374.v1 Höfler, M., Scherbaum, S., Kanske, P., McDonald,
Duken,S.B.,Keessen,L.,Hoijtink,H.,Kindt,M.,&van B., & Miller, R. (2022). Means to valuable
Ast, V. A. (2024). Episodic and affective mem- exploration I. The blending of confirmation
orydistortionsindysphoria:Bayesiantestingof and exploration and how to resolve it. Meta-
divergingtheories.NatureCommunications,15, Psychology, 6. https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.
1320. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024- 2021.2837
45203-4 Hoijtink, H., Mulder, J., van Lissa, C., & Gu, X. (2019).
Elsey,J.W.B.,Filmer,A.I.,&Stemerding,L.E.(2021). A tutorial on testing hypotheses using the
Don’tForgetthePsychologyinAnalysesofPsy- Bayes factor. Psychological Methods, 24, 539–
chological Data: The Case of Sequential Test- 556.https://doi.org/10.1037/met0000201
ing. Collabra: Psychology, 7. https://doi.org/ Ioannides,J.P.A.(2005).Whymostpublishedresearch
10.1525/collabra.24953 findingsarefalse.PLoSMedicine,2,e124.https:
Errington, T. M., Denis, A., Perfito, N., Iorns, E., & //doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.0020124
Nosek, B. A. (2021). Reproducibility in cancer Lakens, D. (2022). Sample Size Justification. Collabra:
biology:Challengesforassessingreplicabilityin Psychology,8,33267.https://doi.org/10.1525/
preclinical cancer biology. eLife. https://doi. collabra.33267
org/10.7554/eLife.67995 Makel, M., Hodges, J., & Cook, B. (2021). Both ques-
Errington, T. M., Mathur, M. M., Soderberg, C. K., De- tionableandopenresearchpracticesarepreva-
nis, A., Perfito, N., Iorns, E., & Nosek, B. A. lent in education research. Educational Re-
(2021). Investigating the replicability of pre- searcher, 50, 493–504. https://doi.org/10.
clinical cancer biology. eLife. https://doi.org/ 3102/0013189X211001356
10.7554/eLife.71601 McKiernan, E. C., Bourne, P. E., Brown, C. T., Buck, S.,
Flake,J.K.,&Fried,E.I.(2020).MeasurementSchmea- Kenall, A., Lin, J., Yarkoni, T., et al. (2016).
surement:QuestionableMeasurementPractices How open science helps researchers succeed.
and How to Avoid Them. Advances in Meth- eLife, 5, 1–19. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.
ods and Practices in Psychological Science, 3, 16800
===== PAGE 11/12 =====
11
Nikolopoulou,K.(2022).Whatispublicationbias?Def- 86, 638–641. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-
inition and examples. https://www.scribbr. 2909.86.3.638
com/research-bias/publication-bias/ Rouder,J.N.(2014).Optionalstopping:Noproblemfor
Nosek, B. A., Beck, E. D., Campbell, L., Flake, J. K., bayesians. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 21,
Hardwicke, T. E., Mellor, D. T., Vazire, S., et 301–308.https://link.springer.com/article/10.
al. (2019). Preregistration is hard, and worth- 3758/s13423-014-0595-4
while. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 23, 815– van Buuren, S. (2018). Flexible imputation of missing
818. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2019. data.Chapman;Hall/CRC.
07.009 van Lissa, C. J. (2022). Complementing preregistered
Nosek, B. A., & Errington, T. (2020). What is replica- confirmatory analyses with rigorous, repro-
tion?PLOSBiology,18,e3000691.https://doi. ducibleexplorationusingmachinelearning.Re-
org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3000691 ligion, Brain & Behavior, 13, 347–351. https:
Open Science Collaboration. (2012). An open, large- //doi.org/10.1080/2153599X.2022.2070254
scale,collaborativeefforttoestimatetherepro- vanLissa,C.J.,Brandmaier,A.M.,B.,V.,etal.(2021).
ducibility of psychological science. Perspectives Worcs: A workflow for open reproducible code
on Psychological Science, 7, 657–660. https:// in science. Data Science, 4, 29–49. https://doi.
doi.org/10.1177/1745691612462588 org/10.3233/DS-210031
OpenScienceCollaboration.(2015).Estimatingthere- van Lissa, C. J., Peikert, A., Brandmaier, A. M., Schon-
producibility of psychological science. Science, brodt,F.D.,&vanDongen,N.N.N.(2025).To
349.https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aac4716 be fair: Theory specification needs an update.
Peikert,A.,&Brandmaier,A.M.(2021).Areproducible https://osf.io/preprints/psyarxiv/t53np
data analysis workflow with R Markdown, Git, vanLissa,C.(2022).Developmentaldatascience:How
Make, and Docker. Quantitative and Computa- machine learning can advance theory forma-
tional Methods in Behavioral Sciences, e3763. tion in developmental psychology. Infant and
https://doi.org/10.5964/qcmb.3763 ChildDevelopment,32,e2370.https://doi.org/
Peikert, A., Ernst, S., Brandmaier, & M., A. (2023). 10.1002/icd.2370
Why does preregistration increase the persua- van den Broek-Honingh, N., & de Jonge, J. (2018).
siveness of evidence? A Bayesian rationaliza- Trust in science in the Netherlands: Survey
tion.https://osf.io/preprints/psyarxiv/cs8wb_ monitor 2018. https://www.rathenau.nl/
v2 en/knowledge- ecosystems/trust- science-
Peikert,A.,vanLissa,C.J.,&Brandmaier,A.M.(2021). netherlands
Reproducible research in R: A tutorial on how Wagenmakers, E.-J., Dutilh, G., & Sarafoglou, G.
to do the same thing more than once. Psych, (2018). The creativity-verification cycle in psy-
3, 836–867. https://doi.org/10.3390/ chological science: New methods to combat
psych3040053 old idols. Perspectives on Psychological Science,
Rathenau Instituut. (2021). Vertrouwde wetenschap 13, 418–427. https://doi.org/10.1177/
– een kwalitatieve studie naar het publieke 1745691618771357
vertrouwen in wetenschap en opdrachtonder- Wagenmakers,E.-J.,Wetzels,R.,Borsboom,D.,vander
zoek. https://www.rathenau.nl/sites/default/ Maas,H.L.J.,&Kievit,R.A.(2012).Anagenda
files/2021-06/Rathenau_Instituut_Rapport_ forpurelyconfirmatoryresearch.Perspectiveson
Vertrouwde_wetenschap.pdf Psychological Science, 7, 632–638. https://doi.
Rohrer, J. M., Tierney, W., Uhlmann, E. L., DeBruine, org/10.1177/1745691612463078
L. M., Heyman, T., Jones, B., Schmukle, S. C., Weston,S.J.,Ritchie,S.J.,Rohrer,J.M.,&Przybylski,
Silberzahn, R., Willén, R. M., Carlsson, R., Lu- A. K. (2019). Recommendations for increasing
cas,R.E.,Strand,J.,Vazire,S.,Witt,J.K.,Zen- thetransparencyofanalysisofpreexistingdata
tall, T. R., Chabris, C. F., & Yarkoni, T. (2021). sets. Advances in Methods and Practices in Psy-
Puttingtheselfinself-correction:Findingsfrom chologicalScience,2,214–227.https://doi.org/
the loss-of-confidence project. Perspectives on 10.1177/2515245919848684
Psychological Science, 16, 1255–1269. https:// Wicherts,J.M.,Veldkamp,C.L.S.,Augusteijn,H.E.M.,
doi.org/10.1177/1745691620964106 Bakker, M., van Aert, R. C. M., & van Assen,
Rosenthal, R. (1979). The "file drawer problem" and M.A.L.M.(2016).Degreesoffreedominplan-
tolerancefornullresults.PsychologicalBulletin, ning,running,analyzing,andreportingpsycho-
===== PAGE 12/12 =====
12
logical studies. Frontiers in Psycholog, 7, 1832.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2016.01832
Wigboldus, D. H. J., & Dotsch, R. (2016). Encourage
playing with data and discourage questionable
reporting practices. Psychometrika, 81, 27–32.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11336-015-9445-1
Wilkinson,M.D.,B.,M.,etal.(2016).Thefairguiding
principles for scientific data management and
stewardship. Scientific Data, 3, 160018. https:
//doi.org/10.1038/sdata.2016.18
Xie, Y., Wang, K., & Kong, Y. (2021). Prevalence
of research misconduct and quesitionable re-
searchpractices:Asystematicreviewandmeta-
analysis.ScienceandEngineeringEthics,27,41.
https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/
s11948-021-00314-9#citeas
Zondergeld, J., Scholten, R. H. H., Vreede, B. M. I.,
Hessels, R. S., Pijl, H. A. G., Buizer-Voskamp,
J. E., Rasch, M., Lange, O. A., & Veldkamp,
C. L. C. (2020). FAIR, safe and high-quality
data:thedatainfrastructureandaccessibilityof
the YOUth cohort study. Developmental Cogni-
tiveNeuroscience,45,100834.https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.dcn.2020.100834