
===== PAGE 1/31 =====
Opendata:NotApplicable Editedby:RickardCarlsson
Meta-Psychology,2026,vol10,MP.2023.4097 Openmaterials:NotApplicable Reviewedby:NicholasJLBrown,KaiHorstmann
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2023.4097 Openandreproducibleanalysis:NotApplicable Analysisreproducedby:NotApplicable
Articletype:Commentary Openreviewsandeditorialprocess:Yes AllsupplementaryfilescanbeaccessedatOSF:
PublishedundertheCC-BY4.0license Preregistration:No https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/NRP6H
An analysis of functional relationships between systemic
conditions and unethical behavior in German academia
Nicole Bössel-Debbert1, Annette Kluge2, Daniel Leising3, Dorothee Mischkowski4, Le Vy Phan5,
Franz Richter3, Manfred Schmitt6, and Jutta Stahl7
1UniversityMedicineGreifswald
2RuhrUniversityBochum
3TechnischeUniversitätDresden
4MPIforResearchonCollectiveGoods,Bonn;LeidenUniversity
5BielefeldUniversity
6UniversityofKaiserslautern-Landau
7UniversityofCologne
ThispaperisanupdatedEnglishversionofareportfiledbyacommissionthattheGer-
manPsychologicalSociety(DGPs)appointedin2022. Thecommission’staskwasa)to
identifyfactorsintheacademicsystemthatenableand/orpromoteunethicalbehavior,
andb)toproposecorrectivemeasures. Basedonexpertinterviews,aliteraturereview,
feedback from the community, and discussions within the commission, the following
problematic issues were identified: (P1) negligent or fraudulent research practices,
(P2) abuse of power, (P3) inadequate supervision of Early Career Researchers, (P4)
poor quality of teaching, (P5) counterproductive incentives, (P6) overburdening of
professorswithtasks,(P7)fixed-termandshort-termemployment,(P8)unnecessarily
strong power imbalance, (P9) an ineffective peer-review system, (P10) questionable
assessment practices in hiring professors, (P11) lack of clarity of, and low commit-
mentto,ethicalstandards,and(P12)weakcontrolandsanctioningmechanisms. The
commissionoffersconcreterecommendationsforchangestotheacademicsystemthat
should make the occurrence of unethical behavior less likely. Even though some of
theserecommendationsmightberatherspecificforthefieldofpsychologyandforthe
Germanacademicsystem,mostofthemmaybevalidforscienceingeneral.
Keywords: Science,Reform,Meta-Science,Misconduct,System
Background andexploitation. Notably,italsocoversbad(e.g.,negli-
gent,redundant)researchandbadsupervisionofEarly
In January 2022, the board of the German Psycho-
CareerResearchers(ECRs).
logical Society (DGPs) appointed a commission tasked
The reason for installing the commission in the first
with (a) identifying the structural conditions that en-
place was the widely shared impression that unethical
able,orevenpromote,unethicalbehaviorinacademia,
behavior in science is not rare, sometimes severe, and
and(b)proposingconcretemeasuresforimprovement.
mostoftenremainsundetectedandunsanctioned. This
In June 2023, the full report was published online,
impression was fed both by a continuing stream of me-
alongside a commentary by the DGPs leadership board
dia reports about several quite drastic cases, and by
(https://www.dgps.de/fileadmin/user_upload/PDF/
findings of systematic research on the topic. Nielsen
Berichte/Bericht_AMWF20230626.pdf).Thepresentpa-
etal.(2010)discussedthat,regardlessoftheworkplace
perisanabridgedandupdatedversionofthatreport.
type(academicornon-academic),accuratelyestimating
Thecommissionusedabroaddefinitionofunethical
the prevalence of unethical workplace behavior, such
behaviorasconductwhoseshort-andlong-termconse-
as bullying, harassment, discrimination, and sexual vi-
quencescontradictwidelyacceptedethicalimperatives,
olence, is non-trivial and complicated by conceptual
specifically the notion that scientific work should serve
(e.g., definitional, terminological) and methodological
the common good and that harm to individuals should
issues (e.g., measurement, recruitment of non-random
be avoided. This definition thus covers scientific mis-
andnon-representativesamples,affectivebias). Intheir
conduct (e.g., data forgery, plagiarism, guest author-
meta-analysis,theseauthorsestimatedthat,onaglobal
ship)aswellasbullying,sexualharassment,corruption,
===== PAGE 2/31 =====
2
average (based on 86 samples; 130,973 respondents), term contracts, control and sanctioning mecha-
“at least 1 out of 10, and maybe as many as about nisms,personnelselection;
1 out of 5, workers are exposed to bullying in their
5. Solicitingfeedbackfromthecommunity.
workplaces” (p. 967). Thus, their prevalence estimate
ranged from about 10 to 20 percent. A study in the US
The Acknowledgements section at the end of this
(Basileetal.,2020)estimatedthatabout5.6percentof
manuscript lists those individuals who supported the
womenand2.5percentofmenhaveexperiencedsome
commission’s work by sharing their views and expe-
form of sexual violence by a workplace-related perpe-
riences. The analyses and recommendations that the
trator in their lifetimes. A more recent meta-analysis
commissiondevelopedconstitutethemainfocusofthis
by Dhanani et al. (2021) reported significantly higher
paperandarepresentedbelow.
prevalence estimates for “workplace mistreatment” (34
percent experienced, 44 percent witnessed). Notably,
BasicConcepts
these authors did not find much evidence for sampling
bias (i.e., systematic over- or under-reporting due to Figure1depictsaheuristicmodelofbehaviorregula-
howsamplesweredrawn). tion, incorporating variables that the commission iden-
Focusing more specifically on academic work envi- tifiedasbeingparticularlyrelevantinthegivencontext.
ronments, Lasser et al. (2021) estimated that 10 to 13 According to the model, the behavior of individuals in
percent of PhD students (PhD network MPI) have been academic institutions may be fueled primarily by two
bulliedbyasuperior. Inarecentsurveyspecificallyad- differentkindsof“motivators”:
dressingresearchersworkinginpsychology(follow-up:
Stahletal.,2024;initialstudy: Elsonetal.,2021),8to • Academicidealssuchascontributingtothegrowth
10 percent of the members of the German Psychologi- and transmission of knowledge for the common
calSocietyreportedthattheyhadexperiencedabuseof good. People may exhibit certain types of behav-
power,sexualorpsychologicaltypesofharassment/bul- ior (e.g., error monitoring and correction) in the
lying,ordiscriminationinacademia. service of such ideals. Notably, the very existence
Atpresent,thequestionofwhetheracademia,orGer- ofpublicresearchinstitutionsisjustifiedprimarily
manacademia,isaparticularlyfertilebreedingground through the extent to which the behavior of their
forunethicalbehaviorcannotbeconclusivelyanswered, membersservestheachievementofthesegoals.
duetoalackofcomparativestudies. Thepresentreport
• Prospective personal benefits such as financial
is based on the premise that the prevalence of unethi-
profit, prestige, or making a livelihood. People
cal behavior in (German) academia is substantial, and
may exhibit certain behaviors (e.g., covering up
that there may be parameters of the current academic
mistakes)intheserviceofthesemotives.
systemthatpermitorevenexacerbateandrewardsuch
behavior. The commission’s task was to identify those
Presumably, the behavior of most individuals work-
parameters and to make suggestions for structural re-
inginacademicinstitutionsisinfluencedbymotivators
forms.
from both domains, although the relative strength of
the respective influences may differ between individu-
ProcesandMethods
als. Moreover, the influences of the two kinds of moti-
Between its appointment and the delivery of its first vatorsmaybewellalignedwitheachother(e.g.,when
report, the commission held 21 extended meetings. In researchers’ desire for recognition by others in the sci-
itswork,itreliedonaqualitativeapproach,by entificcommunitymotivatesthemtocollectparticularly
strongdata),buttheymayalsocomeintoconflict(e.g.,
1. Collecting, reading, analyzing and discussing rel- when researchers use questionable scientific practices
evantliterature; to increase their chances of getting their research pub-
lishedandthusgettingtenure).
2. Evaluatingparticularlyproblematiccaseexamples
aswellasbestpractices;
3. Discussing personal experiences that commission
members had had while serving in various aca-
demicfunctions;
4. Consulting experts on specific topics (i.e., power
imbalances, employment relationships and fixed-
===== PAGE 3/31 =====
3
Figure1
Modelofbehavioralregulationinacademia(withtwotypesofmotivatorsontheindividualsideandfivemoderatorsontheworkenvironmentside),plus
referencestotwelveproblemareasidentifiedinthisreport(P1toP12;seetextfordetails);ECRs=EarlyCareerResearchers.
===== PAGE 4/31 =====
4
However, human behavior depends not only on the MultipleNestedness
motives of individuals, but also on the conditions un-
The behavior of individuals in academic institutions
derwhichtheyoperate. Keyenvironmentalfactorsthat
isnestedwithinseverallayersofrules,regulations,and
the commission considered in its analyses are also con-
guidelinesthathavebeenestablishedatthevariouslev-
tainedinFigure1(“Moderators”):
els of the academic system. Also, various actors may
influence the behavior of individuals in the system, by
1. Personnel Selection. How people (with specific
enforcing these rules, regulations, and guidelines. Fig-
behavioralinclinationsandskills)arerecruitedto,
ure2demonstratesthisfortheGermanacademicenvi-
andretainedby,theorganization;
ronment.
2. Incentives. Which behavior is rewarded (directly Therelevantactorsprimarilyincludethreegroupsof
orindirectly); people: (1) people who have been given primary re-
sponsibility for tasks in the context of research, teach-
3. Climate and Culture. Which norms and values
ing, and training of young researchers (usually profes-
guidethebehavioroftheorganization’smembers
sors), (2) people who are currently preparing for such
andareviewedasbeingcommonbythem.
a position (they are referred to as Early Career Re-
searchers (ECRs) in the present paper), and (3) stu-
4. ControlandSanctions. Whetherunethicalbehav-
dents. They all interact with one another on a daily
ior is likely to be detected and, if necessary, sanc-
basis against the background of the institutional envi-
tioned;
ronmentanditsimplicitandexplicitrewardstructure.
5. PowersandResources. Howmuchlibertyanddis- Thebehaviorofthesedifferentgroupsofactorsissit-
cretion members of the organization have to be- uated within the regulations of the faculties and uni-
haveastheyplease. versities. These, in turn, belong to the jurisdiction of
the responsible ministries of the federal states, and at
These contextual conditions of the current academic thesametimetheyarealsopartofthehigher-level(na-
system may move the behavior of the people working tionalandinternational)sciencesystem.
in it away from its original purposes (i.e., to serve the We consider this multiple nestedness relevant for
aforementionedacademicideals). Themoretheseorig- the present analyses in at least two regards: First, for
inal purposes are sacrificed, however, the more the le- all interventions meant to alleviate a problem of the
gitimacyofthiskindofworkisatriskofgettinglost. academic system, it will be necessary to identify the
Consequently, the behavior resulting from these in- relevantlevelatwhichtheyshouldtakeplace. Second,
teractions between motivators and moderators should changes taking place at one level may conflict with
be considered problematic to the extent that it leads regulations or expectations located at other levels.
to ethically unacceptable consequences. This extent For example, if a hiring committee decided to use
may be determined by comparing the long-term con- criteria other than the usual ones (such as number of
sequences that the respective behavior will likely have authorships, citations, impact factors, and acquired
for different parties (see Figure 1). For example, neg- grant money), it might work against the interests of
ligentorfraudulentresearcherbehaviorshouldbecon- the faculty and the university, which – at present –
sidered problematic because it consumes resources pri- are themselves evaluated largely on the basis of these
marilytothepersonalbenefitoftheresearcher(career- criteria (www.topuniversities.com/university-rankings-
wise), without yielding any return on investment (e.g., articles/world-university-rankings/world-university-
a relevant increase in knowledge) to those who con- ranking-methodologies-compared).
tributedtheseresources(e.g.,taxpayers).
Twelve particularly important “problem areas” (ab-
breviatedP1toP12)wereidentifiedbythecommission.
TheyarelistedinFigure1anddiscussedinmoredetail
in the second part of the present paper. Note that our
analysis does not distinguish between individual aca-
demic institutions, but rather aims to describe typical
institutional conditions. The arrows connecting some
moderators with one another in Figure 1 are intended
to symbolize that these variables may affect each other
(furtherconnectionsanddirectionsarepossible).
===== PAGE 5/31 =====
5
Figure2
Multiple nestedness of relevant actors and institutions in the German science system. DFG = Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (German Research Foun-
dation), ERC = European Research Council, GSP = Good Scientific Practice, WissZeitVG = Wissenschaftszeitvertragsgesetz (German Act on Temporary
ScientificContracts).
===== PAGE 6/31 =====
6
DetailedAnalysisofExistingProblemsand changes in faculty policies vs. changes to the law) will
SuggestedSolutions requiredifferenttimelinestobeimplemented, whichis
why their (likely) effects must be monitored both indi-
Theoverallgoalofthecommission’sworkwastode-
vidually and in combination with each other, at differ-
rive concrete recommendations on how to improve the
ent points in time. All of this introduces a significant
academicsystem. Theremainderofthispapercontains
levelofuncertainty. Thecommissionproposesthatsys-
detailedanalysesof12“problemareas”,alongwiththe
tematicresearchaccompanyingthesuggestedmeasures
commission’srecommendationsforimprovement.
andtheireffectsshouldbeconductedfromthestart.
Our analyses begin with some particularly problem-
Given the staggering complexity of the overall task,
atic kinds of behavior and their consequences (P1 to
it is impossible to tie all of the recommendations pre-
P4). Theirexistenceisbasicallythecauseandthestart-
sented here to empirical evidence. Many of these mea-
ing point for all of the following elaborations. We then
sures have never been implemented, but this may not
analyzevariouscharacteristicsoftheacademicworken-
beusedasanargumentagainstevertryingthem.
vironment(P5toP12)thatmaycontributetotheemer-
Due to how the current process was initiated (see
gence and/or persistence of this problematic behavior
above), the present paper does focus on the situation
anditsconsequences(seeFigure1).
within psychology, and within the German academic
Notably, the twelve problem areas that the commis-
system. Based on the many discussions we had, how-
sion identified are interrelated in complex ways. Of-
ever, we are convinced that most of the issues we ad-
ten,aproblematicoutcomeisbroughtaboutbyseveral
dressarenotspecifictoagivenfieldoragivennational
problematic system features, and sometimes it is even
system, but rather universal. We will come back to this
possible to delineate entire “chains” of effects. For ex-
aspectlater.
ample, the overburdening of professors with tasks (P6)
mayleadtoreduceddiligenceinpeerreview(P9),and
Problem Area 1. Negligent or Fraudulent Research
this low diligence (P9) may then make it more likely
Practices(P1)
for other researchers to get away with questionable re-
searchpracticesoroutrightfraud(P1). Most scientific research is supposed to generate ro-
Moreover, the same feature of the academic system bust, relevant knowledge for the benefit of society.
may be the cause of several problematic outcomes. As However, many published studies lack methodological
aconsequence,aproposedsolutiontargetingonecause qualityandpublishedresultsoftencannotbereplicated
mayhelpalleviateseveralproblemsatonce. Forexam- (Errington et al., 2021; Open Science Collaboration,
ple, the large power differentials between senior and 2015).
junior researchers (P8) not only enable various forms Probably the main reason for this lack of replication
ofpowerabuse(P2),butalsoimpairthefunctioningof liesintheeveryday(mis)behaviorofresearchers, espe-
controlmechanisms(P12)(i.e.,mostjuniorresearchers ciallytheiruseofso-calledQuestionableResearchPrac-
donotdaretofilecomplaints). Inthefollowing,wehint tices(QRPs)(e.g.,passingoffrandomfindingsaseffects
atthesecomplexitiesoccasionally,butacknowledgethat thatwerepredictedbytheory). ThelinebetweenQRPs
a comprehensive analysis of this multilateral interplay and outright fraud is not clear-cut, with the former be-
wouldexceedthescopeofthepresentpaper. ing commonly perceived as less severe and thus more
Thecurrentpaperreflectsthecommission’sinformed permissible. While there is evidence for a widespread
opinion. However,notalloftherecommendationswere use of QRPs (Fanelli, 2009; John et al., 2012), the
considered equally helpful by all members of the com- amountoffraudismoredifficulttodetermine,forobvi-
mission. The consequences of some of the proposed ousreasons. Itshouldbenoted,however,thateventhe
changes are difficult to foresee in a system as complex useofQRPsmaysufficetodiscreditapieceofscientific
asscience. Insomecases,onlyacombinationofseveral workentirely,andshouldthusbegenerallyregardedas
measures may lead to the desired improvement, while unethical(Milleretal.,2025).
implementing individual measures in an isolated fash- In addition to non-replicability, which is a problem
ionmayevenleadtoadeterioration. shared by other scientific disciplines (e.g., Errington et
Some of the proposed measures (e.g., supervisor al., 2021), psychology has a number of more specific
training)mayincurincreasesinworkload,whereasoth- weaknesses such as a lack of precision (formalization)
ers(e.g.,limitsonauthorshipsoradvisorships)mayac- inmanyofitstheoriesandaconfusinglandscapeofcon-
tually help reduce workload. Again, we occasionally structs,terminology,andmeasures(Anvarietal.,2025;
hint at this, but abstain from attempting a comprehen- Block,1995;Flake&Fried,2020). Thislackofbinding
siveanalysis. standardsmayeasilybeexploitedforone’sownbenefit
Furthermore, the different types of measures (e.g., (e.g., by choosing an analysis pipeline that maximizes
===== PAGE 7/31 =====
7
publishability rather than informativeness). Thus, re- every day, many researchers simply lack the time
search is less efficient than it should be, and resources to take proper steps to promote research quality
arewastedtoasignificantextent. Inaddition,suchdefi- (e.g., preliminary studies to estimate effect sizes,
cienciesmayharmotherresearcherswhentheyhaveto sufficiently specific pre-registrations, replications,
basetheirownresearchonunsoundfindingspublished thorough theoretical deliberations, or even just
bytheircolleagues. Ultimately,thepublic’strustinpsy- readingothers’work).
chology and empirical science as a whole may decline,
6. The occurrence of QRPs, as well as their non-
as may the identification of the next generation of po-
detection, may also be promoted by the exist-
tential researchers with their own discipline (Brachem
ing power differentials in research teams (see
etal.,2022).
P8). Scientific misconduct is often not reported
Causes/ContributingFactors because potential whistleblowers fear retaliation
(e.g., in the form of non-renewal of their fixed-
Negligent and fraudulent research practices may be
term contracts, see P7). In the survey by Elson et
promotedbyavarietyoffactors:
al.(2021),somesupervisorsweredescribedasex-
plicitly asking employees to manipulate data (see
1. Academia is largely lacking a constructive error-
alsoStahletal.,2024).
managementculture(Franketal.,2024). Tolearn
from mistakes (e.g., in experimental programs 7. Thepracticeofgivingmostlyfixed-termcontracts
or data processing), open communication about with relatively short durations to ECRs (see P7)
thesemistakesisnecessary. However,fearofneg- createsacertainpressurecontinuouslytoproduce
ative consequences (e.g., financial penalties, loss new research successes in order to secure one’s
offace),maygetinthewayofsuchopennessand continuedemployment. ThismayleadsomeECRs
leadtoconcealmentofmistakesorevendeliberate tolowertheirethicalstandardsandadoptQRPsto
deceptionaboutmistakesthathavehappened. savetheircareers.
2. Another highly relevant factor is the current in- 8. Personal integrity does not yet play an important
centivestructurein(German)academia: Boththe enough role as a selection criterion in academic
careers of individual researchers and the evalua- hiringprocedures. Infact,theseproceduresoften
tions of academic institutions are strongly tied to relyheavilyonmetricsthatareeasilymanipulated
primarily quantitative metrics such as the num- (see P5, P10). With little effective oversight in
ber of authorships and citations, impact factors, place (see P9, P12), there may thus be a risk of
and grant money. However, the validity of these selecting personnel with particularly low ethical
metrics as measures of research productivity (es- standards.
peciallyinthesenseofgeneratingreliableknowl-
edge gains) is highly questionable. They are 9. Even when scientific misconduct is absent, vague
also easily and commonly manipulated (Borke- theory and terminology, as well as arbitrary mea-
nau,2012;Chapmanetal.,2019;Fong&Wilhite, suring practices, will reduce the refutability of
2017;Johnetal.,2012;Pruschak&Hopp,2022). one’s hypotheses, which in turn will improve the
chancesofhavingone’sresearchpublished.
3. The cost of conducting and publishing studies
of dubious scientific value is borne not by those Recommendations
who conduct and publish them, but by other re-
(1.1.) Engage in more active culture assessment
searchersandbythepublic.
and development. This may include awarding certifi-
4. Theriskofdetectionandsanctionislow,sincetra- cates like "great place to work" or “or great place to
ditionalpeerreviewseemsunabletoenforcegood do research” (note that these are separate issues). In
scientificpractice(seeP9)andtheeffortnecessary this, it will be important to enable independent eval-
foridentifyingtheuseofQRPswouldbeveryhigh uations (e.g., by letting assessors interview organiza-
in the present reviewing system. The oversight tionmembersoftheirownchoosing,anonymously)and
mechanisms currently in place seem to be rather to take measures to avoid positive evaluations that are
ineffective(seeP12). rooted in the assessors’ own interests (e.g., of being
hiredagain). Therelevantcriteriaandprocessmustbe
5. The overburdening of professorships with tasks
transparent, continuously monitored and, if necessary,
(seeP6)maypromotetheuseofQRPs: Duetothe
furtherdeveloped.
multitude of tasks that they have to engage with
===== PAGE 8/31 =====
8
(1.2.) Provisionofamatureinfrastructurefortheim- to their work. A solid foundation in philosophy of sci-
plementation of Good Scientific Practices (such as Pre- ence,logic,andmathematicsisnecessaryforthis,which
Registration and Open Data) by universities and other requirestheparticipationofappropriatelyqualifiedcol-
researchinstitutions,aswellasthirdparty-agents(e.g., leagues(including,ideally,colleaguesfromotherfields,
ZPID,OpenScienceFramework). see 1.6). As an alternative to founding an entire new
(1.3.) Explicit recognition and consideration of the section, explicitly strengthening this subject within the
additional workload necessary to comply with higher already existing Methodology division may be consid-
research quality standards (e.g., larger samples, repli- ered.
cationtrials)inthecontextofgrantapplications. (1.10.) Employ the Research Quality Evaluation
(1.4.) PromotionoftraininginGoodScientificPrac- (RESQUE)collectorApp(Gärtneretal.,2025)toshow-
ticeforindividualresearchers(e.g.,asaroutinepartof case the good science merits of a researcher’s / depart-
ECR training, and as compulsory professional develop- ment’s / university’s publications, independently of the
mentforprofessors). peerreviewconductedbyscientificjournals.
(1.5.) Good Scientific Practice and Open Science (1.11.) Establish the explication of all authors’ ac-
shouldbekeytopicsinteaching,notonlyastheoretical tual contributions as a standard practice (Allen et al.,
concepts,butalsoinapplication(e.g.,aspartofstudent 2014; https://credit.niso.org/). Note that adoptingthe
researchprojects)(Scheffeletal.,2023). CRediTsystemimpliesthattheorderofauthorsdoesnot
(1.6.) The teaching of psychology must be signifi- contain any additional information as compared to the
cantly strengthened in terms of theory formation, the- CRediTrolesthemselves. Onemaythusmovetoalpha-
ory specification (formalization), and theory testing. beticalorderingasalreadycommoninsomedisciplines.
The commission recommends fostering this develop- NotefurtherthattheCRediTsystemdoesacknowledge
mentthroughcooperationwithotherfields(mathemat- types of contributions (i.e., supervision, funding acqui-
ics,philosophy,physics,computerscience)whosemem- sition,projectadministration)thatwerepreviouslyseen
berspossesstherelevantexpertise. asnotjustifyingauthorship. UndertheRESQUEframe-
(1.7.) The problem of the confusing landscape of work,thesizeofthecontributionthateachauthormade
terms, constructs and measures in psychology can only intheirrespectivearea(s)isnowsupposedtobedirectly
besolvedthroughcoordinatedefforts. Itisnecessaryto quantified, via a statement (Leising et al., 2025). Im-
(a) document the multiple existing redundancies and plementing these changes would be the responsibility
ambiguities of meaning (e.g., Cain et al., 2008; Eva ofscientificjournals.
et al., 2025; Hodson et al., 2018, and then (b) reduce
them by gradually establishing more explicit consensus ProblemArea2. AbuseofPower(P2)
on term, construct, and measurement use (see Leising
Surveys at universities and research institutes (Ar-
etal., 2024forsuggestionsonhowsuchaprocessmay
cudietal.,2019;Beadleetal.,2020;Elsonetal.,2021;
beorganized). Duetothehighdegreeofcomplexityof
Olsthoorn et al., 2020; Peukert et al., 2020; Regler et
this task (Leising et al., 2022b, 2022a) and the polit-
al.,2019; Scherpenbergetal.,2021; Schraudneretal.,
ical dimension involved, it may be necessary for jour-
2019;Stahletal.,2024)suggestthatabuseofpoweris
nals and/or professional societies to make this a pri-
notanexceptioninacademia. Mostabusesofpowerare
ority point on their agenda, and to explicitly mandate
committed by academics already firmly established in
and massively incentivize such a development (e.g., by
the system (usually professors), while the victims tend
creatinghighpublicvisibility).
tobeECRs, students, andadministrativestaff(Elsonet
(1.8.) Developandgraduallyimplementelementsof
al.,2021;Stahletal.,2024). Thisisunsurprisinggiven
a more constructive error-management culture. Here,
thelargepowerdifferentialbetweentheformerandthe
onemayborrowfromexistingapproachesinotherfields
lattergroups(seeP8). Inaddition,certaingroups(e.g.,
such as medicine (e.g., web-based error reporting sys-
racialized persons; first-generation academics) seem to
tems; Hoffmann et al., 2008). Generally speaking, the
beatanevengreaterriskofbecomingvictims(e.g.,Nie-
making of errors needs to be destigmatized, and error
mann et al., 2020). However, we do acknowledge that
detection needs to be systematized and rewarded (El-
ways exist for persons lower in the hierarchy to abuse
son,2024).
the power that they do hold against persons higher up
(1.9.) Establish a DGPs division focusing on The-
inthehierarchy(e.g.,byrefusingtocooperate,bybad-
oretical Psychology. This new group should not work
mouthingleaders).
separatelyfromthoseaddressingmorespecificcontent-
Abuse of power can take many different forms in
related questions, but rather establish sustainable ties
varying degrees of severity: (a) Misappropriating an-
withthemandattempttoprovidehelpfulcontributions
other person’s intellectual property, including plagia-
===== PAGE 9/31 =====
9
rism as well as "guest" and "honorary" authorships, (b) rarelyexperiencedassatisfactorybycomplainants
Extorting extra work (e.g., delegating one’s own teach- (Elson et al., 2021; Höbel et al., 2022). The vast
ing responsibilities to ECRs), (c) Demanding problem- majority of misconduct cases thus remains unre-
atic research practices and shifting responsibility for ported and unsanctioned. The knowledge of this
them onto the dependent person in case of detection, low effectiveness of the existing control mecha-
(d) Bullying (e.g., threats, humiliation), (e) Physical nismsisinitselflikelytopromoteabusesofpower,
abuse, and (f) Sexual harassment (Stahl et al., 2024). asperpetratorscanfeelrelativelysafefromconse-
In addition to those directly affected by such behavior, quences.
others may be harmed more indirectly (e.g., when the
4. Anotherimportantfactorthatlikelyfostersabuses
detection of the abuse of power by one person harms
ofpowerinacademiaisthegenerallackofaware-
the reputation of colleagues working at the same de-
ness of, and commitment to, certain ethical stan-
partment).
dards (see P11). In the course of the past few
Causes/ContributingFactors decades, it seems to have been a widely accepted
tenetthatprofessorsare(andshouldbe)allowed
Abuseofpowerintheacademiccontextoftenresults
to demand a lot from their employees in almost
fromaninterplayofseveralfactors:
everyrespect,sincethepathtoaprofessorship“is
rocky" ("it’s always been that way", "we all had
1. Some personality dispositions (especially a readi-
to go through it"). The line between legitimate
nesstomaximizeone’sownpersonalbenefitatthe
usesandillegitimateabusesofpowermaythusbe
expense of others, overstepping boundaries and
blurred, which makes detection and sanctioning
violatingrulesandevenlawsindoingso;Mosha-
ofthelatterlesslikely.
gen et al., 2018; Paulhus and Williams, 2002)
make abuses of power more likely. Research on 5. Thecommonuseoffixed-termcontractsforECRs
business leaders clearly shows the relevance of (see P7) creates a situation of high job insecurity
thesetraits(Palmeretal.,2020);theirimportance and – desired – personnel turnover (see also Ra-
in higher education contexts, on the other hand, hal et al., 2023). Given the fact that institutional
is only recently being considered more systemat- grievanceproceduresusuallytakemonthsoreven
ically (Cohen & Baruch, 2022; Forster & Lund, years, a typical outcome is that such procedures
2018). Selection procedures for academic lead- have not yet concluded when the complainant’s
ershippositionsdonotyetcoverthisdomain(see contract expires, and are then simply abandoned
P10). withnopalpableeffectsonthe–permanentlyem-
ployed–accused.
2. Some structural characteristics of the science sys-
tem (especially in combination with the above- 6. Many forms of power abuse in academia come at
mentionedpersonalcharacteristics)maypromote little cost to the perpetrator, while at the same
the abuse of power (Cohen & Baruch, 2022; time being highly likely to “pay off”. This con-
Lasser et al., 2021). A central factor in this re- cerns, for example, the practice of coercing un-
gardistheunnecessarycentralizationoftoomuch deserved authorships from people in less power-
power in the hands of professors (see P8). This fulpositions(e.g.,asreviewer,editor,oradvisor).
makes it very risky for potential complainants to The likelihood of ever being “caught” with this
voice any concerns because they must fear retal- type of behavior is very low. At the same time,
iation (e.g., non-renewal of fixed-term contracts, longpublicationslistsareamajorassetintryingto
see P7) by the person whose behavior they com- attainapermanentposition,obtainresearchfund-
plainabout(Horbachetal.,2020). ing,orjustgetaraise(seeP5).
3. The existing mechanisms for detecting and sanc-
Recommendations
tioningabusesofpowerinacademiaareweakand
largelyineffective(seeP12). Theresponsiblebod- The commission did not identify any measures for
ieswithinacademicinstitutionstendtobeunder- improvementthatwouldbeuniquelysuitedforfighting
staffed, have hardly any power to impose sanc- power abuse in academia. However, many of the mea-
tions, and are often not even known to potential sures that are proposed in the other 11 chapters of this
complainants. Surveys also show that these “in- report would serve that goal, too. We attempt to point
ternal” complaint channels are not trusted much, outwhenthatisthecase.
andthattheirusetendstoproduceresultsthatare
===== PAGE 10/31 =====
10
Problem Area 3. Inadequate Supervision of ECRs 5. Personnel management and supervision skills do
(P3) not play a relevant role in training on the path
to becoming a professor, or in the assessment of
Some ECRs experience a severe lack of competent
applications in the context of hiring professors
and responsible supervision by their advisors (Mackie
(P10).
&Bates,2018). Deficienciesoftennamedinthisregard
comprise (a) being pushed into bad scientific practice, 6. ItisoftenunclearwhomECRsmayturntoifthey
(b) chronic inaccessibility of the supervisor, (c) lack of are dissatisfied with their supervision, and what
access to needed resources, (d) supervisors’ lack of in- measures may be taken to alleviate such a situa-
terest in the ECRs’ research topics and/or personal and tion. Sanctions for bad supervision do not exist
professionaldevelopment,and(e)toolittlefreedomfor (P12).
ECRs to make and be accountable for their own deci-
sions (which is at odds with the idea that ECRs are Recommendations
supposed to learn how to work independently as re-
(3.1.) Let universities and other research institu-
searchers).
tions, the German Psychological Society, and institu-
Poor supervision almost by definition tends to dam-
tions funding research (e.g., German Research Foun-
age the ECRs concerned, both in terms of professional
dation, Federal Ministry of Research, Technology, and
development and/or well-being. In the long run, how-
Space) declare a plausible maximum number of ECRs
ever,italsohasthepotentialtoharmthescientificpro-
(e.g., five) who may collaborate scientifically with the
cess, as inadequate supervision may lead to inefficient
samesupervisoratthesametime.
and low-quality work. In addition, the reputation of
(3.2.) With an increasing number of ECRs, the time
professors, faculties, and universities may be damaged
and energy that a supervisor may devote to each indi-
when poor supervision becomes publicly known. Fur-
vidualECRislikelytodecrease. Thereisnoautomatism
thermore, negative supervision experiences may drive
here,butitisjustnotplausiblethatthenumberofECRs
talentedECRsoutofthescientificcommunity(Christian
supervised by the same person may be raised indefi-
etal.,2021;Kisetal.,2022),sothattheirqualifications
nitelywithoutanylossinsupervisionquality. Therefore,
willnolongerbeavailabletoscience.
alargenumberofPhDstudentsworkingwiththesame
Causes/ContributingFactors supervisor should only be admitted under special con-
ditions (e.g., co-supervision), and the quality of super-
1. The overburdening of professors with tasks (see vision should then be regularly and carefully checked
P6) plays an important role: German professors (e.g.,byinterviewingtheECRsconcerned,see3.7.).
often have so many responsibilities and are busy (3.3.) Devise and disseminate explicit guidelines re-
with so many things at once that they can only gardingthecooperationbetweenECRsandprofessors.
provide high-quality supervision for a very small (3.4.) Increase the use of supervision agreements
numberofECRs,ifany. to increase the predictability and controllability of sci-
entific collaboration for all parties involved. In such
2. The current incentive system (see P5) rewards
agreements, essential parameters of the planned col-
the completion of as many doctorates as possible
laboration should be put in writing (e.g., preliminary
without ever raising the question of supervision
research topic, modalities of changing topic and/or
quality.
supervisor, access to resources, rights to use data,
3. The power imbalance between professors and authorships, frequency and format of progress re-
ECRs (see P8) can make ECRs reluctant to voice ports, feedback). Standard ways of dealing with com-
criticismofinadequatesupervision,ortodemand plaints and conflicts, including responsibilities for han-
more and better supervision (e.g., more frequent dling them, should also be clarified. The commission
anddetailedfeedback). has published a template for supervision agreements
(https://www.dgps.de/fileadmin/user_upload/PDF/
4. Thereisarelativelackofclarityastowhatconsti- Empfehlungen/Handreichung_BV_zur_
tutes"good”supervisioninthefirstplace. Asthere Weitergabe__Fassung_Mai_06_2024_.pdf).
are no well-established standards for this, ECRs (3.5.) Regular feedback to professors on the quality
often do not have a clear idea of what quantity of their scientific cooperation with and supervision of
and quality of supervision they may legitimately ECRs, by the latter (e.g., in the context of semi-annual
expect. meetings, or based on the results of - possibly anony-
mous-surveys).
===== PAGE 11/31 =====
11
(3.6.) Aslongasthecurrentpracticeofmergingthe or“deadwood”.
rolesofbossandscientificcollaboratorpersists(the“su-
Causes/ContributingFactors
pervisor” is both at once), it will be necessary to es-
tablish explicit, legally binding regulations of the pro-
1. At present, high-quality teaching is not explicitly
cedure for changing supervisors, including the condi-
incentivized much within the German academic
tionsunderwhicheachpartymayoptoutofanexisting
environment. For tenured professors, negative
collaboration, and provisions for enabling a successful
evaluations by students do not have any serious
completionofthecandidate’sPhDregardless.
consequences. Itismostlyuptotheteachingstaff
(3.7.) Use of Thesis Advisory Committees (TACs)
to decide whether or what conclusions they want
to establish independent oversight, documentation,
to draw from such feedback, or whether even to
and, if necessary, protection of the ECRs’ research
obtainsuchfeedbackinthefirstplace. Theeasiest
projects. Here, a group of other researchers monitors
optionisnottodrawanyconclusions,todisregard
theprogressofadoctoralprojectbywayofregular,sep-
ornotobtainfeedback,andtocontinueasbefore.
arate meetings with both parties (supervisor and PhD
student). Notably, supervisors shall not be members 2. Teaching skills play a subordinate role in aca-
of a TAC overseeing the progress of ECRs they work demic hiring procedures at German universities
with. TACs may include members from other univer- (seeP10). Thiscanbeseenasadirectreflectionof
sities and/or disciplines – this seems even desirable as the current incentive structure in which publica-
it may help promote the quality and interdisciplinarity tions, citations, and third-party funding are given
of the project concerned. The establishment of a TAC much greater weight in evaluations of academic
shouldbearoutinepartofsupervisionagreements. institutions.
(3.8.) For academic positions with supervision re-
3. It is unclear how teaching quality should best be
sponsibilities, the commission recommends systemati-
assessed. At present, teaching quality is not mea-
callyintroducingvalidatedtoolsforpersonneldevelop-
sured in terms of achieving long-term teaching
ment, such as 360° feedback. Given the potential of
goals (i.e., increasing the competencies of stu-
such assessment to be abused (e.g., to retaliate against
dents) – which is the primary goal of teaching
a supervisor for perceived injustices), this should be
– but in terms of grades and pass rates, and in
triedprimarilyinthecontextofpersonneldevelopment
terms of evaluations by students. These criteria
(ratherthanpersonnelselection).
arepronetoerror: Typically,thecontentofclasses
and exams as well as grading criteria are deter-
ProblemArea4. PoorQualityofTeaching(P4)
mined by the same persons who also teach the
Besides research, teaching is one of the central tasks classes. This creates a situation in which teach-
of universities, as defined in German federal higher- ers may achieve high pass rates, good average
education acts. However, complaints about the poor exam grades, good teaching evaluations by their
quality of academic teaching in Germany are not un- students, and a low number of complaints simply
commonandinclude(a)lackofcommitmentbyteach- by lowering their standards (known as the "good
ingstaff, (b)outdatedcontent, (c)contentofquestion- grades in return for bad teaching" principle). In
able or obviously low relevance, (d) presentation for- fact,thismayberegardedasaninstanceofpower
mats that are not conducive to learning, (e) redundan- abuse – this time for the benefit of students (at
cies,aswellas(f)unsuitableexaminationformats. least superficially). The problem may be exacer-
Thosewhoareaffectedthemostbythesedeficitsare batedbythefactthatthemerenumberofgradua-
students, who not only have to deal with unnecessary tionsiscommonlyusedasametricofinstitutional
frustrationsandobstaclesinthecourseoftheirstudies, performanceforuniversities.
but also with the feeling of not being valued in their
role and position. Also, learning success may fall short 4. A final important factor is, once again, the over-
of what would be desirable and achievable. Another burdeningofprofessorswithtasks(seeP6). Con-
group of persons affected are those lecturers who are sidering the number of tasks with which profes-
more committed to teaching than would be absolutely sors are regularly expected to engage, a rational
necessary, as their commitment is (apart from student responsewillbeforthemtoreducetheireffortin
feedback) rarely rewarded. In fact, time invested in thoseareaswhereitwillhavetheleastunpleasant
teachingwillnotbeavailableforresearchactivitiesany- consequencesforthemselves(e.g.,teaching).
more, and professors who do invest much of their time
this way are commonly regarded as being second-rate
===== PAGE 12/31 =====
12
Recommendations ingcited. However,thesameoutcomeisoftenachieved
by papers with relatively weak scientific content. This
(4.1.) Create explicit, effective rewards (including
is partly due to the fact that quality assurance through
financial ones) for teachers who invest time and effort
peerreviewdoesnotyetfunctionwellenough(seeP9).
intothequalityoftheirteaching.
Among the negative consequences of this situation are
(4.2.) Givegreaterweighttoteachingqualityinhir-
(a) a dubious scientific evidence base, and (b) biased
ing procedures and in evaluations of faculties and uni-
academichiringandpromotionprocedurestothedisad-
versities.
vantage of researchers who put more emphasis on the
(4.3.) Establishcontinuoustrainingofteachingskills
quality,ratherthanthequantity,oftheirwork.
for teachers in academia. Participation should be en-
Many of the commonly used metrics are easy to ma-
couragedorevenmademandatory(e.g.,onceayear).
nipulateandareinfactcommonlymanipulated(Chap-
(4.4.) Academic institutions should proactively and
man et al., 2019; Falagas & Alexiou, 2008). For exam-
individuallyapproachtheirteachers,offeringvoluntary
ple,surveysshowthattheacquisitionofso-calledguest
externalevaluationandexpertadviceontheirteaching.
orhonoraryauthorshipsbywayofmutualfavorsorco-
(4.5.) Professors teaching the same subject should
ercionisacommonformofscientificmisconduct(Fong
cooperate more closely with one another: They may
& Wilhite, 2017; Gasparyan et al., 2013; Pruschak &
streamline and harmonize the content of their courses,
Hopp, 2022). The benefits of this practice for individ-
and work on creating shared teaching materials. Such
ual researchers and the institutions they work for are
exchanges would likely promote the quality of teach-
obviousunderthecurrentincentivestructure,whilethe
ingoverall(becauseeachtopiccouldbecoveredbythe
cost and the risk of discovery and sanctions (see P12)
teacher with the greatest expertise, respectively), and
is close to zero for everyone involved (i.e., those who
reducethe workloadforindividualteachers. Theymay
grant guest authorships and those who accept them).
(andshould)alsoresultinthecreationofOpenEduca-
Theconsequenceisthatauthorshipssayverylittleabout
tional Resources (i.e., freely available teaching materi-
people’sactualscientificcontributionstoaresearchpa-
als). TheDGPsmaytakeonasteeringrolehere.
per–itmayrangefromseveralyearsofintensivework
(4.6.) Criteriaandmethodsforteachingevaluations
toexactlyzero. Themerenumberofaperson’sauthor-
(especially by students) should be critically scrutinized
shipsshouldthusbeviewedasadiscreditedmetric,yet
and optimized. Suggestions in this regard were made,
itcontinuestoplayakeyroleinresearchevaluations.
forexample,byKreitzerandSweet-Cushman(2021).
There also exist some counterproductive incentives
(4.7.) The question of appropriate forms of exami-
in the area of third-party funding. At some academic
nation in psychology should also be critically reflected
institutionsinGermany,successinacquiringthird-party
upon. Complaintsbystudentsabout"presentationsem-
funding is actually the only relevant criterion by which
inars" and multiple-choice examinations, for example,
the performance of professors is measured and possi-
are common, but viable alternatives are hardly ever
bly rewarded (e.g., with a tax-funded bonus to a re-
specified.
searcher’s income). This is because a certain percent-
ageofthesesumsistypicallyaddedontopasan“over-
ProblemArea5. CounterproductiveIncentives(P5)
head” to be used directly by the institution. German
Scientists regularly compete with each other for lim- academicinstitutionsmayactuallyneedthatmoney, as
ited resources such as positions and project funding. they continue to be described as being short of budget
In order to make decisions on the allocation of these (e.g., Vallbracht, 2024). As a consequence, it is ratio-
resources as objective as possible, the use of so-called nalforresearchinstitutionstospendasmuchmoneyas
metrics of research productivity has become firmly es- possibleasquicklyaspossibleontheirresearch,andto
tablished. However, common quantitative metrics such reward those researchers who help them achieve that
as publication and citation numbers, third-party fund- goal (e.g., with bonuses to their salaries). Researchers
ing totals, impact factors, and h-indices are increas- whose research is the costliest are the most likely to be
ingly seen as lacking validity, so much so that their rewardedthatway.
usemayactuallybedetrimentaltotheoriginalgoalsof Notably, all of this happens irrespective of any po-
science(EuropeanCommission,Directorate-Generalfor tential returns on investment for the public that funds
Research and Innovation, 2021; Leising et al., 2022b, the whole endeavor, and it also happens within a sys-
2022a)). tem in which actual quality control is more or less un-
Itispossiblethatstrongercontributionstoadomain’s heard of. The current incentive structure is primarily
knowledgebasehavebetterchancesofbeingpublished orientedtowardsquantityandattachestoolittleimpor-
in prestigious (“high-impact”) journals, and of becom- tance to actual scientific progress in terms of content
===== PAGE 13/31 =====
13
(i.e., giving reliable answers to relevant scientific ques- al., 2022b, 2022a; Schönbrodt et al., 2025). Scores at-
tions). This is also the case, for example, when profes- tainedbyindividualarticlesmaybeaggregatedforindi-
sors, faculties, and universities are rewarded (e.g., in vidual researchers (e.g., as part of promotion or hiring
universityrankings)forthesheernumberofcompleted proceedings) or for entire institutions (e.g., as part of
doctorates(Hachmeister,2019),butdecisionsonthere- rankings).
spective quality criteria are made solely by those same (5.4.) Use more valid metrics in specifying strategic
professors,faculties,anduniversities. Thisapproachob- objectives (e.g., between professors, faculties, and uni-
viouslyentailsastrongincentivetoincreasecompletion versity leadership). For example, a faculty may be fi-
ratesbyloweringqualitystandards. nanciallyincentivizedforincreasingitsnumberofrepli-
cation attempts (by X percent in a given time-span) –
Causes/ContributingFactors
irrespectiveoftheoutcomeofthoseattempts.
(5.5.) Abandon the pure number of completed doc-
1. The current dysfunctional metrics were proba-
toratesasanevaluationcriterioninallofthepreviously
bly once introduced with the best of intentions,
mentionedcontexts.
namelywiththeaimofestablishinggreaterobjec-
(5.6.) Usemorevalidmetricsascriteriainhiringand
tivityinassessingscientificproductivity. However,
promotionprocedures(see10.3.).
their validity relies too much on the honesty of
(5.7.) Voluntary public commitment by researchers
individual researchers, and on the functioning of
to a (relatively low) maximum number of authorships
thepeer-reviewsystem. Apparently,itwasunder-
per average year (Frith, 2020). This would be a highly
estimatedhoweasilythesemetricsmaybemanip-
plausible way to prioritize quality over quantity, as it
ulated,andhowwillingmanywouldbetodojust
shifts the focus to one’s most important projects, in-
that(Chapmanetal.,2019;Fong&Wilhite,2017;
stead of one’s being only superficially involved in as
Johnetal.,2012;Pruschak&Hopp,2022).
manyprojectsaspossible. Thismeasurewouldalsohelp
2. It is not uncommon for academics working in the reduce the overall number of manuscripts to be peer-
systemtojustifytheirownacquiescencebysaying reviewed, which should enable more thorough peer re-
thattheyaremoreorlesspowerlesstochangethe views in turn (see P9). As with some of the other rec-
currentformofmetrization,eventhoughtheyac- ommendationswemake,thisonewillbemosteffective
tuallysharethegrowingcriticismofit. Professors ifadoptedbymanyresearchersatonce.
routinelyrefertofacultyoruniversityadministra-
tions as the responsible agents, and these in turn Problem Area 6. Overburdening of Professors with
refer to ranking agencies and to political leader- Tasks(P6)
ship. This inclination to deny responsibility is a
Current expectations regarding German professors’
keyfactorthatkeepstheproblemgoing.
performanceareconsideredbymanytobefartoohigh.
A study by Weihs et al. (2018) yielded an estimate of
Recommendations
56 hours average working time per week [95 percent
(5.1.) Raisepublic–andespeciallypolitical–aware- CI: 35, 80]. In another study by Jackenroll and Julmi
ness of the lack of validity of common metrics and the (2018), a substantial percentage of German professors
possibility of developing and using more valid metrics. reported feeling exhausted (15 % none to mild; 55 %
Thismaybeachievedby(e.g.) talkingtothemedia,by mildtointermediate;27%intermediatetostrong;3%
writingblogpostsoropenletters,orviaofficialpetitions strongtoverystrong).
toparliaments. As a general rule, university professors in Germany
(5.2.) Academic institutions and advocacy groups areexpectedto(a)teacheighttonineclasses(typically
should publicly distance themselves from the use includinglecturesandseminars)peryear. Thisrequires
of invalid productivity metrics in science evaluation. keeping teaching materials up to date (in both analog
One way of doing this would be to join the Coali- and digital format) based on scientific innovation and
tion for the Advancement of Research Assessment studentfeedback,aswellaspreparingandgradingclass
(https://coara.eu/) which the German Psychological papersandexams. Allofthisisaccompaniedbyalotof
Societyhasalreadydone. administrative work (e.g., archiving; handling of legal
(5.3.) Specify and start using more valid metrics, complaints). Most professors also supervise Bachelor’s
especially ones capturing the methodological rigor of and Master’s theses, which involves regular meetings
studies (e.g., for representative data, sufficient statis- with students, reviewing drafts, and reading and grad-
tical power, and reproducibility checks that were suc- ingthefinalversionsoftheses.
cessfully carried out: Gärtner et al., 2025; Leising et
===== PAGE 14/31 =====
14
The law requires German professors also to (b) con- manuscripts or grant proposals, and in the context of
tribute to their institutions’ self-government. This im- hiring procedures and award committees. Composing
plies participation in the meetings of various commit- suchreviewsmayeasilyconsumeentireworkdays. Yet
tees (e.g., faculty, senate, teaching committee, exami- another task is to make one’s own scientific work visi-
nation committee, hiring committee, ethics committee, ble (e.g., by having it registered in relevant databases,
opensciencecommittee, librarycommittee, admissions or via direct communication with the public using the
committee,budgetcommittee),aswellasstudyingand availablemediachannels).
commenting on the documents used in the work of Finally,professorsareexpectedtobe(e)goodrepre-
thesecommittees. sentativesoftheirrespectiveinstitutionsandofscience
German professors are also (c) the responsible per- as a whole. For example, they are to appear at social
sonnel and budget managers of their respective work- events such as alumni meetings or career days. They
group, including not only the bureaucratic duties that answere-mailsregardingallsortsoftopicsbystudents,
this entails (e.g., continuous monitoring of available colleagues,andjournalists. Andtheyvolunteertowork
funds, initiating and overseeing hiring procedures, asmembersofthegoverningbodiesofscience(e.g.,for
readingandsigningcontracts,sometimesfiringpeople), theirprofessionalsocieties).
but also a significant responsibility for their employees’ The first to suffer from this overload of tasks are the
well-being and career progress (e.g., goal-setting, eval- professors themselves, many of whom are constantly
uation of goal achievement, giving feedback, help with working at the limits of their own capacity, often ac-
networking,identifyingandmanagingconflicts,writing companiedbythefeelingthattheyhavetocutbackon
referenceletters). quality in order to be able to meet all the demands at
Beyond meeting these “basic” requirements, profes- least to some extent. This contributes directly to the
sors are also expected to (d) continuously deliver re- lackofqualityinresearch,teaching,andsupervision.
searchthatisinternationallycompetitive. Thisrequires Theoverburdeningofprofessorswithtasksalsocon-
long-term, intensive content-related work at a high in- tributes directly to the lack of thoroughness in peer re-
tellectuallevelandinconstantcoordinationwithchang- views(seeP9)andintheworkofappointmentcommit-
ing teams of colleagues within and outside the respec- tees (see P10). Oversight (see P12) will also be weak
tive institution. Typical research projects take several when professors have no time and energy left to pay
years from the beginning to completion: The literature attention to what their colleagues are doing, and when
must be studied, grant proposals must be written, sub- the responsible offices (e.g., for scientific integrity) are
mitted to funding bodies, and often revised. The same staffedwithotherprofessorswhocanonlyengagewith
proposalmustalsobesubmittedtoethicscommittees. thisdemandingtypeofwork“ontheside”.
The research that is going on in a professor’s group
Causes/ContributingFactors
must be supervised, discussed, and continuously opti-
mized. Datamustbecollected,stored,analyzedandin-
1. It has repeatedly been argued that academic in-
terpreted,anderrorsmustbediscoveredandeventually
stitutions in Germany lack the basic funding that
corrected. Depending on the field one works in, data
theywouldneedtofunctionproperly(Institutfür
collection for a single project may take months or even
Demoskopie Allensbach, 2019; Vallbracht, 2024;
years. Project funds (e.g., subject compensation, ma-
Wissenschaftsrat, 2023). If this is true, then it is
terials, wages) must be spent and correctly accounted
likelythattoofewpeopleareexpectedtoshoulder
for.
toomuchwork.
Furthermore,researchresultshavetobepresentedat
conferences and submitted to scientific journals in the 2. The low level of formal flexibility in the distribu-
formofmanuscripts. Thepublishingprocessusuallyre- tion of tasks (e.g., the teaching load is typically
quires extensive (often multiple) rounds of manuscript thesameforallprofessors)resultsinaninefficient
reviews, at the same journal, or at different journals. allocationofresources.
Drafting and continuously optimizing a single, high-
quality manuscript until it is ready for publication usu- Recommendations
ally involves hundreds or even thousands of hours of
Themainactivitiesofprofessorsshouldbeinthear-
work. The current development towards Open Science
eas of research and teaching. Generally speaking, the
has increased this effort even more (e.g., by requiring
commission recommends that professors be relieved of
pre-registration,opendata,etc.).
some of the more extraneous tasks they are currently
Inaddition,professorsregularlyappearonthe"other
burdened with, to enable them to concentrate more on
side" of the scientific process as well: as reviewers for
thesecoreresponsibilitiesoftheirs.
===== PAGE 15/31 =====
15
(6.1.) Increase the number of specialized positions even after attaining a doctorate, make it comparatively
that relieve professors of delegable tasks (examples: unattractivetoremaininGermanacademia(bothwhen
teaching coordinator, open science coordinator, exam compared to academic employment in other countries,
coordinator, lab manager, data steward). The creation and to regular employment outside of academia). For
of such positions also prevents the coercion of ECRs to example, the lack of compatibility between such em-
performsuchtasks"ontheside". ployment conditions (which require high levels of re-
(6.2.) Allow for more flexibility with regard to the gional mobility) and family planning is obvious (Kuhnt
relative importance of the different tasks (research, et al., 2022). This may lead women in particular to
teaching, administration, "third mission"), both be- quitacademiaaftercompletingtheirdoctorate(Lemser,
tween professorships and within professorships over 2019). In a recent survey, 72 percent of professors
time. Most notably, this includes making the teaching agreed that career prospects for ECRs are “too un-
load more flexible, which may require changes to the certain” (Deutsches Zentrum für Hochschul- und Wis-
respectivestatelaw. senschaftsforschung(DZHW),2024).
(6.3.) Makeitpossibleforprofessorshipstobefilled
Causes/ContributingFactors
part-time (e.g., through job-sharing). This may require
changes to state law. Halving the number of tasks as-
1. The lack of non-competitive basic funding limits
signed to a person this way may help reduce the felt
theinstitutions’abilitytoplanaheadandvirtually
workloadandpressureoverall,thuscontributingtobet-
forcesthemtoretainasmuchbudgetflexibilityas
terwell-beingandbetterqualityoftheremainingwork.
possiblethroughtemporaryappointments.
(6.4.) Make the overburdening of professorships
better visible by publicly naming it as a problem, and 2. In 2007, the German federal government intro-
through systematic research on the topic (e.g., by sur- duced a new law (i.e., the German Act on Tem-
veyingprofessorsregardingtheirworkload). porary Scientific Contracts; WissZVG; see Som-
(6.5.) Increasethebasicfundingofhigher-education mer et al., 2022) with the original intention of
institutionsinGermany,toenableadequatestaffing(see limiting fixed-term employment. To achieve that
also 6.1.). This may be achieved at no additional cost goal,thislawprohibitsfurtherfixed-termemploy-
byrepurposingsomeofthemoneythatwouldotherwise ment for persons who have worked in academia
beusedforcompetitivegrants. for 12 years or more. However, the effect was
pretty much the opposite of what had been origi-
ProblemArea7. Fixed-TermandShort-TermEmploy- nallyintended: insteadofbeinggivenpermanent
ment(P7) positions, ECRs are now regularly unable to find
further employment once they have reached the
Recentstudiesshowthat81percentofacademicstaff
12-yearlimit.
in Germany are employed on a fixed-term basis (in
2013,thefigurewas83percent). Accordingtoarecent 3. Given that professors in Germany currently have
evaluation, about one third of these employment con- the authority to hire “their own” ECRs, university
tracts have a duration of less than twelve months. In a administrations attempt to make their available
survey of around 6,000 employees holding such a po- professorships attractive by keeping all the ECR
sition, every second person stated that they considered positionsassociatedwiththemeasytovacate.
thedurationoftheircontracttobetooshorttoachieve
thedesiredqualificationgoal(Sommeretal.,2022). 4. Occasionally,itisarguedthatpermanentemploy-
Thecommissionseesthreemaindisadvantagesofthe ment would reduce the productivity of scientists
current situation (see also Rahal et al., 2023): (a) The (duetolowerpressure). Tothebestofourknowl-
qualityofacademicworkislikelytosufferifemployees edge,however,thereisnoempiricalevidencesup-
must permanently concern themselves with their own porting this claim, and the same argument could
professional future (and write job applications, for ex- also be used against the permanent appointment
ample) in addition to their actual scientific tasks. Slim ofprofessors.
timeperspectivesmaycomeintoconflictwiththebasic
Recommendations
requirementfordiligenceinresearch(e.g.,thenecessity
tocheckforerrors,attemptreplications,andsoon). (b) (7.1.) Use of US-style tenure-track positions as the
The constant dependence of ECRs on renewals of their standard path toward a tenured professorship. This
fixed-termcontractsmakesthemvulnerabletoexploita- may be accomplished using an approach in which an
tion attempts by superiors (Scherpenberg et al., 2021). ever-increasing number of professors is appointed this
(c) Precarious and unstable employment conditions, way(DGPsBoardofDirectors,2022). Themaingoalin
===== PAGE 16/31 =====
16
this would be to provide ECRs with more predictability freely to decide whether to help push the careers of ju-
in planning their careers. A positive evaluation should nior scientists by (e.g.) collaborating with them, intro-
leadtoapermanentposition,eitherwithorwithoutthe ducingthemtoinfluentialcolleagues(i.e.,otherpoten-
titleofprofessor. tial collaborators), or recommending them for leader-
(7.2.) Increase the number of permanent positions shippositions(e.g.,oneditorialboards).
with full or even increased teaching load. The holders Unfortunately,theexistingpowerimbalanceexposes
ofthesepermanentpositionsmayalsocontributetore- those who do not hold a professorship to potential
lieving professors from some of their more peripheral powerabuse(seeP2),andresearchsuggeststhatdiffer-
tasks(see6.1.). ent forms of power abuse may actually be fairly com-
(7.3.) Make 4 years the regular contract duration mon in German academia (e.g., Scherpenberg et al.,
for PhD positions and/or take measures to shorten the 2021). For example, the power associated with a pro-
typical time-span needed for completing a PhD to 3 fessorship may be used to coerce employees into ap-
years. The latter should become easier when also im- plyingquestionablescientificpractices(QRPs)(seeP1).
plementing recommendations 7.4. (relieving PhD stu- Speaking more generally, the integrity of the scientific
dentsfromdata-collectionwork)and8.6(makingasin- discourse itself is likely to suffer when discussions be-
glemanuscriptthebasisforaPhD). tween professors and ECRs take place within relation-
(7.4.) Pure data collection for research projects can shipscharacterizedbysomuchdependencyofthelatter
and should primarily be carried out by research assis- on the former (Kuhnt et al., 2022). In a recent survey,
tants (RA), not by PhD students. This would relieve about40percentofGermanprofessorsagreedwiththe
thelatterofataskforwhichtheyareusuallyoverqual- statementthattheexistinghierarchieshaveadetrimen-
ified and give them time to concentrate on scientific taleffectontheautonomyofECRs(DeutschesZentrum
tasks that they cannot delegate (e.g., reading, design- für Hochschul- und Wissenschaftsforschung (DZHW),
ingstudies,analyzingdata,attendingconferences,writ- 2024).
ing manuscripts). It would also make the people who
Causes/ContributingFactors
carry out the data collection less vulnerable to abuses
ofpowerbyprincipalinvestigators,sincethedependen-
1. The unnecessarily steep power imbalance be-
ciesassociatedwithPhDcompletionmaynotbeusedas
tween professors and most other people in the
leverageagainstthem.
academic system results primarily from the ac-
cumulation of various functions in the hands of
Problem Area 8. Unnecessarily Strong Power Imbal-
the former. Particularly problematic for ECRs
ance(P8)
(probablythemostvulnerablegroup)maybethe
Depending on the position, jobs in academia offer fact that their closest scientific collaborators are
varying degrees of opportunity to exercise power over alsotheirimmediatesuperiors,combinedwiththe
others. The power gap between those who hold a pro- commonpracticeofshort-termemployment(P7).
fessorship and most other people in the system (espe- Thereisaveryconcreteriskthattheneedtohave
cially ECRs and students) is particularly large (Scher- one’scontractrenewedrepeatedlymaybeusedas
penberg et al., 2021): A German professorship entails leverageagainstECRs(Kuhntetal.,2022).
thepowertomakedecisionsoverresources(e.g., labo-
2. Another possible source of leverage against ECRs
ratory time, research infrastructure such as computers,
isrootedintheallegedoractualpowerofprofes-
congressfees,travelexpenses),toevaluatetheworkof
sors to give or deny access to the research data
others (e.g., grading of theses), and to hire people or
that are collected as part of a project. For most
discontinue their contracts. With a majority of votes in
ECRs,havingaccesstothesedataisanindispens-
hiringandpromotioncommittees(seeP10), professors
able prerequisite for being able to work on their
also decide who else will be appointed to a professor-
research questions at all. However, the legal situ-
ship. As reviewers and editors for scientific journals,
ationinthisarea("whoownsthedata?")islargely
they decide whose work is published where (see P9),
unclear to most of those involved. Most often, it
andwhowillbeawardedaresearchgrant. Asteachers,
issimplyassumedthatthedataareownedbythe
professors basically have complete autonomy in deter-
head of the respective division (i.e., the profes-
mining the content (including difficulty level) of their
sor).
classesandexams.
In addition, more informal sources of power play an 3. Moreover,mostGermanprofessorsarepublicser-
important role. For example, given their expertise and vants(“Beamte”),whichgivesthemanextraordi-
standinginthescientificcommunity,professorsareable narylevelofjobsecurity(e.g.,itiscomparatively
===== PAGE 17/31 =====
17
difficulttofirethem;e.g.,LöweandValet,2023), forwhichtheythemselvesarenotinanywayresponsi-
andtheirrelativelyfairsalariesgivethemthead- ble. External (preferably international) reviewers may
vantageofbeingabletoaffordgoodlegalcounsel be selected by an independent body (e.g., thesis advi-
in cases of conflict – a privilege not enjoyed by sory committee). This approach implies that the com-
mostECRs. pletion of a doctorate is explicitly decoupled from any
publicationsuccess.
Recommendations (8.8.) Abolishthegradingofdoctoraltheses. Evalua-
tionsshouldinsteadbemadeintermsofthesefourcate-
(8.1.) Disentangletherolesasscientificcollaborator
gories: “passed”,“significantformalrevisionnecessary”,
and superior of ECRs, both of which are currently held
“significantrevisionofcontentnecessary”,“failed”.
byprofessors,andinsteadassignpersonnelresponsibil-
(8.9.) Consider a more equal representation of the
ity to the department as a whole. This means that pro-
four major academic status groups (professors, ECRs,
fessorships will no longer have ECR positions formally
students,administration)intheself-governingbodiesof
assignedtothem(Spechtetal.,2017). Rather,letjunior
academic institutions. This is likely to require changes
and senior scientists agree on working together rather
tostatelaw.
informally, and make it clear that such arrangements
(8.10.) ProvideECRswithbudgetsforcongresspar-
may be modified in the course of a junior scientist’s as-
ticipationandtravelthattheymayuseattheirowndis-
sociation with the department (see 3.4.). In order to
cretion.
prevent an undue concentration of power in the dean’s
(8.11.) Establish and provide sustainable financing
office, personnel decisions (e.g., over premature con-
for a position that offers independent legal advice for
tracttermination)shouldbemadejointlybyastanding
ECRsatnocosttothem(uptoacertainlimit).
committeewitharegularlychangingcomposition.
(8.12.) Develop and publish a legally sound guide-
(8.2.) Make exemplary solutions in this regard visi-
line on the topic of "Rights to Research Data". This is a
ble(e.g.,byreportingonthemontheDGPswebsite),as
task for the DGPs (and/or DFG) leadership. The com-
amodelforotherfaculties.
mission recommends taking into account the relevant
(8.3.) Authorship, access to data, and access to fi-
experiences documented by the German Research Om-
nancial and material research resources (e.g., labora-
budsman(Czesnick,2020).
tory hours, travel funds) should be explicitly and bind-
ingly regulated at the beginning of any scientific co-
ProblemArea9. IneffectivePeer-ReviewSystem(P9)
operation. For ECRs, this should be made part of a su-
pervisionagreement(see3.4.). Peer review (i.e., the assessment of research ideas
(8.4.) Delegate (at least part of) the coaching func- andresearchresultsbycolleagues)issupposedtofunc-
tioncurrentlyassociatedwithprofessorshipstopersons tionastheprimaryquality-assurancemechanismofthe
who are particularly qualified for this (e.g., specialized academic world. It is necessary because competently
counselorsatgradschools). Thesecounselorsalsoneed assessing some scientific achievement usually requires
abudgetforfinancingtrainingworkshopsforECRs. a high level of expertise, which only other researchers
(8.5.) Make an external assessment of all scientific working in the same field have to a sufficient extent.
worktherule: Personswhowerethemselvesinvolvedin Thecommissionassumesthatpeerreviewmustandwill
thepreparationofsomepieceofscientificoutput(such continuetoplaythedecisiveroleinmakingsuchassess-
as a manuscript) should not be involved in the assess- mentsinthefuture.
ment of that work. The same goes for all of their close However, it has become clear that peer review often
collaborators. does not properly fulfill its quality-assurance function
(8.6.) A single manuscript that could be submitted (Rennie, 2016; Tennant & Ross-Hellauer, 2020; Vazire
to a scientific journal for review should be sufficient as &Holcombe,2021). Thisappliesbothtoreviewsofsci-
the basis for a doctorate. This rule takes into account entific manuscripts and to reviews of grant proposals.
the significantly higher demands of research in times Thefollowingconcernsarecommonlyvoicedinthatre-
of Open Science, as well as the general goal of giving gard:
moreweighttothequality(asopposedtothequantity) (a) Peer review is hardly able to detect actual fraud
ofresearch. (seeP1).
(8.7.) Thismanuscriptshouldbereviewedexternally (b)Thepeer-reviewsystemissusceptibletonepotism
(i.e., by persons not part of the same research team and (positive as well as negative) reciprocity effects.
or faculty) and independently of any peer review by a This is because academic fields are often small (people
scientific journal that may also take place. Otherwise know who is working on what), roles of authors and
ECRs might be forced to endure long review processes reviewers change continuously in both directions, and
===== PAGE 18/31 =====
18
thesupposedanonymityofauthorsandreviewersisof- P5): Researchers are primarily rewarded for pub-
ten questionable, or even actively broken (“guess who lishingasmuchaspossibleasquicklyaspossible,
reviewed your grant proposal recently?”), without this and for raising and spending as much third-party
everbecomingtransparentorbeingregulated. fundingaspossible.
(c) Peer review may be strongly influenced by polit-
2. Most reviewers are professors, who tend to be
ical and strategic considerations (e.g., attempts to pro-
overburdened with tasks (see P6). The constant
mote or impede a particular research subject, or a par-
distraction by numerous other tasks makes it less
ticular"schoolofthought”onagivensubject),withthis
likely that they are willing and able to invest the
beinghiddenbehindpseudo-scientificarguments.
necessarydiligenceintotheirreviewingwork.
(d)Somereviewersandeditorsusetheirpositionsof
power in the peer-review process to pressure authors
3. There are hardly any extrinsic incentives for tak-
into citing them, or to steal others’ ideas, or to pre-
ing one’s reviewing work seriously and investing
vent/delay publications by others that could (suppos-
thetimeanddiligencethatwouldbeneeded.
edly) stand in the way of their own academic success
(e.g.,becausethereviewedworkchallengesthereview- 4. The primary interest of commercial publishers is
ers’/editors’ownwork). to generate revenue from selling articles. More
(e)Reviewsaresometimesnegligentandsuperficial, thorough reviews would prevent many articles
which is a problem given how much people’s career from ever being published, and they would slow
prospects depend on publication success. For example, down the publication process for the remaining
actual checks of reproducibility (i.e., running the asso- ones. There is a clear conflict of interest here
ciated code on the associated data and comparing the between the publishers’ commercial interest and
results to those reported in an article) are still not con- qualityassurance.
ductedatmostjournals.
5. Duetoacommonlackoftransparencyontheside
(f) Some reviewers use inappropriately condescend-
of the authors, reviewers have a hard time get-
ing,hostile,orhurtfullanguage.
ting a complete and unadorned picture of the re-
(g)Thesystemisinefficientbecausearticlesrejected
search,andthushavetorelyonthevalidityofthe
byonejournalkeepgettingsubmittedtootherjournals
information that the authors are willing to make
untiltheyareeventuallypublishedsomewhere.
available.
(h) The fact that so many findings cannot be repli-
cated shows that the current peer-review system is not
6. Traditionally, peer reviews are not made pub-
asufficientgatekeepingmechanismagainstthepublica-
lic. This leaves room for editors’ decisions to be
tionoflow-qualityresearch.
“based on peer review” with little accountability
The main victims of a dysfunctional peer-review sys-
for the quality of the respective information base
temarethoseresearcherswhovalueandproducehigh-
(i.e., the reviews), for how carefully the sound-
quality research, as they cannot be sure that their ef-
ness of the reviewers’ arguments was considered,
forts will be appreciated and rewarded. Good publica-
andwhetherappropriatemeasuresforpreventing
tion success may be achieved with easily-produced and
undue (e.g., political) influences on the review
methodologicallyinferiorresearchifnon-scientific(e.g.,
processweretaken.
personal,political)influencesplayadecisiveroleinthe
publicationprocess. Thismaythentranslateintounfair Recommendations
disadvantagesinhiringprocedures(seeP10). Otherre-
(9.1.) Public declaration by professional societies
searchers working in the same field may also be nega-
and research institutions that a significant reduction of
tively affected if they must build their own research on
thepublicationoutputintermsofquantityisneeded.
publishedstudiesofdubiousquality.
(9.2.) Reduce the number of manuscripts under re-
Causes/ContributingFactors view by significantly increasing the minimal method-
ological requirements (e.g., mandatory pre-registration
1. The number of items (i.e., grant proposals and
andreplication)anddesk-rejectingmanuscriptsincase
journal manuscripts) to be reviewed is constantly
of non-compliance with these requirements. In this,
veryhigh,whichhasledtoasituationinwhichit
special study features such as particularly expensive /
becomesmoreandmoredifficulttofindqualified
sophisticateddesignsorparticipantsamplesthataredif-
reviewers (so-called "reviewer fatigue"). One of
ficulttorecruitmustbetakenintoconsideration.
the main reasons for this high number of submis-
(9.3.) Move to not-for-profit scientific publishing
sions is to be found in misaligned incentives (see
as the standard model, as quickly as possible. There
===== PAGE 19/31 =====
19
should be no commercial interests that may interfere to invite certain reviewers and thus provide them with
withtheoriginalpurposesofscientificpublishing. Plat- more opportunities for getting their reviews published
formsaffordingnot-for-profitpublishingdoalreadyex- (and cited). To prevent this, (a) it should be made
ist and continue to emerge (e.g., the PsychOpen GOLD transparentwhohasinvitedwhomtobeareviewerfor
program at ZPID; Meta-Psychology hosted at Linnaeus a manuscript, (b) such decisions should not be made
UniversityinSweden). Not-for-profitpublishingshould by a single person, and (c) the number of such invita-
lead to a smaller overall publication volume and a bet- tions to the same reviewer should be limited (e.g., to 3
ter signal-to-noise ratio in the published literature. It per year and journal). Note that DOI allocation is also
thusbears significantpotential forimprovingefficiency conceivableforanonymousreviews.
inthespendingofpublicresources. (9.10.) Promote registered reports as the gold stan-
(9.4.) The Commission recommends that the transi- dard in publishing empirical studies. This publishing
tion to not-for-profit publishing be publicly declared a modelautomaticallyentailspre-registration,helpsfight
key strategic goal by professional societies and univer- publication bias, and makes the expertise of reviewers
sities. available at earlier stages of the research process, so it
(9.5.) Asageneralrule,thecontentsofpeerreviews may actually contribute to better study planning. Sub-
should be made public. This would provide some ur- mission of registered reports could be incentivized by
gently needed transparency in regard to the soundness offeringfast-trackingforthem.
of the arguments on whose grounds journal editors ul-
timatelyrejectoracceptapaper. Problem Area 10. Questionable Assessment Prac-
(9.6.) Getspecializedexpertsinvolvedwho–inaddi- ticesinHiringProfessors(P10)
tiontothetraditionalcontentreview–evaluatesubmit-
For years, a need for improvement has been artic-
ted manuscripts for their more technical aspects (e.g.,
ulated with regard to selection procedures in hiring
compliancewithpre-registrations;reproducibilityofre-
personnelforleadershippositionsinGermanacademia
sultsusingopendataandcode).
(e.g., Abele-Brehm and Bühner, 2016a, 2016b). Com-
(9.7.) Peer reviews should be signed by the review-
mon complaints include a lack of due diligence, the
ers, if possible. This would increase transparency and
use of data (e.g., metrics) of questionable validity, fail-
accountabilitywithregardtopossibleinfluencesof(hid-
uretocapturehighlyrelevantpersonalitycharacteristics
den) networks and reciprocities, as well as reviewers’
(e.g., integrity, leadership skills), and an overly strong
vestedinterestsandbiasesfororagainstcertainsubjects
influence of local micropolitics. All of this may result
or methods. In addition, such unblinding may help en-
in suboptimal decisions that have a variety of negative
courage reviewers to adopt a constructive tone. There
effects: (a) Students may be affected by poor teach-
may, however, still be situations in which anonymous
ing (see P4), (b) scientific personnel may be affected
peerreviewisappropriate.
byproblematicleadershipbehavior,bothontheprofes-
(9.8.) Note, however, that unblinding may inad-
sional level (e.g., demanding the use of QRPs) and on
vertently strengthen the aforementioned reciprocity ef-
theinterpersonallevel(e.g.,bullying),(c)totheextent
fects: Authorsmaywishto“payback”reviewerswhose
that unethical leaders give ECRs who tolerate such be-
identities they know, when the roles of author and re-
havior preferential treatment (e.g., by furthering their
viewer are reversed some time in the future (Lynam et
careers), questionable scientific and interpersonal val-
al.,2019). Afurtherriskmaylieinagenerallyreduced
uesmaybepassedontothenextgenerationandmulti-
willingnessofreviewerstoexpressappropriatecriticism
plied in their problematic effects, (d) appointing scien-
publicly. Theserisksmustthereforebekeptinmindand
tific leaders with questionable integrity is likely to lead
monitored. This monitoring will become easier when
to poor integrity of the scientific output, to the detri-
thecontentofreviewsisroutinelypublished(see9.5.).
ment of other researchers and the general public (see
(9.9.) Peer reviews should be recognized as a pub-
P1), (e) the appointment of persons with low integrity
lication format in its own right, receive DOIs, and thus
toacademicleadershippositionscreatesaconsiderable
become citable. This should help increase the motiva-
reputational risk for the institutions concerned ("scan-
tion of reviewers to be thorough in their work. The
dals").
commission proposes that journals maintain (or link
to) a database containing all submitted manuscripts as Causes/ContributingFactors
preprints, as well as the citable reviews that were writ-
1. Validlyassessingcandidatesforprofessorshipsnot
tenabouteachsubmission.
only requires (a) basic diagnostic competencies
Note, however, that this approach does entail some
(e.g., knowledge of concepts such as reliability,
potential for power abuse, because editors may prefer
===== PAGE 20/31 =====
20
predictive and construct validity, as well as typ- is similarly questionable, as it is known that such
ical errors of judgment) and (b) specific exper- data strongly reflect relatively extraneous factors
tise for judging the quality of an applicant’s sci- suchasaffectionfortheteacherandthedifficulty
entific contributions (e.g., publications) (instead of the subject (Kreitzer & Sweet-Cushman, 2021;
of just counting them, for example), but also Stroebe,2020).
(c) the time and willingness to use these com-
4. As pointed out above, the commission assumes
petencies conscientiously and thoroughly. How-
thatproblemssuchasabuseofpower(seeP2)and
ever, time is something that German professors
scientificmisconduct(seeP1)resultfrominterac-
are notoriously short of, due to the vast range of
tions between environmental conditions and the
tasksthattheyaresupposedtohandlesimultane-
personality dispositions of certain individuals. A
ously (see P6). The potential long-term benefits
thorough assessment of such dispositions should
thatmaybeincurredbydoingdiligentcommittee
thus be part of any hiring procedure for perma-
work (e.g., more productive collaborations with
nent positions in academia. However, at present
newcolleagues,fewerscandals)maythusoftenbe
there is still a gross disparity between their obvi-
trumpedbymoreimmediateconcernsoverwhere
ous relevance (Forster & Lund, 2018; Peus et al.,
best to allocate one’s time and energy in the next
2015) and the rather marginal role that person-
fewweeksormonths.
alitydispositionstypicallyplayinassessingcandi-
2. As an alternative to a thorough qualitative exam- dates. More generally speaking, there is too little
ination of the research performance of individual clarityregardingstandardsofgoodleadershipbe-
applicants, the use of mainly quantitative metrics haviorinGermanacademia.
(e.g., numberofpublicationsandcitations, third-
5. The Commission is not aware of any systematic
party funding, h-indices, impact factors) is still
studies addressing the influence of local micro-
very common. These metrics not only appear to
politics on hiring procedures in academia. How-
becomparativelyobjective,butarealsoveryeasy
ever, a large body of anecdotal evidence suggests
todetermine. Theirusemaythussavecommittee
thatthepersonalinterestsofcurrentfacultymem-
memberstimeandeffort, whichmakesitveryat-
bers (e.g., fear of competition or critical scrutiny
tractive. However, it has become more and more
ofone’sownwork)dooftenplayaratherdecisive
obvious how easily these metrics may be manip-
roleintheselectionofcandidates.
ulated, and how readily some researchers do ma-
nipulate them (e.g., Chapman et al., 2019). For
Recommendations
example, guest and "honorary" authorships con-
tinue to be among the most common forms of (10.1.) Membersofhiringcommitteesneeddiagnos-
scientific misconduct (Fong & Wilhite, 2017; Pr- tic expertise. Concepts such as reliability and validity,
uschak&Hopp,2022),despitethefactthatthese typicaljudgmenterrorsandtheircauses,aswellasways
practices have been denounced as unethical for toavoidthemarefamiliartomosttrainedpsychologists.
decades. The lengths of publication lists and the However, most hiring committees include many mem-
impact factors of the journals one publishes in berswholacksuchexpertise. Itthusseemsadvisableto
continue to play important roles in selecting aca- trainthosepeopleforthetask.
demic leadership personnel. Taken together, this (10.2.) Membersofhiringcommitteesneedtimeand
may lead to a selection of the most ruthless indi- energy for a thorough review of applications. There-
vidualsforprofessorships(i.e.,theoneswhohave fore,theireffortsmustbecompensated(e.g.,byreliev-
theleastobjectionsagainstmaximizingtheirown ing them of some of their teaching duties, or by grant-
numeric indices of research productivity at any ing them additional personnel and material resources
cost). for their research). This likewise applies to members
of committees making tenure decisions or decisions on
3. Withregardtotheassessmentofteachingcompe-
the hiring of staff for non-professorial but permanent
tence, it must be asked whether the typical 15-
positions.
minute live-teaching sample is a valid indicator
(10.3.) Explicitly use Good Scientific Practice crite-
of those characteristics that one is looking for in
ria when evaluating the scientific output and potential
a professor (e.g., the ability to explain difficult
ofapplicants(Gärtneretal.,2025;Leisingetal.,2022b,
matters in ways that foster interest and under-
2022a;Schönbrodtetal.,2025).
standing in students). The use of course evalua-
(10.4.) Develop and use more valid indicators
tionsbystudentsasindicatorsofteachingquality
of teaching skills. For shortlisted candidates, live or
===== PAGE 21/31 =====
21
recordedteachingsamplescouldbeassessedbyexperts paper. Toestablishanethicalorganizationalclimateand
withregardtocorrectnessofcontent,didactics,andap- culture, however, not only do norms have to exist, but
propriateness for the intended audience, as well as the membersoftheorganizationneedtobeawareofthem,
applicants’ ability to engage with questions construc- takethemseriously,andidentifywiththem.
tively, and to promote debate and knowledge transfer. Inrecentyears,theconceptofanorganization’s“eth-
Comprehension tests for participants (pre-post) would ical climate” has been applied to academic institutions.
enableamoreobjectiveassessmentoflearningprogress Work climate is defined as organizational norms and
thanispossible,forexample,withglobalratingsofstu- conventionsthatareseenbyanorganization’smembers
dentsatisfaction. asexistingwithinitsstructuresandprocedures(Martin
(10.5.) Relevant personality traits and competen- & Cullen, 2006). It is assumed that an organization’s
cies (e.g., ethical leadership, mentoring, and conflict climate is amenable to planned change (e.g., Vid¯ak et
management) must be explicitly recognized in their al., 2021). Richardson and Healy (2019) point out the
importance and be accounted for by assessment pro- relevance of an overarching framework for promoting
cedures (Abele-Brehm & Bühner, 2016b). Mere self- an ethical climate at institutions of higher education,
assessmentsofthesecharacteristicsmustbeassumedto and the leadership’s responsibility to assess the current
have very limited utility, due to their strong social de- ethicalclimate,inordertounderstanditsimpactonthe
sirability. A personality variable of utmost importance staff’sbehavior.
is personal integrity, which needs to be distinguished Empirical studies suggest that many who work in
from agreeableness, because integrity is most clearly science perceive the gap between theory and practice
demonstratedininstanceswhereapersonopenlydares in that regard as being quite large (Chapman et al.,
to object to unethical behavior even if it is shown by 2019). Forexample,althoughmostscientistsareproba-
almost everybody else. More research into viable ways blyawareofthedifferencebetweenacceptableandun-
of validly assessing this domain is needed. Based on a acceptableresearchpractices,useofthelatterseemsto
review of the available literature, the commission rec- befairlycommon(seeP1). Whenmembersofanorga-
ommendslookingmorecloselyintothefollowingmeth- nizationperceiveitsallegedethicalprinciplesasmerely
ods: assessment centers (Müller, 2015); structured in- ashallowfacade(becausetheykeepgettingviolatedby
terviews including biographical elements and critical theactualbehavioroftheorganization’smembers),this
scenarios (Strobel et al., 2018); Situational Judgment maybreedcynicismandalienation(Mete, 2013). With
Tests (Corstjens et al., 2017; Kasten et al., 2020); in- regardtotheusevs. abuseofpower(seeP2),eventhe
tegrity tests (Marcus et al., 2007; Ones & Viswesvaran, relevantnormsthemselvesseemnottobeentirelyclear.
2001; Ones et al., 1993, 2012; Van Iddekinge et al., Thecommission’sextensivediscussionswithvariousac-
2012). The level of candidates’ voluntary transparency tors in the system revealed that many of them seem to
abouttheirownresearchprocesses(asdemonstratedby be unsure about why certain actors are given certain
their using Open Science practices) may function as a powers, and where the line should be drawn between
proxymeasureofintegrityinthisdomain. TheRESQUE legitimateusesofthosepowersandillegitimateabuses.
CollectorApp(Gärtneretal.,2025)maybeusedtoas- There also seems to be little knowledge regarding
sessthis. forms of destructive leadership that may be fueled by
(10.6.) Significantly increase the proportion of ex- a leader’s narcissistic or psychopathic personality char-
ternal members in hiring committees, and have them acteristics(seeP10),andmostemployeesknowverylit-
selectedinwaysthatensuretheirindependence(ofthe tle about their own rights under labor law. Such a lack
local faculty, and each other). For example, external of clarity may be conducive to misconduct. The com-
members of hiring committees may be selected by a missionthusrecognizesaneedforraisingawarenessin
group that is appointed for that purpose by a profes- theseregards.
sional association. This approach may not only help
Causes/ContributingFactors
limit unwanted influences of local micro-politics, but
alsoaddsomerelevant(e.g.,diagnostic)expertise. 1. AmoreconsistentimplementationofGoodScien-
tificPracticeisseverelyimpededbythecurrentin-
Problem Area 11. Lack of Clarity of, and Low Com-
centivesystem,whichrewardsquantityoverqual-
mitmentto,EthicalStandards(P11)
ity (see P5). Injunctive norms (i.e., officially de-
Theexistenceofethicalnormsisanecessaryprereq- clared values and guidelines) often stand in di-
uisite for being able to judge people’s actions as more rect opposition to descriptive norms (i.e., actual
or less morally acceptable. It is therefore central to all behavior).
twelve problem areas that are addressed in the current
2. In academia, issues of power and power abuse
===== PAGE 22/31 =====
22
in the workplace have only recently begun to be found online at https://www.path2integrity.eu/ and
taken seriously. The commission suspects that https://sops4ri.eu/.
the previous neglect of these issues was rooted
in a widespread, hyper-competitive mindset that Problem Area 12. Weak Control and Sanctioning
prioritized (the appearance of) productivity and Mechanisms(P12)
achievementoveralmostallotheraspectsofwork
In many areas of the private sector (e.g., banking,
(e.g.,thewell-beingofemployees). Itmayalsobe
mobility, pharmaceutical research), it has become ac-
areflectionofmoregeneralavoidancetendencies:
ceptedthattheactionsoforganizationsandtheindivid-
Most people – within and outside of academia
uals in them have to be externally monitored in some
– are reluctant actively to confront the question
way, especially if these actions have the potential ad-
of how well they are living up to (their own or
verselytoaffectpublicgoods. Inmanyfieldsofscience
others’) moral standards, and to deal with such
(includingpsychology),thesituationtodateisverydif-
unpleasanttopicsasmanipulation,deception,ex-
ferent: Most of the responsibility for supervision, con-
ploitation,corruption,andboundaryviolations.
trols,andpossiblesanctionslieswiththeacademicinsti-
tutions themselves. However, many case reports in the
Recommendations
media as well as survey studies show that the current
(11.1.) Offer (continuous) training regarding top- complaint systems are not very effective (Elson et al.,
ics with ethical relevance: power and abuse of power; 2021; Höbel et al., 2022; Scherpenberg et al., 2021;
GoodScientificPracticeandOpenScience;bullyingand Schraudner et al., 2019). Potential complainants do
ostracism; sexual harassment; conformity and dissent; nottrustthem,donotusethem,andunethicalconduct
psychopathyandnarcissism;leadership;corruption,in- hardlyeverhassevereconsequencesforperpetrators.
cluding the applicable laws; dealing with and learn- Scientificmisconductharmsthescientificcommunity
ing from mistakes; labor laws; quantity versus quality andthegeneralpublic. Otherformsofmisconduct(ex-
inresearch;whistleblowingandcomplaintmechanisms ploitation, bullying, sexual harassment) harm the re-
(e.g., Kohrs et al., 2023). Make participation in such spective victims’ physical and mental health. More-
trainingobligatory,ifpossible. over,intherarecaseswheresuchmisconductisactually
(11.2.) Such training should have an applied, uncovered, it often causes immense reputational dam-
psycho-educational character. Working on emotionally age to those directly responsible and to the institutions
engaging case examples may be a particularly suitable they work for. This damage is all the greater if it also
method for this (Katsarov et al., 2022). The primary becomes apparent that others in the institution knew
goal should be to make such topics discussable in the about the misconduct for a long time, did nothing to
firstplace,toenableparticipantstorecognizewheneth- stopit,orevenattemptedtohelpcoveritup.
ical questions are involved, and to make more respon-
sible decisions in that regard. Useful recommendations Causes/ContributingFactors
regardingcoursedesignmaybefoundinvandenHoven
Severaldifferentfactorscontributetothecurrentsit-
etal.(2023)andinPrieß-Buchheitetal.(2020).
uationinwhichcontrolandsanctioningmechanismsin
(11.3.) Thetargetaudienceforsuchtrainingshould
academiafailtoperformtheirfunctionsadequately:
include students, professors, ECRs, staff, and univer-
sityleadership–inotherwords,everyonewhoissome- 1. In contrast to many universities’ public commit-
howinvolvedinresearchorteachingactivities. Astudy ments to ethical research practices, the easiest
covering three countries (Netherlands, Spain, Croatia) pathforthemtocreateanappearanceofresearch
by Evans et al. (2022) shows the importance of an excellence is by rewarding researchers who help
institution-wideapproach. optimizethecommonmetrics(seeP5), whilenot
(11.4.) For efficiency, the commission recommends asking too many questions regarding the means
that academic institutions work together in developing bywhichthisisachieved.
asharedcurriculumforsuchthistypeoftraining.
(11.5.) Another possible measure would be the 2. Potential whistleblowers or complainants are not
training of multipliers who are explicitly appointed familiar with the respective procedures, or the
as contact persons regarding ethical questions and relevant procedures and responsibilities have not
problems. They might be tasked with proactively evenbeensufficientlyspecified.
promoting the importance of ethical awareness and
3. Potential whistleblowers or complainants lack
commitment (e.g., by giving short refresher talks
confidence in the existing complaint channels.
on regular bases). Some tested material can be
===== PAGE 23/31 =====
23
This may be due to doubts about (a) the confi- problems. There is a feedback loop in operation
dentiality and/or (b) the effectiveness of the des- here, in which the factual weakness of oversight
ignatedprocedures,and/or(c)theimpartialityof (withfewcomplaintsbeingmadeandevenfewer
the responsible office-holders. All three types of sanctionsimposed)isusedasanargumentagainst
doubts seem to be justified, as media reports and theneedforoversightinthefirstplace.
personal testimonies to members of the commis-
9. Lack of awareness and commitment regarding
sionsuggest.
ethical standards (see P11) is also likely to
4. The investigative and sanctioning powers of the contribute to the lack of effective oversight in
responsible offices and of the universities’ leader- academia. This is because (a) potential whistle-
ship boards are very limited. For example, om- blowers may simply not have a clear enough un-
budspersons working for different academic in- derstandingofwhatisandwhatisnotacceptable,
stitutions are not legally allowed to share their and(b)membersoftheinstitutionmaydecideto
knowledge of individual cases with one another, abstainfromflaggingunethicalbehaviorthatthey
andthemostserioussanctionthattheGermanRe- seebeingtoleratedallthetime.
search Foundation has for violations of its ethics
10. Finally, university professors enjoy a very high
code is a five-year ban on submitting grant pro-
reputation with the German public (e.g., as intel-
posals.
ligent, meticulous and responsible people whose
5. The responsible offices within German academic primary aim is to benefit the public). Such views
institutionstendtobepoorlystaffed. Ombudsper- maymakethenecessityofoversightofthesepeo-
sons,forexample,areoftenacademicswhodothe ple’s activities seem less than obvious for layper-
job on top of their everyday duties (see P6), who sons.
receive no (e.g., financial) compensation or even
Givenallofthesechallenges–entirelytothedetri-
incentives for doing the job thoroughly, and who
ment of potential whistleblowers – it is not sur-
often lack the legal and psychological expertise
prising that successful complaints seem to be a
necessary for doing it well. In addition, turnover
rare exception rather than the rule in the science
ishigh,whichmakesitevenmoredifficulttohan-
system (Elson et al., 2021; Höbel et al., 2022),
dletheoftencomplexandlengthycasesproperly.
and that many cases of even severe misconduct
6. Iftheaccusedareprofessors,thepowerimbalance onlycometolightviathepress.
between them and most potential complainants
Recommendations
(see P8) tends to induce intense fear (e.g., of re-
taliation)inthelatter. Forexample,complainants (12.1.) Specify all reporting procedures and pub-
maybeafraidthataprofessorcouldtakerevenge lishthemonthesameeasy-to-findwebsites. Itmustbe
on them by attempting to ruin their career. Un- madeclearwhichofficeisresponsibleforwhichtypeof
derGermanlaw,mostprofessorsarestateemploy- complaint (scientific misconduct, bullying, corruption,
eesandthusalmostunfireable,whereasalmostall sexual harassment, interpersonal conflict, supervision
ECRsworkonfixed-termcontractswithrelatively problems), how the relevant processes work, how the
shortdurations(seeP7). confidential handling of information (e.g., about the
identity of persons providing information) is ensured,
7. The effectiveness of internal complaint mecha-
and what further protection measures are available to
nisms may be severely diminished by conflicts of
complainants.
interest that arise from the existence of personal
(12.2.) Strengthen the responsible offices signifi-
and/orprofessionalrelationshipsbetweentheac-
cantly, through adequate staffing, full-time payment,
cused and (a) the officers responsible for dealing
and granting of proper investigative powers (e.g., the
withcomplaints,and/or(b)othersinthesamein-
righttoinspectand–ifnecessary–securethefilesand
stitution who know of misconduct and might file
data-sets from research projects). The commission also
a complaint. Often, taking reported problems se-
considers the clarification of the legal situation in this
riously could lead to greater damage to relation-
areatobeanimportantshort-termgoal.
ships and reputations than attempting to conceal
(12.3.) Establish independent ethics offices at the
them.
state or federal level. The most important issue
8. The fact that so few cases of misconduct are re- here is to decouple these offices from individual aca-
ported is sometimes misinterpreted by decision- demic institutions, to reduce the aforementioned con-
makers as an indication of a low prevalence of flicts of interest. Such offices may be financed di-
===== PAGE 24/31 =====
24
rectly by the state, or by an association of academic HowSpecificaretheseProblemsfor(German)
institutions. The same requirements regarding re- Academia,andforPsychology?
sources and powers mentioned in point 12.2. ap-
Wewillconcludethisarticlebybrieflyaddressingthe
ply here, as well. The commission has issued a sep-
generality vs. specificity of our problem descriptions
arate document addressing these topics in more de-
and recommendations for (a) academia, (b) Germany,
tail, incorporating advice from several members of
and(c)thefieldofpsychology. Inthis, wewillnotaim
the Network Against Power Abuse in Science e.V.
for comprehensiveness, but rather highlight what are
(https://www.dgps.de/fileadmin/user_upload/PDF
some of the most prominent issues from our perspec-
/Stellungnahmen/AMWF_Stellungnahme_
tive.
Beschwerdeverfahren.pdf).
First, it has been said above that many forms of un-
(12.4.) Asarule,getanindependentofficeinvolved
ethical conduct are prevalent both within and outside
atthe beginningof everycomplaint procedure. Thede-
of academia. This includes bullying, as well as sexual
cision as to whether and how a complaint should be
harassmentand exploitation. Dhananiet al.(2021)re-
followed up inside or outside the concerned institution
ported that they could not find systematic differences
must not rest with persons who are employed by that
in prevalence estimates between representative sam-
institution.
ples and convenience samples. This would mean that
(12.5.) Staff ethics offices with several, rather than
common prevalence estimates (approx. 20-40 percent)
justone,personsattheexecutivelevel. Thiswillestab-
may be taken seriously. We are not aware of any stud-
lish some desirable redundancy and help mitigate po-
ies comparing prevalence estimates between academia
tentialbiasesandconflictsofinterest.
and other types of work environment. Therefore, the
(12.6.) Conduct regular proactive inquiries of em-
question of whether unethical behavior is more or less
ployees. These may be anonymous surveys or confi-
common in academia than outside of it has to remain
dential face-to-face interviews focusing on opportuni-
unanswered for now. We do believe, however, that our
ties for improvement in organizational structures and
analyses above show that the current academic system
processes. Approaching employees proactively should
encouragesandrewardsunethicalbehaviortoacertain
help lower the threshold for reporting problems. In
degree.
this,aimingforrepresentativenessiskeytoavoidinter-
Second, the German academic system does have
pretabilityproblemsduetopossible(non-)participation
some characteristics that are quite distinctive in inter-
bias.
national comparison. Among these is the fact that a
(12.7.) Test the viability and effectiveness of anony-
typical German professor is not only the closest scien-
mousreportingofmisconduct. Note,however,thatGer-
tific collaborator of “her” PhD students and postdocs,
man law requires complainants ultimately to come for-
butalsotheirboss,andalsoinvolvedinevaluatingtheir
ward and identify themselves if their complaint is sup-
scientificwork. ComparedtomostotherWesterncoun-
posedtoleadtoaninvestigation. Astheexistingpower
tries,thisaccumulationofpowerinthehandsofasingle
imbalance(seeP8)andtheassociatedfearofretaliation
individualisratherextreme(seeP8).
may ultimately disable any reporting channel (anony-
In addition, Germany has a special law (the Wis-
mousornot),flatterhierarchieswillstillbeneeded.
sZeitVG) in place that legalizes giving ECRs a series of
(12.8.) Conductevaluationresearchontheeffective-
relativelyshort-termcontracts(seeP7). Ifanemployer
nessofexistingcomplaintprocedures.
(typically a professor) is not satisfied with anECR any-
(12.9.) An ethics office that may function properly
more,thislawmakesitlegaleffectivelytoterminatethe
requires employees with legal, psychological, and ad-
ECR’s employment by simply not renewing their con-
ministrativeexpertise,aswellassomeknowledgeofthe
tract. This possibility adds significantly to the existing
internal workings of the science system. This suggests
powerdifferentialbetweenseniorandjunioracademics.
it will be reasonable to fill these positions with people
Theresultingleveragemaybeusedbytheformertoex-
whohavethenecessaryprofessionalbackgrounds(e.g.,
ertallsortsofpressureonthelatter(e.g.,toworkmore,
lawyers), and that a single position-holder will be
toworkontasksunrelatedtotheirjob,tosomehowde-
unlikelytohaveallthenecessaryexpertise.
liverseeminglygoodresults,etc.).
The same dependencies that make the occurrence
Note that, since the first version of the current report
of these and other forms of unethical behavior more
wasprepared,thenewWhistleblowerProtectionAct(Hin-
likely also make it less likely that any victims or wit-
SchG) has come into force in Germany. It covers some of
nesses will ever file complaints, due to fear of retalia-
thesamegroundasthecommission’srecommendationsin
tionorbeingostracized. Thepervasivesilenceandfear
thischapter.
among people working in the German academic sec-
===== PAGE 25/31 =====
25
tor have been repeatedly documented by investigative ORCIDs
journalists (Illinger, 2019; Neumann, 2019; Wiarda,
Nicole Bössel-Debbert 0000-0002-2578-6447 An-
2023). Furthermore, most German professors are em-
netteKluge0000-0002-8123-0427DanielLeising0000-
ployed by the state (Bundesland) in which they work,
0001-8503-5840 Dorothee Mischkowski 0000-0002-
providing them high job security and strong legal pro-
7563-402X Le Vy Phan 0000-0002-6470-8871 Franz
tections against being laid off or sanctioned otherwise.
Richter 0009-0004-6862-2962 Manfred Schmitt 0000-
Allofthisaddstotheaforementionedpowerdifferential
0002-9978-8357JuttaStahl0000-0002-3252-180X
even more. The overall situation of German professors
has been described as “an invitation to power abuse”
Acknowledgments
(Winkler,2023).
By international comparison, German professors The members of the commission would like to ex-
havearelativelyhighteachingload. MostGermanuni- press their gratitude to the following members of the
versities are publicly funded and do not collect tuition two previous DGPs leadership boards (2020-2022 and
fees. Even the most unfavorable teaching evaluations 2022-2024)fortheirtrustandcontinuedsupport:
hardly ever have tangible consequences for a tenured MarkusBühner,AnneGärtner,Eva-LotteBrakemeier,
professor. These factors combined may account for a Stefan Schulz-Hardt, Karl-Heinz Renner, Anna-Lena
relativeneglectofteachingqualityatGermanuniversi- Schubert, Matthias Nückles, Ulrich Ansorge, Christian
ties. We are not aware of any systematic investigations Fiebach,JensBölte,ChristinaBermeitinger.
intotheseissues,however. The members of the commission would also like to
Third, above we highlighted some deficiencies of thankthefollowingindividualsfortheirhelpwithcom-
standardpracticeinpsychologicalresearch,suchasthe piling the content of the present report, through their
useofunderspecifiedtheoriesandagenerallackofco- commentsonearlierversions,in-depthdiscussions,and
ordination (e.g., regarding terminology and measure- readingrecommendations:
ment practices) (see P1). These deficiencies continue Gerhard Blickle, Sabine Chai, Hjördis Czesnick,
to harm the credibility of the entire field. In fact, a Sibylle Detel, Malte Elson, Maximilian Frank, Kathrin
recent German survey shows that researchers’ trust in Fucke, Tobias Heed, Gina Henze, Chris Hopwood, Uwe
the solidity of the work that is being done in their own Kanning, Martin Kersting, Peter Kirsch, Jana Lasser,
fieldisparticularlylowamongpsychologists(Deutsches Seraina Lerch, Martin Kleinmann, Eva Korus, Stefan
Zentrum für Hochschul- und Wissenschaftsforschung Krumm, Bernd Markus, Patrick Mussel, Rolf Nichel-
(DZHW), 2024). Given that at least some other fields mann,TuuliaOrtner,TilmanReitz,StephanRixen,Julia
have replicability rates that are not higher than those Rohrer, Tobias Rosefeldt, Dominik Schwarzinger, Jule
in psychology (e.g., Errington et al., 2021), we lean Specht, Sonja Utz, Erich Witte, Joachim Wittkowski,
towards interpreting this as a sign of healthy realism PatrickWöhrle,andthemembersofMaWi(theNetwork
ratherthannegativism. againstAbuseofPowerinScience).
To end on a more positive note, psychologists’ The authors would like to thank Paula Knischewski
growing awareness of these and other weaknesses of forherhelpwiththetypesettingofthisarticle.
their own scientific work has undeniably led to a
number of very fruitful initiatives for improvement ConflictofInterestandFunding
(e.g., pre-registration; replication databases; theory-
The authors declare that none of them has a conflict
formalization efforts; large-scale data-collection and
ofinterestassociatedwiththepublicationofthiswork.
data-analysis collaborations; Diamond Open Access
Nospecificfundingwasassociatedwiththiswork.
journals; transparent peer review). There can be lit-
tledoubtthatallofthesearewell-suitedforimproving
CRediTRoles
scientificpracticeandforyieldingmoretrustworthyre-
sults in more efficient ways. Even the greatest skeptic Authorsareorderedalphabetically
wouldhaveahardtimemakingthepointthatimprove- Conceptualization: NBD,AK,DL,DM,LVP,MS,JS
mentisnowhereinsight. Itis. Writing-OriginalDraft: DL
Writing - Review and Editing: NBD, AK, DL, DM, LVP,
AuthorContact MS,FR,JS
Visualization: DL,JS,AK,DM,LVP
Corresponding author is Daniel Leising, TU Dresden
(daniel.leising@tu-dresden.de).
===== PAGE 26/31 =====
26
OpenSciencePractices Bulletin,117(2),187–215.https://doi.org/10.
1037/0033-2909.117.2.187
Thisarticleisconceptualinnatureandassuchisnot
Borkenau, P. (2012). Not all authorships are created
eligible for Open Science badges. The entire editorial
equal. Measurement: Interdisciplinary Research
process,includingtheopenreviews,ispublishedinthe
and Perspectives, 10(3), 147–148. https://doi.
onlinesupplement.
org/10.1080/15366367.2012.720192
Brachem, J., Frank, M., Kvetnaya, T., Schramm, L. F.,
References
& Volz, L. (2022). Replication crisis, p-hacking
Abele-Brehm, A. E., & Bühner, M. (2016a). Überlegun- and Open Science: A survey of questionable
gen zur Optimierung von Berufungsverfahren research practices in student projects and im-
in der Psychologie. Psychologische Rundschau, pulses for teaching. Psychologische Rundschau,
67(4), 262–268. https://doi.org/10.1026/ 73(1), 1–17. https://doi.org/10.1026/0033-
0033-3042/a000333 3042/a000562
Abele-Brehm,A.E.,&Bühner,M.(2016b).Wersolldie Cain, N. M., Pincus, A. L., & Ansell, E. B. (2008). Nar-
Professur bekommen? [Who shall get the pro- cissism at the crossroads: Phenotypic descrip-
fessorship?] Psychologische Rundschau, 67(4), tion of pathological narcissism across clinical
250–261. https://doi.org/10.1026/0033- theory, social/personality psychology, and psy-
3042/a000335 chiatric diagnosis. Clinical Psychology Review,
Allen, L., Scott, J., Brand, A., Hlava, M., & Altman, M. 28(4), 638–656. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
(2014). Publishing: Credit where credit is due. cpr.2007.09.006
Nature, 508(7496), 312–313. https://doi.org/ Chapman, C. A., Bicca-Marques, J. C., Calvignac-
10.1038/508312a Spencer, S., Fan, P., Fashing, P. J., Gogarten,
Anvari, F., Alsalti, T., Oehler, L. A., Zach, M., Hussey, J., Guo, S., Hemingway, C. A., Leendertz, F.,
I., Elson, M., & Arslan, R. C. (2025). A frag- Li, B., Matsuda, I., Hou, R., Serio-Silva, J. C.,
mented field: Construct and measure prolifer- & Stenseth, N. C. (2019). Games academics
ation in psychology. Advances in Methods and play and their consequences: How authorship,
Practices in Psychological Science, 8(3), Article h-index and journal impact factors are shaping
25152459251360642. https://doi.org/10. thefutureofacademia.ProceedingsoftheRoyal
1177/25152459251360642 Society B, 286(1916), 20192047. https://doi.
Arcudi, A., Cumurovic, A., Gotter, C., Graeber, D., Joly, org/10.1098/rspb.2019.2047
P., Ott, V., Schanze, J.-L., Thater, S., Weltin, Christian, K., Johnstone, C., Larkins, J.-a., Wright, W.,
M.,&Yenikent,S.(2019).DoctoralResearchers &Doran,M.R.(2021).Asurveyofearly-career
in the Leibniz Association: Final Report of the researchers in Australia. eLife, 10. https://doi.
2017LeibnizPhDSurvey.LeibnizPhDNetwork. org/10.7554/eLife.60613
https://nbn-resolving.org/urn:nbn:de:0168- Cohen, A., & Baruch, Y. (2022). Abuse and exploita-
ssoar-61363-9 tion of doctoral students: A conceptual model
Basile, K. C., D’Inverno, A. S., & Wang, J. (2020). for traversing a long and winding road to
National prevalence of sexual violence by a academia.JournalofBusinessEthics,180,505–
workplace-related perpetrator. American Jour- 522. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10551-021-
nal of Preventive Medicine, 58(2), 216–223. 04905-1
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2019.09. Corstjens, J., Lievens, F., & Krumm, S. (2017). Situa-
011 tional judgement tests for selection. In H. W.
Beadle, B., Do, S., El Youssoufi, D., Felder, D., Gorenf- Goldstein, E. D. Pulakos, J. Passmore, & C.
losLópez,J.,Jahn,A.,Pérez-BoschQuesada,E., Semedo (Eds.), The Wiley Blackwell Hand-
Rottleb, T., Rüter, F., Schanze, J.-L., Stroppe, book of the Psychology of Recruitment, Selec-
A.-K., Thater, S., Verrière, A., & Weltin, M. tion, and Employee Retention (pp. 226–246).
(2020). Being a doctoral researcher in the Leib- Wiley-Blackwell. https://doi.org/10.1002/
niz Association: 2019 Leibniz PhD Network Sur- 9781118972472.ch11
veyReport.LeibnizPhDNetwork.https://www. Czesnick, H. (2020). Konflikte im Zusammenhang mit
ssoar.info/ssoar/handle/document/69403 Autorschaften und Datennutzung – Erfahrun-
Block,J.(1995).Acontrarianviewofthefive-factorap- gen des "Ombudsman für die Wissenschaft".
proach to personality description. Psychological https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4723737
===== PAGE 27/31 =====
27
Deutsches Zentrum für Hochschul- und Wissenschafts- Fanelli, D. (2009). How many scientists fabricate and
forschung (DZHW). (2024). Barometer für die falsifyresearch?asystematicreviewandmeta-
Wissenschaft: Ergebnisse der Wissenschaftsbefra- analysisofsurveydata.PLoSONE,4(5),e5738.
gung 2023. Deutsches Zentrum für Hochschul- https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.
und Wissenschaftsforschung. https://www. 0005738
bmbf.de/SharedDocs/Downloads/DE/2023/ Flake,J.K.,&Fried,E.I.(2020).Measurementschmea-
dzhw-wissenschaftsbefragung.pdf?__blob= surement:Questionablemeasurementpractices
publicationFile&v=4 and how to avoid them. Advances in Meth-
DGPs Board of Directors. (2022). #IchBinHanna: ods and Practices in Psychological Science, 3(4),
Tenure-Track anstatt Befristung (Pressemit- 456–465. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 /
teilung). https://www.dgps.de/aktuelles/ 2515245920952393
details/ichbinhanna- tenure- track- anstatt- Fong,E.A.,&Wilhite,A.W.(2017).Authorshipandci-
befristung/ tationmanipulationinacademicresearch.PLoS
Dhanani, L. Y., LaPalme, M. L., & Joseph, D. L. (2021). ONE, 12(12), e0187394. https://doi.org/10.
How prevalent is workplace mistreatment? A 1371/journal.pone.0187394
meta-analytic investigation. Journal of Organi- Forster,N.,&Lund,D.W.(2018).Identifyinganddeal-
zational Behavior, 42(8), 1082–1098. https:// ing with functional psychopathic behavior in
doi.org/10.1002/job.2534 higher education. Global Business and Organi-
Elson,M.(2024).Payresearcherstospoterrorsinpub- zational Excellence, 38(1), 22–31. https://doi.
lishedpapers.Nature,629.https://doi.org/10. org/10.1002/joe.21897
1038/d41586-024-01465-y Frank, M., Miller, B., Vosskuhl, J., Zänkert, S., Hessel-
Elson, M., Fiedler, S., Kirsch, P., & Stahl, J. (2021). mann, F., & Joliffe, J. (2024). Error needs cul-
Bericht des Ombudsgremiums der Deutschen ture! Exploring the relationship between error
Gesellschaft für Psychologie – DGPs [OSF culture and openness [Preprint]. https://doi.
Preprint]. https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/ org/10.31219/osf.io/kruhn_v2
MK9ST Frith,U.(2020).Fastlanetoslowscience.TrendsinCog-
Errington, T. M., Denis, A., Perfito, N., Iorns, E., & nitive Sciences, 24(1), 1–2. https://doi.org/10.
Nosek, B. A. (2021). Reproducibility in cancer 1016/j.tics.2019.10.007
biology: Challenges for assessing replicability Gärtner, A., Leising, D., Freyer, N., Musfeld, P., Lange,
in preclinical cancer biology. eLife, 10, e67995. J., & Schönbrodt, F. D. (2025). Responsible
https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.67995 Research Assessment II: A specific proposal
European Commission, Directorate-General for Re- for hiring and promotion in psychology. Meta-
search and Innovation. (2021). Towards a re- Psychology, 9, MP.2024.4604. https://doi.org/
form of the research assessment system: Scoping 10.15626/MP.2024.4604
report. European Commission. https://data. Gasparyan, A. Y., Ayvazyan, L., & Kitas, G. D. (2013).
europa.eu/doi/10.2777/707440 Authorshipproblemsinscholarlyjournals:Con-
Eva, N., Howard, J. L., Liden, R. C., Morin, A. J. S., & siderationsforauthors,peerreviewersandedi-
Schwarz, G. (2025). An inconvenient truth: A tors. Rheumatology International, 33, 277–284.
comprehensiveexaminationoftheaddedvalue https://doi.org/10.1007/s00296-012-2582-2
(or lack thereof) of leadership measures. Jour- Hachmeister, C.-D. (2019). Im Blickpunkt: Promotionen
nal of Management Studies, 62, 3072–3117. als Indikator für die Leistung von Hochschulen.
https://doi.org/10.1111/joms.13156 Auswertung von Daten des Statistischen Bun-
Evans, N., Buljan, I., Valenti, E., et al. (2022). Stake- desamtes und des CHE Rankings 2019/20.
holders’ experiences of research integrity sup- CentrumfürHochschulentwicklung.Gütersloh,
portinuniversities:Aqualitativestudyinthree Germany.
European countries. Science and Engineering Höbel, M., Durglishvili, A., Reinold, J., & Leising, D.
Ethics, 28, 43. https://doi.org/10.1007/ (2022). Sexual harassment and coercion in
s11948-022-00390-5 German academia: A large-scale survey study.
Falagas, M. E., & Alexiou, V. G. (2008). The top-ten in Sexual Offending: Theory, Research, and Preven-
journal impact factor manipulation. Archivum tion, 17, 1–34. https://doi.org/10.5964/
Immunologiae et Therapiae Experimentalis, 56, sotrap.9349
223–226. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00005- Hodson, G., Book, A., Visser, B. A., Volk, A. A., Ash-
008-0024-5 ton, M. C., & Lee, K. (2018). Is the Dark Triad
===== PAGE 28/31 =====
28
common factor distinct from low Honesty- 17(10), e0274976. https://doi.org/10.1371/
Humility?JournalofResearchinPersonality,73, journal.pone.0274976
123–129. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jrp.2017. Kohrs, F. E., Auer, S., Bannach-Brown, A., Fiedler, S.,
11.012 Haven, T. L., Heise, V., Weissgerber, T. L., et
Hoffmann, B., Beyer, M., Rohe, J., Gensichen, J., & al. (2023). Eleven strategies for making repro-
Gerlach, F. M. (2008). ‘Every error counts’: A ducibleresearchandOpenSciencetrainingthe
web-basedincidentreportingandlearningsys- norm at research institutions [Preprint]. https:
tem for general practice. Quality and Safety in //doi.org/10.31219/osf.io/kcvra
Health Care, 17(4), 307–312. https://doi.org/ Kreitzer, R. J., & Sweet-Cushman, J. (2021). Evaluat-
10.1136/qshc.2006.018440 ing student evaluations of teaching: A review
Horbach, S. P. J. M., Breit, E., Halffman, W., & of measurement and equity bias in SETs and
Mamelund, S.-E. (2020). On the willingness to recommendationsforethicalreform.Journalof
report and the consequences of reporting re- AcademicEthics,20(1),73–84.https://doi.org/
searchmisconduct:Theroleofpowerrelations. 10.1007/s10805-021-09400-w
Science and Engineering Ethics, 26(3), 1595– Kuhnt, M., Reitz, T., & Wöhrle, P. (2022). Arbeiten
1623. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11948-020- unter dem Wissenschaftszeitvertragsgesetz: Eine
00202-8 Evaluation von Befristungsrecht und -Realität
Illinger,P.(2019).WiderstandgegendieWahrheit[Re- an deutschen Universitäten. Qucosa. Dresden.
sistance against the truth]. https://www. https : / / mittelbau . net / evaluation - des -
sueddeutsche.de/wissen/niels-birbaumer- wisszeitvg/
locked-in-syndrom-als-1.4478914 Lasser, J., Bultema, L., Jahn, A., Löffler, M., Minneker,
InstitutfürDemoskopieAllensbach.(2019).Forschungs- V.,&vanScherpenberg,C.(2021).Powerabuse
freiheit an deutschen Universitäten: Ergebnisse and anonymous accusations in academia: Per-
einer Online-Umfrage unter Professoren und spectivesfromearlycareerresearchersandrec-
wissenschaftlichen Mitarbeitern (IfD-Bericht Nr. ommendations for improvement. Contributions
8724).AllensbacherArchiv. toHigherEducationResearch,43(1-2),48–61.
Jackenroll, B., & Julmi, C. (2018). Sind deutsche Pro- Leising, D., Gärtner, A., & Schönbrodt, F. (2025). Re-
fessorenausgebrannt?BurnoutunddessenFol- sponsible research assessments (parts I and
gen für die Leistungserstellung in deutschen II): Responses to the commentaries. Meta-
Universitäten [Are German professors burnt Psychology, 9, MP.2024.4603. https://doi.org/
out? Burnout and its consequences for perfor- 10.15626/MP.2024.4603
manceinGermanuniversities].Hochschulman- Leising, D., Liesefeld, H., Buecker, S., Glöckner, A.,
agement,13,34–40. & Lortsch, S. (2024). A tentative roadmap
John, L. K., Loewenstein, G., & Prelec, D. (2012). Mea- for consensus building processes. Personality
suring the prevalence of questionable research Science, 5. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 /
practices with incentives for truth telling. Psy- 27000710241298610
chologicalScience,23(5),524–532.https://doi. Leising, D., Thielmann, I., Glöckner, A., Gärtner, A., &
org/10.1177/0956797611430953 Schönbrodt, F. (2022a). Ten steps towards a
Kasten, N., Freund, P. A., & Staufenbiel, T. (2020). betterpersonalityscience–howqualitymaybe
"Sweetlittlelies":Anin-depthanalysisoffaking rewarded more in research evaluation. Person-
behaviour on Situational Judgment Tests com- alityScience,3,1–44.https://doi.org/10.5964/
pared to personality questionnaires. European ps.6029
JournalofPsychologicalAssessment,36(1),136– Leising, D., Thielmann, I., Glöckner, A., Gärtner, A., &
148. https://doi.org/10.1027/1015-5759/ Schönbrodt, F. (2022b). Ten steps towards a
a000479 better personality science – a rejoinder to the
Katsarov,J.,Andorno,R.,Krom,A.,etal.(2022).Effec- comments. Personality Science, 3, 1–15. https:
tivestrategiesforresearchintegritytraining—a //doi.org/10.5964/ps.7961
meta-analysis. Educational Psychology Review, Lemser, S. (2019). Das Für und Wider einer Karriere
34, 935–955. https://doi.org/10.1007/ in der Wissenschaft: Geschlechtsunterschiede bei
s10648-021-09630-9 Studierenden und Promovierenden am Bereich
Kis,A.,Tur,E.M.,Lakens,D.,Vaesen,K.,&Houkes,W. MatNat der TU Dresden [The pros and cons of
(2022). Leaving academia: PhD attrition and a career in science: Gender differences in stu-
unhealthy research environments. PLoS ONE, dentsandECRsatTUDresden’sschoolofscience]
===== PAGE 29/31 =====
29
[Master’s thesis, Technische Universität Dres- Neumann, R. (2019). Bitte publik machen, aber ohne
den][UnpublishedMaster’sthesis]. meinen Namen! [Please publicize, but without
Löwe,P.S.,&Valet,P.(2023).IstderöffentlicheDienst myname].https://www.laborjournal.de/blog/
noch ein attraktiver Arbeitgeber? Veränderte ?p=10331
WahrnehmungenzuJobsicherheit,langfristiger Nielsen,M.B.,Matthiesen,S.B.,&Einarsen,S.(2010).
Beschäftigung und Karriereperspektiven von The impact of methodological moderators on
Beschäftigten im öffentlichen Dienst und der prevalenceratesofworkplacebullying:Ameta-
Privatwirtschaft von 1985 bis 2018. Zeitschrift analysis.JournalofOccupationalandOrganiza-
fürSozialreform, 69(1),1–30.https://doi.org/ tional Psychology, 83, 955–979. https://doi.
10.1515/zsr-2022-0105 org/10.1348/096317909X481256
Lynam, D. R., Hyatt, C. S., Hopwood, C. J., Wright, Niemann,Y.F.,Muhs,G.G.y.,&Gonzalez,C.G.(Eds.).
A. G. C., & Miller, J. D. (2019). Should psy- (2020). Presumed incompetent II: Race, class,
chologists sign their reviews? Some thoughts power, and resistance of women in academia.
andsomedata.JournalofAbnormalPsychology, UtahStateUniversityPress.
128(6), 541–546. https://doi.org/10.1037/ Olsthoorn,L.H.M.,Heckmann,L.A.,Filippi,A.,Vieira,
abn0000426 R. M., Varanasi, R. S., Lasser, J., Bäuerle, F.,
Mackie,S.A.,&Bates,G.W.(2018).Contributionofthe Zeis,P.,&Schulte-Sasse,R.(2020).PhDnetRe-
doctoral education environment to PhD candi- port 2019. https://pure.mpg.de/pubman/
dates’ mental health problems: A scoping re- faces/ViewItemOverviewPage.jsp?itemId=
view.HigherEducationResearch&Development, item_3243876_4
38(3), 565–578. https://doi.org/10.1080/ Ones, D. S., & Viswesvaran, C. (2001). Integrity tests
07294360.2018.1556620 and other criterion-focused occupational per-
Marcus, B., Lee, K., & Ashton, M. C. (2007). Person- sonalityscales(COPS)usedinpersonnelselec-
ality dimensions explaining relationships be- tion. International Journal of Selection and As-
tweenintegritytestsandcounterproductivebe- sessment, 9(1-2), 31–39. https://doi.org/10.
haviour: Big five, or one in addition? Personnel 1111/1468-2389.00161
Psychology, 60(1), 1–34. https://doi.org/10. Ones, D. S., Viswesvaran, C., & Schmidt, F. L. (1993).
1111/j.1744-6570.2007.00063.x Comprehensive meta-analysis of integrity test
Martin, K. D., & Cullen, J. B. (2006). Continuities and validities:Findingsandimplicationsforperson-
extensions of ethical climate theory: A meta- nel selection and theories of job performance.
analytic review. Journal of Business Ethics, 69, Journal of Applied Psychology, 78(4), 679–703.
175–194. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10551- https://doi.org/10.1037/0021-9010.78.4.679
006-9084-7 Ones, D. S., Viswesvaran, C., & Schmidt, F. L. (2012).
Mete,Y.A.(2013).Relationshipbetweenorganizational Integrity tests predict counterproductive work
cynicism and ethical leadership behaviour: A behavior and job performance well: Comment
studyathighereducation.Procedia-Socialand on Van Iddekinge, Roth, Raymark, and Odle-
Behavioral Sciences, 89, 476–483. https://doi. Dusseau (2012). Journal of Applied Psychology,
org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2013.08.880 97(3), 537–542. https://doi.org/10.1037/
Miller, J. D., Phillips, N. L., & Lynam, D. R. (2025). a0024825
Questionable research practices violate the OpenScienceCollaboration.(2015).Estimatingthere-
American Psychological Association’s Code of producibility of psychological science. Science,
Ethics. Journal of Psychopathology and Clinical 349(6251),aac4716.https://doi.org/10.1126/
Science, 134(2), 113–114. https://doi.org/10. science.aac4716
1037/abn0000974 Palmer, J. C., Holmes, R. M., & Perrewé, P. L. (2020).
Moshagen, M., Hilbig, B. E., & Zettler, I. (2018). The ThecascadingeffectsofCEOdarktriadperson-
dark core of personality. Psychological Review, alityonsubordinatebehaviourandfirmperfor-
125(5), 656–688. https://doi.org/10.1037/ mance: A multilevel theoretical model. Group
rev0000111 & Organization Management, 45(2), 143–180.
Müller,W.(2015).AssessmentCenterinBerufungsver- https://doi.org/10.1177/1059601120905728
fahren der Universität Bremen. In C. Peus, S. Paulhus, D. L., & Williams, K. M. (2002). The Dark
Braun, T. Hentschel, & D. Frey (Eds.), Person- Triadofpersonality:Narcissism,Machiavellian-
alauswahl in der wissenschaft (pp. 261–267). ism, and psychopathy. Journal of Research in
Springer.
===== PAGE 30/31 =====
30
Personality, 36(6), 556–563. https://doi.org/ Schönbrodt,F.D.,Gärtner,A.,Frank,M.,Gollwitzer,M.,
10.1016/S0092-6566(02)00505-6 Ihle,M.,Mischkowski,D., Phan,L.V.,Schmitt,
Peukert, K., Jacobi, L., Geuer, J., Paredes Cisneros, I., M., Scheel, A. M., Schubert, A.-L., Steinberg,
Löffler, M., Lienig, T., Taylor, S., Gusic, M., U., & Leising, D. (2025). Responsible Research
Novakovic, N., Kuhl, T., Ordini, E., Runge, AssessmentI:ImplementingDORAandCoARA
A., Samoylov, O., Härtel, M., Amend, A.-L., for hiring and promotion in psychology. Meta-
& Nagel, M. (2020). Survey Report 2019. Psychology, 9. https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.
Helmholtz Juniors. https://www.helmholtz. 2024.4601
de/fileadmin/user_upload/06_jobs_talente/ Schraudner, M., Striebing, C., & Hochfeld, K. (2019).
Helmholtz-Juniors/Survey_Report2019.pdf Work culture and work atmosphere in the Max
Peus, C., Braun, S., Hentschel, T., & Frey, D. (Eds.). Planck Society. Fraunhofer IAO. https://www.
(2015).PersonnelSelectioninScience.Springer. mpg . de / 14284109 / mpg - arbeitskultur -
Prieß-Buchheit, J., Aro, A. R., Demirova, I., Lanzerath, ergebnisbericht-englisch.pdf
D., Stoev, P., & Wilder, N. (2020). Rotatory Sommer, J., Jongmanns, G., Book, A., & Rennert,
role-playingandrole-modelstoenhancethere- C. (2022). Evaluation des novellierten Wis-
searchintegrityculture.ResearchIdeasandOut- senschaftszeitvertragsgesetzes. Interval GmbH &
comes,6,e53921.https://doi.org/10.3897/rio. InstitutfürHochschulentwicklunge.V.https://
6.e53921 www.bmbf.de/SharedDocs/Downloads/de/
Pruschak, G., & Hopp, C. (2022). And the credit goes 2022/abschlussbericht-evaluation-wisszeitvg.
to... ghost and honorary authorship among so- html
cial scientists. PLoS ONE, 17(5), e0267312. Specht, J., Hof, C., Tjus, J., Pernice, W., & Endesfelder,
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone. U. (2017). Departments statt Lehrstühle: Mod-
0267312 erne Personalstruktur für eine zukunftsfähige
Rahal,R.-M.,Fiedler,S.,Adetula,A.,Berntsson,R.P.-A., Wissenschaft. AG Wissenschaftspolitik der Jun-
Dirnagl, U., Feld, G. B., Fiebach, C. J., Himi, genAkademie.
S. A., Horner, A. J., & Lonsdorf, T. B. (2023). Stahl, J., Bössel-Debbert, N., Elson, M., Fiedler,
Quality research needs good working condi- S., Kirsch, P., Kluge, A., Leising, D., Mis-
tions.NatureHumanBehaviour,7(2),164–167. chkowski, D., Phan, L., Richter, F., & Schmitt,
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-022-01508-2 M. (2024). Machtmissbrauch an Universitäten:
Regler,B.,Einhorn,L.,Lasser,J.,Vögele,M.,Elizarova, Strukturelle Ursachen und Ebenen potentieller
S.,Bäuerle,F.,Wu,C.,Förste,S.,Shenolikar,J., Maßnahmen. Beitrag zur Ringvorlesung: Miss-
& Group 2018, PhDnet. (2019). PhDnet Report brauchte Macht. Universität Würzburg. https:
2018.MaxPlanckPhDNet.https://doi.org/10. / / www. psychologie . uni - wuerzburg . de /
17617/2.3052826 fileadmin / 0602 - grk2660 / 2024 / Stahl _
Rennie,D.(2016).Let’smakepeerreviewscientific.Na- Wuerzburg240124.pdf
ture, 535, 31–33. https://doi.org/10.1038/ Strobel,A.,Franke-Bartholdt,L.,&Kersting,M.(2018).
535031a Eignungsinterviews/direkte mündliche Befra-
Richardson,M.,&Healy,M.(2019).Examiningtheeth- gungen. In Personalauswahl kompetent gestal-
ical environment in higher education. British ten: Grundlagen und Praxis der Eignungsdiag-
Educational Research Journal, 45(6), 1089– nostik nach DIN 33430 (2018) (pp. 66–83).
1104. Springer.
Scheffel, C., Korb, F., Dörfel, D., Scherbaum, S., Stroebe,W.(2020).Studentevaluationsofteachingen-
et al. (2023). Gute wissenschaftliche Praxis courage poor teaching and contribute to grade
und Open Science im Empiriepraktikum: inflation: A theoretical and empirical analysis.
Wissenschaftlicher Kompetenzerwerb durch BasicandAppliedSocialPsychology,42(4),276–
Replikationsstudien. Psychologische Rundschau, 294.https://doi.org/10.1080/01973533.2020.
74(4), 241–243. https://doi.org/10.1026/ 1756817
0033-3042/a000643 Tennant, J. P., & Ross-Hellauer, T. (2020). The limita-
Scherpenberg,C.,Bultema,L.,Jahn,A.,Löffler,M.,Min- tions to our understanding of peer review. Re-
neker, V., & Lasser, J. (2021). Manifestations search Integrity and Peer Review, 5, 6. https://
of power abuse in academia and how to pre- doi.org/10.1186/s41073-020-00092-1
vent them. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo. Vallbracht,C.(2024).GeldnotanHochschulenführtzu
4608392 EntfallanStellen[Lackoffundingleadstoloss
===== PAGE 31/31 =====
31
of jobs] [Published February 2]. https://www.
forschung-und-lehre.de/politik/geldnot-an-
hochschulen-fuehrt-zu-entfall-von-stellen-
6259
van den Hoven, M., Lindemann, T., Zollitsch, L., et al.
(2023).Ataxonomyforresearchintegritytrain-
ing: Design, conduct, and improvements in re-
search integrity courses. Science and Engineer-
ing Ethics, 29, 14. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11948-022-00425-x
Van Iddekinge, C. H., Roth, P. L., Raymark, P. H.,
& Odle-Dusseau, H. N. (2012). The criterion-
related validity of integrity tests: An updated
meta-analysis. Journal of Applied Psychology,
97(3), 499–530. https://doi.org/10.1037/
a0021196
Vazire, S., & Holcombe, A. O. (2021). Where are the
self-correcting mechanisms in science? Review
of General Psychology, 26(2), 212–223. https:
//doi.org/10.1177/10892680211033912
Vid¯ak, M., Bara´c, L., Tokali´c, R., Buljan, I., & Marui´c,
A. (2021). Interventions for organizational cli-
mate and culture in academia: A scoping re-
view. Science and Engineering Ethics, 27, 1–23.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11948-021-00298-6
Weihs,C.,HernandezRodriguez,T.,Doeckel,M.,Marty,
C., & Wormer, H. (2018). Arbeitszeiten von
ProfessorinnenundProfessoreninDeutschland
2016. AStA Wirtschafts- und Sozialstatistisches
Archiv,12,135–177.https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11943-018-0227-y
Wiarda,J.-M.(2023).DasstilleLeidenderBetroffenen
[The victims’ silent suffering]. https://www.
jmwiarda.de/2023/11/20/das-stille-leiden-
der-betroffenen/
Winkler, M. (2023). Machtmissbrauch an Univer-
sitäten [Power abuse at universities]. https:
/ / zeitgeschichte - online . de / themen /
professorinnen - gegen - machtmissbrauch -
universitaeten
Wissenschaftsrat. (2023). Strukturen der Forschungs-
finanzierung an deutschen Hochschulen. Wis-
senschaftsrat. https://doi.org/10.57674/
pms3-pr05