Meta-Psychology, 2020, vol 4, MP.2018.884, Open data: Yes Edited by: Daniël Lakens
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2018.884 Open materials: Yes Reviewed by: K. Coburn, F. D. Schönbrodt
Article type: Original Article Open and reproducible analysis: Yes Analysis reproduced by: Erin M. Buchanan
Published under the CC-BY4.0 license Open reviews and editorial process: Yes All supplementary files can be accessed at the OSF project
Preregistration: No page: https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/MY8S6
Publication Bias in Meta-Analyses of
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder Interventions
Helen Niemeyer* Robbie C.M. van Aert*
Freie Universität Berlin, Department of Clinical Tilburg University, Department of Methodology
Psychological Intervention, Germany and Statistics, the Netherlands
Sebastian Schmid Dominik Uelsmann
Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy,
Charité University Medicine Berlin, Campus Mitte, Charité University Medicine Berlin, Campus Mitte,
Germany Germany
Christine Knaevelsrud Olaf Schulte-Herbrueggen
Freie Universität Berlin, Department of Clinical Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy,
Psychological Intervention, Germany Charité University Medicine Berlin, Campus Mitte,
Germany
* HN and RvA have equally contributed and split first authorship.
Meta-analyses are susceptible to publication bias, the selective publication of studies
with statistically significant results. If publication bias is present in psychotherapy re-
search, the efficacy of interventions will likely be overestimated. This study has two aims:
(1) investigate whether the application of publication bias methods is warranted in psy-
chotherapy research on posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and (2) investigate the de-
gree and impact of publication bias in meta-analyses of the efficacy of psychotherapeutic
treatment for PTSD. A comprehensive literature search was conducted and 26 meta-
analyses were eligible for bias assessment. A Monte-Carlo simulation study closely re-
sembling characteristics of the included meta-analyses revealed that statistical power of
publication bias tests was generally low. Our results showed that publication bias tests
had low statistical power and yielded imprecise estimates corrected for publication bias
due to characteristics of the data. We recommend to assess publication bias using mul-
tiple publication bias methods, but only include methods that show acceptable perfor-
mance in a method performance check that researchers first have to conduct them-
selves.
Keywords: Publication bias, meta-meta-analysis, meta-analysis, posttraumatic stress dis-
order, psychotherapy
Meta-Psychology, 2020, vol 4, MP.2018.884, Open data: Yes Edited by: Daniël Lakens
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2018.884 Open materials: Yes Reviewed by: K. Coburn, F. D. Schönbrodt
Article type: Original Article Open and reproducible analysis: Yes Analysis reproduced by: Erin M. Buchanan
Published under the CC-BY4.0 license Open reviews and editorial process: Yes All supplementary files can be accessed at the OSF project
Preregistration: No page: https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/MY8S6
Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) following synthesizing individual study results (Aguinis, Gott-
potentially traumatic events is a highly distressing fredson, & Wright, 2011; Head, Holman, Lanfear,
and common condition, with lifetime prevalence Kahn, & Jennions, 2015). Results of meta-analyses
rates in the adult population of 11.7% for women and are often used for deciding which treatment should
4% for men in the United States of America (Kessler, be applied in clinical practice, and international ev-
Petukhova, Sampson, Zaslavsky, & Wittchen, 2012). idence-based guidelines recommend TF-CBT and
PTSD is characterized by the re-experiencing of a EMDR for the treatment of PTSD (ACPMH; Forbes et
traumatic event, avoidance of stimuli that could al., 2007; NICE; National Collaborating Centre for
trigger traumatic memories, negative cognitions Mental Health, 2005).
and mood, and alterations in arousal and reactivity
(American Psychiatric Association, 2013). The DSM
Publication Bias in Psychotherapy Research
criteria have been updated recently, but most re-
search is still based on the previous versions DSM-
The validity of meta-analyses is highly dependent
IV-TR (American Psychiatric Association, 2000),
on the quality of the included data from primary
DSM-IV (American Psychiatric Association, 1994) or
studies (Valentine, 2009). One of the most severe
DSM-III-R (American Psychiatric Association, 1987).
threats to the validity of a meta-analysis is publica-
Various forms of psychological interventions for
tion bias, which is the selective reporting of statisti-
treating PTSD have been investigated in a large
cally significant results (Rothstein, Sutton, & Boren-
number of studies. Cognitive behavioral therapies
stein, 2005). Approximately 90% of the main hy-
(CBT) and eye movement desensitization and repro-
potheses of published studies within psychology are
cessing (EMDR) are the most frequently studied ap-
statistically significant (Fanelli, 2012; Sterling, Ros-
proaches (e.g., Bisson, Roberts, Andrew, Cooper, &
enbaum, & Weinkam, 1995) and this is not in line
Lewis, 2013). Trauma-focused cognitive behavioral
with the on average low statistical power of studies
therapies (TF-CBT) use exposure to trauma memory
(Bakker, van Dijk, & Wicherts, 2012; Ellis, 2010). If
or reminders and the identification and modification
only published studies are included in a meta-anal-
of maladaptive cognitive distortions related to the
ysis, the efficacy of interventions may be overesti-
trauma in their treatment protocols (e.g., Ehlers,
mated (Hopewell, Clarke, & Mallett, 2005; Ioannidis,
Clark, Hackmann, McManus, & Fennell, 2005; Foa &
2008; Lipsey & Wilson, 2001; Rothstein et al., 2005).
Rothbaum, 1998; Resick & Schnicke, 1993). Non
About one out of four funded studies examining the
trauma-focused cognitive behavioral therapies (non
efficacy of a psychological treatment for depression
TF-CBT) do not focus on trauma memory or mean-
did not result in a publication, and adding the results
ing, but for example on stress management (Vero-
of the retrieved unpublished studies lowered the
nen & Kilpatrick, 1983). EMDR includes an imaginal
mean effect estimate by 25% from a medium to a
confrontation of traumatic images, the use of eye
small effect size (Driessen, Hollon, Bockting, &
movements and some core elements of TF-CBT (see
Cuijpers, 2017).
Forbes et al., 2010). Although a range of other psy-
The treatments in evidence-based psychother-
chological treatments exists (e.g., psychodynamic
apy are mainly selected based on published research
therapies or hypnotherapy), fewer empirical studies
(Gilbody & Song, 2000). The scientist-practitioner
of these approaches have been conducted (Bisson et
model (Shapiro & Forrest, 2001) calls for clinical psy-
al., 2013).
chologists to let empirical results guide their work,
Meta-analysis methods are used to quantitatively
aiming to move away from opinion- and experience-
synthesize the results of different studies on the
driven therapeutic decision making toward the use
same research question. Meta-analysis has become
of research results in clinical practice. If publication
more popular according to the gradual increase of
bias is present, guidelines may offer recommenda-
published papers that apply meta-analysis methods
tions seemingly based on apparent empirical evi-
especially since the beginning of the 21st century
dence that are only erroneously supported by the
(Aguinis, Dalton, Bosco, Pierce, & Dalton, 2010), and
results of meta-analyses (Berlin & Ghersi, 2005).
it has been called the "gold standard" for
PUBLICATION BIAS IN META-ANALYSES OF POSTTRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER INTERVENTIONS 3
Consequently, psychotherapists who follow the sci- Mazumdar, 1994; Egger, Smith, Schneider, & Minder,
entist-practitioner model would be prompted to ap- 1997; Renkewitz & Keiner, 2019; Sterne, Gavaghan, &
ply interventions in routine care that may be less ef- Egger, 2000; van Assen, van Aert, & Wicherts, 2015).
ficacious than assumed and may even have detri- This raises the question whether routinely applying
mental effects for patients. publication bias tests without taking into account
A re-analysis of meta-analyses in psychotherapy characteristics of the meta-analysis, such as the
research for schizophrenia and depression revealed number of included studies, is a good practice.
that evidence for publication bias was found in
about 15% of these meta-analyses (Niemeyer, Objectives
Musch, & Pietrowsky, 2012, 2013). However, until
The first goal of this paper is to study whether
now no further comprehensive assessment of pub-
applying publication bias tests is warranted under
lication bias in meta-analyses of the efficacy of psy-
conditions that are representative for published
chotherapeutic treatments for other clinical disor-
meta-analyses on PTSD treatments. Applying publi-
ders has been conducted. Hence, the presence and
cation bias tests may not always be appropriate if,
impact of publication bias in psychotherapy re-
for example, statistical power of these tests is low
search also for PTSD remains largely unknown. Alt-
caused by a small number of studies included in the
hough trauma-focused interventions are claimed to
meta-analysis. Hence, we study the statistical prop-
be efficacious, their efficacy may be overestimated
erties of publication bias tests by conducting a
and might be lower if publication bias was taken into
Monte-Carlo simulation study that closely resem-
account. This in turn would result in suboptimal rec-
bles the meta-analyses on PTSD treatments.
ommendations in the treatment guidelines and con-
The second goal of our study is to assess the se-
sequently also in unnecessarily high costs for the
verity of publication bias in the meta-analyses pub-
health care system (Jaycox & Foa, 1999; Maljanen et
lished on PTSD treatments. We will not interpret the
al., 2016; Margraf, 2009).
results of the publication bias tests if it turns out
Due to publication bias being widespread and its
that these tests have low statistical power. Regard-
detrimental impact on the results of meta-analyses
less of these results, we will apply multiple methods
(Dickersin, 2005; Fanelli, 2012; Rothstein &
to correct effect size for publication bias to the
Hopewell, 2009), a statistical assessment of publica-
meta-analyses on PTSD treatments. Effect size esti-
tion bias should be conducted in every meta-analy-
mates of these methods become less precise (wider
sis investigating psychotherapeutic treatments. This
confidence intervals), but they still provide relevant
is in line with recommendations in the Meta-Analy-
insights into whether the effect size estimate be-
sis Reporting Standards (MARS; American Psycho-
comes closer to zero if publication bias is taken into
logical Association, 2010) and the Preferred Report-
account.
ing Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses
(PRISMA; Moher, Liberati, Tetzlaff, & Altman, 2009).
A considerable number of statistical methods to in- Method
vestigate the presence and impact of publication
bias have been developed in recent years. These Data Sources
methods should also be applied to already published
We conducted a literature search following the
meta-analyses in order to examine whether publi-
search strategies recommended by Lipsey and Wil-
cation bias distorts the results (Banks, Kepes, &
son (2001) to identify all meta-analyses published on
Banks, 2012; van Assen, van Aert, & Wicherts, 2015).
PTSD treatments. We screened the databases
The development of publication bias methods
PsycINFO, Psyndex, PubMed, and the Cochrane Da-
and recommendations to apply these methods will
tabase of Systematic Reviews for all published and
likely yield a more routinely assessment of publica-
unpublished meta-analyses in English or German up
tion bias in meta-analyses. However, research has
to 5th September 2015. The search combined terms
shown that publication bias tests generally suffer
indicative of meta-analyses or reviews and terms in-
from low statistical power and especially if there are
dicative of PTSD. The exact search terms were
only a small number of studies included in a meta-
[(“metaana*” OR “meta-ana*” OR “review” OR
analysis and publication bias is not extreme (Begg &
4
NIEMEYER*, VAN AERT*, SCHMID, UELSMANN, KNAEVELSRUD & SCHULTE-HERBRUGGEN
“Übersichtsarbeit”) AND (“stress disorders, post analysis upon preliminary reading of the abstract
traumatic” (MeSH) OR “post-trauma*” OR “post- and discussed in the case of dissent.1 We included a
trauma*” OR “posttraumatic stress disorder” OR meta-analysis if it did not explicitly target children
“trauma*” OR “PTSD” OR “PTBS”)]. and adolescents, but minor hints for the inclusion of
In addition, a snowball search system was used such studies were present. However, this was only
for the identification of further potentially relevant suitable if it concerned individual studies in a meta-
studies by screening the reference lists of included analysis, and if we found such hints only when thor-
articles and of conference programs from the field oughly checking the list of references.
of PTSD and trauma as well as psychotherapy re- For conciseness, we use the term meta-analysis
search (see https://osf.io/9b4df/ for more infor- to refer to the article that was published and use the
mation). Experts in the field were contacted, but no term data set for the effect sizes included in a meta-
additional meta-analyses were obtained. Meta-anal- analysis. A meta-analysis can comprise more than
yses were retrieved for further assessment if the ti- one data set if, for instance, treatment efficacy was
tle or abstract suggested that these dealt with a investigated for different outcomes, such as PTSD
meta-analysis of psychotherapy for PTSD. If an ab- symptoms and depressive symptoms, or when the
stract provided insufficient information, the respec- efficacy of two treatments (e.g., TF-CBT and EMDR)
tive article was examined in order not to miss a rel- was investigated separately in the same meta-anal-
evant meta-analysis. ysis. The term primary study is used to refer to the
original study that was included in the meta-analy-
Study Selection and Data Extraction sis. When a meta-analysis consists of multiple data
sets, we included all data sets for which primary
Meta-analyses were required to meet the follow-
studies' effect sizes and a measure of their precision
ing inclusion criteria: 1) a psychotherapeutic inter-
were provided or could be computed.
vention was evaluated. Psychotherapy was defined
We tried to extract effect sizes and their preci-
as “the informed and intentional application of clin-
sion of the primary studies from the meta-analysis.
ical methods and interpersonal stances derived
If the required data were not reported, we con-
from established psychological principles for the
tacted the corresponding authors and re-analyzed
purpose of assisting people to modify their behav-
the primary studies in order to obtain the data. Data
iors, cognitions, emotions, and/or other personal
were extracted independently by one author (SSch),
characteristics in directions that the participants
cross-checked by a second reviewer (HN), and in
deem desirable" (Norcross, 1990, p. 219). 2) The in-
case of deviations during the statistical calculations
tervention aimed at reducing subclinical or clinical
checked by two researchers (RvA, HN). All data sets
PTSD, according to diagnostic criteria for PTSD (e.g.,
for which the data were available and we could re-
using one of the versions of the DSM) or according
produce the average effect size reported in the
to PTSD symptomatology as measured by a vali-
meta-analysis ourselves were included. An absolute
dated self-report or clinician measure in an adult
difference in average effect size larger than 0.1 was
population (i.e., aged 18 years and older). And 3) a
set as criterion for reproducibility. We labeled a data
summary effect size was provided. Both uncon-
set as not reproducible if we could not reproduce
trolled designs investigating changes in one group
the results based on the available data and descrip-
(within-subjects design) and multiple group com-
tion of the analyses after contacting the authors of a
parisons (between-subjects design) were suitable
meta-analysis. Moreover, there were no restrictions
for inclusion. Exclusion criteria were: 1) pooling of
with respect to the dependent variable. That is, all
studies with various disorders, so that samples com-
primary and secondary outcomes of the meta-anal-
posed of other disorders along with PTSD were in-
yses were suitable for inclusion. Primary outcomes
cluded in a meta-analysis and the effect sizes were
in meta-analyses on PTSD are usually PTSD symp-
combined to an overall effect estimate not re-
tom score or clinical status, whereas secondary out-
stricted to the treatment of PTSD; and 2) the meta-
comes often vary (e.g. anxiety, depression, dropout,
analysis examined the efficacy of pharmacological
or other; see also Bisson, Roberts, Andrew, Cooper,
treatment. Three independent raters (DU, HN, SSch)
& Lewis, 2013).
decided on the inclusion or exclusion of each meta-
PUBLICATION BIAS IN META-ANALYSES OF POSTTRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER INTERVENTIONS 5
The objectives of our paper were to study corresponding confidence intervals wider (Stanley
whether applying publication bias tests is warranted et al., 2017; van Assen et al., 2015).
in meta-analyses on the efficacy of psychotherapeu-
tic treatment for PTSD and to assess the severity of Statistical Methods
publication bias in these meta-analyses. The major-
Publication bias test. We assessed for the follow-
ity of statistical methods to detect the presence of
ing publication bias tests whether it was warranted
publication bias does not perform well if the true ef-
to apply these methods to the data sets in PTSD psy-
fect sizes are heterogeneous (e.g., Stanley & Dou-
chotherapy research: Egger’s regression test (Egger
couliagos, 2014; van Aert et al., 2016; van Assen et al.,
et al., 1997), rank-correlation test (Begg & Ma-
2015), some are even recommended not to be used
zumdar, 1994), Test of Excess Significance (Ioannidis
in this situation (Ioannidis, 2005). Hence, it was nec-
& Trikalinos, 2007b), and p-uniform’s publication
essary to only include data sets where the propor-
bias test (van Assen et al., 2015). These methods were
tion of variance that is caused by heterogeneity in
included, because these are commonly applied in
true effect size as quantified by the I2-statistic was
meta-analyses (Egger’s regression test and rank-
smaller than 50%.
correlation test) or outperformed existing methods
We excluded all data sets of a meta-analysis that
in some situations (TES and p-uniform’s publication
included less than six studies, because publication
bias test; Renkewitz & Keiner, 2019). It is important
bias tests suffer from low statistical power in case of
to note that Egger’s regression test and the rank-
a small number of studies in a meta-analysis and if
correlation test were developed to test for small-
severe publication bias is absent (Begg & Mazumdar,
study effects. Small-study effects refer to the ten-
1994; Sterne et al., 2000). Others recommend a min-
dency of smaller studies to go along with larger ef-
imum of 10 studies (Sterne et al., 2011), but we
fect sizes. One of the causes of small-study effects
adopted a less strict criterion for two reasons. First,
is publication bias, but another cause is, for instance,
we want to study whether applying publication bias
heterogeneity in true effect size (see Egger et al.,
tests is warranted for conditions that are repre-
1997, for a list of causes of small-study effects). The
sentative for published meta-analyses. Meta-anal-
TES was also not specifically developed to test for
yses often contain less than 10 studies. For example,
publication bias, but examines whether the ob-
the median number of studies in meta-analyses
served and expected number of statistically signifi-
published in the Cochrane Database of Systematic
cant effect sizes in a meta-analysis are in line with
Reviews is 3 (Rhodes, Turner, & Higgins, 2015;
each other (see https://osf.io/b9t7v/ for an elabo-
Turner, Jackson, Wei, Thompson, & Higgins, 2015).
rate overview of existing publication bias tests).
Also the number of studies in meta-analyses for psy-
In order to investigate whether the application of
chotherapy research is usually small. Meta-analyses
the publication bias tests to the included data sets
on the efficacy of psychotherapy for schizophrenia
was warranted, we conducted a Monte-Carlo simu-
(Niemeyer, Musch, & Pietrowsky, 2012) as well as de-
lation study to examine the statistical power of the
pression (Niemeyer, Musch, & Pietrowsky, 2013) also
publication bias tests for the data sets. Data were
applied a minimum of 6 studies as lower limit for the
generated in a way to stay as close as possible to the
application of publication bias tests.
characteristics of the data sets. That is, the same
Second, more recently developed methods to
number of effect sizes as in the data set as well as
correct effect size for publication bias can be used
the same effect size measure were used for gener-
to estimate the effect size even if the number of
ating the data. The data were simulated under the
studies in a meta-analysis is small. For example, a
fixed-effect (a.k.a. equal-effects) model, so effect
method that was developed for combining an origi-
sizes for each data set were sampled from a normal
nal study and replication has shown that two studies distribution with mean (cid:2) and variance equal to the
can already be sufficient for accurately evaluating
“observed” squared standard errors. Statistically
effect size (van Aert & van Assen, 2018). However, a
significant effect sizes based on a one-tailed test
consequence of applying publication bias methods
with (cid:1)=.025 (to reflect common practice of testing
to meta-analyses based on a small number of studies
a two-tailed hypothesis and only reporting results in
is that effect size estimates become less precise and
the predicted direction) were always “published”
6
NIEMEYER*, VAN AERT*, SCHMID, UELSMANN, KNAEVELSRUD & SCHULTE-HERBRUGGEN
and included in a simulated meta-analysis. Publica- study because the methodology underlying p-curve
tion bias restricted the “publication” of statistically is the same as p-uniform, and p-uniform has the ad-
nonsignificant effect sizes in a way that these effect vantage that it can also test for publication bias and
sizes had a probability of 1-pub to be included in a estimate a 95% confidence interval (CI; see
simulated meta-analysis. Effect sizes were simu- https://osf.io/b9t7v/ for an elaborate overview of
lated till the included number of simulated effect existing methods to correct effect size for publica-
sizes equaled the number of effect sizes in a data set. tion bias).
We examined the Type-I error rate and statistical Average effect size estimates of traditional meta-
power of Egger’s regression test, rank-correlation analysis, trim and fill, PET-PEESE, p-uniform, and
test, TES, and p-uniform’s publication bias test for the selection model approach were computed and
each simulated meta-analysis using (cid:1)=.05. Two- transformed to a common effect size measure (i.e.,
tailed hypothesis tests were conducted for Egger’s Cohen’s d) before interpreting them. Data sets that
regression test and the rank-correlation test. One- used log relative risks as effect size measure were
tailed hypothesis tests were used for TES and p-uni- conducted based on log odds ratios and these aver-
form’s publication bias test, because only evidence age effect size estimates were transformed to Co-
in one direction for these methods is indicative of hen’s d values. If there was not enough information
publication bias. For each simulated meta-analysis, to transform Hedges’ g to Cohen’s d, Hedges’ g was
we recorded the proportion of data sets for which used in the analyses. Effect sizes were computed us-
the statistical power of a publication bias test was ing the formulas described in Borenstein (2009).
larger than 0.8. Meta-analyses were simulated We assessed the severity of publication bias by
10,000 times for all included data sets. True effect computing difference scores in effect size estimates
size (cid:2) was fixed to zero for generating data, be- between traditional meta-analysis and each publi-
cause this enabled simulating data using the same cation bias method (i.e., trim and fill, PET-PEESE, p-
effect size measure as in the data sets. Selected val- uniform, and the selection model approach). That is,
ues for publication bias (pub) were 0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, we subtracted the effect size estimate of traditional
0.85, 0.95, and 1 where pub equal to 0 indicates no meta-analysis from the method’s effect size esti-
publication bias and 1 extreme publication bias. This mate. A difference score of zero reflects that the es-
Monte-Carlo simulation study was programmed in R timates of traditional meta-analysis and the publica-
3.5.3 (R Core Team, 2019) and the packages “meta- tion bias method were the same, whereas a positive
for” (Viechtbauer, 2010), “puniform” (van Aert, 2019), or negative difference score indicates that the esti-
and “parallel” (R Core Team, 2019) were used. R code mates were different. Subsequently, the mean and
for this Monte-Carlo simulation study is available at standard deviation (SD) of these difference scores
https://osf.io/pg7sj. were computed for the three methods.
Estimating effect size corrected for publication All analyses were conducted using R version 3.5.3
bias. Five different methods were included to esti- (R Core Team, 2019). The “metafor” package (Viecht-
mate the effect size: traditional meta-analysis, trim bauer, 2010) was used for conducting fixed-effect or
and fill, PET-PEESE, p-uniform, and the selection random-effects meta-analysis, trim and fill, rank-
model approach proposed by Vevea and Hedges correlation test, and Egger’s regression test. The
(1995). Traditional meta-analysis was included, be- “puniform” package (van Aert, 2019) was used for ap-
cause it is the analysis that is conducted in every plying the p-uniform method using the default esti-
meta-analysis. Either a fixed-effect (FE) or random- mator based on the Irwin-Hall distribution. In line
effects (RE) model was selected depending on the with the recommendation by Stanley (2017), (cid:1)=0.1
statistical model used in the meta-analysis. These was used for the right-tailed test whether the inter-
publication bias methods were selected, because cept of a PET analysis was different from zero, and
they were either often applied in meta-analyses therefore whether the results of PET or PEESE had
(trim and fill) or outperformed other methods (PET- to be interpreted. The selection model approach as
PEESE, p-uniform, and the selection model ap- proposed by (Vevea & Hedges, 1995) and imple-
proach; McShane et al., 2016; Stanley & Doucouli- mented in the “weightr” package (Coburn & Vevea,
agos, 2014; van Assen et al., 2015). P-curve (Simon- 2019) was applied to all data sets. Data and R code of
sohn et al., 2014) was not included in the present
PUBLICATION BIAS IN META-ANALYSES OF POSTTRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER INTERVENTIONS 7
the analyses are available at https://osf.io/afnvr/ https://osf.io/pkzx8/). Of these 89 meta-analyses,
and https://osf.io/taq5f/?. four could not be located as they were unpublished
dissertations and the authors did not reply to our
requests.2 One meta-analysis was excluded because
Results
it used a network meta-analysis approach (Gerger et
al., 2014) and the included publication bias methods
Description of Meta-Analyses investigated
cannot be applied to this type of data. A multi-site
A flowchart illustrating the procedure of select- study (Morrissey et al., 2015) was excluded, because
ing meta-analyses and data sets is presented in Fig- meta-analysis methods were used to combine the
ure 1. The literature search resulted in 7,647 hits in- results from the different sites. Of the remaining 83
cluding duplicates, the screening process reduced meta-analyses, we contacted 36 authors (43.4%) be-
this number to 502 meta-analyses, of which 89 dealt cause the effect size data was not fully reported in
with the efficacy of psychotherapeutic interventions their paper and obtained data from six authors
for PTSD and were included (see Appendix A and (16.7%).
*438 primary studies
-neercS
-anA
noitacifitnedI
ytilibigilE
atad
gniniatbO
gni
dezyl atad
7,647 hits including duplicates (screened up to 5th September 2015)
• PsycINFO/Psyndex (2,980)
• PubMed (4,412)
• Cochrane (131)
• References (123)
• Conference programs, communication with experts (0)
7,145 records identified as duplicates, no meta-analyses (e.g. primary
studies, book chapters, editorials, comments or corrections to other pub-
lications)
419 meta-analyses excluded
502 meta-analyses • no psychotherapeutic intervention (245)
• no PTSD diagnosis (112)
• studies with mixed disorders including PTSD but without PTSD sub-
group (10)
• targeting children and adolescents (22)
• targeting acute stress disorder (17)
• older version of a meta-analysis (5)
83 meta-analyses • fMRI as outcome (2)
(2,110 data sets)* • network meta-analysis approach (1)
• multisite study (1)
• data not available (4)
2,017 data sets excluded
• less than six studies (1,510)
• heterogeneity (309)
• results not replicable (141)
• duplicates (6)
• random assignment of signs† (5)
• studies for acute stress disorder, psychotropic drugs or children in-
cluded (16)
• no effect sizes (e.g. rather dropout in percentage) (25)
98 data sets • 36 authors contacted for requesting data (28 no data received)
(26 meta-analyses)
Figure 1. Flow chart: Identification and selection of meta-analyses and data sets. Note. † positive and
negative signs were randomly assigned to each effect in the meta-analysis
Meta-Psychology, 2020, vol 4, MP.2018.884, Open data: Yes Edited by: Daniël Lakens
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2018.884 Open materials: Yes Reviewed by: K. Coburn, F. D. Schönbrodt
Article type: Original Article Open and reproducible analysis: Yes Analysis reproduced by: Erin M. Buchanan
Published under the CC-BY4.0 license Open reviews and editorial process: Yes All supplementary files can be accessed at the OSF project
Preregistration: No page: https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/MY8S6
Our analysis of the 83 meta-analyses first exam-
ined whether they discussed the problem of publi-
cation bias. Fifty-eight meta-analyses (69.9%) men-
tioned publication bias, whereas 25 (30.1%) did not
mention it at all. In 35 meta-analyses (42.2%), it was
specified that the search strategies included un-
published studies, and 20 (24.1%) indeed found and
included unpublished studies. However, in 46 meta-
analyses (55.4%) unpublished studies were explicitly
regarded as unsuitable for inclusion, and two meta-
analyses (2.4%) did not specify their search and in-
clusion criteria with respect to unpublished studies.
Forty-seven meta-analyses (56.6%) statistically
assessed publication bias, whereas 36 (43.4%) did
not. Five meta-analyses (6.0%) included the rank-
correlation test, six (7.2%) Egger's regression test,
and nine (10.8%) the trim and fill procedure. TES,
PET-PEESE and p-uniform were not applied in any
Figure 2. Histogram of the number of primary stud-
of the meta-analyses. A funnel plot (Light & Pillemer,
ies’ effect sizes included in data sets. The vertical red
1984) was presented in 26 meta-analyses (31.3%) and
dashed line denotes the cut-off that was used for as-
failsafe N (Rosenthal, 1979) was computed in 26
sessing publication bias in a meta-analysis.
meta-analyses (31.3%). These results indicate that a
large number of meta-analyses did not assess publi-
cation bias or only applied a selection of publication
Characteristics of included data sets
bias methods. PET-PEESE and p-uniform have been
developed more recently and therefore we did not
Thirty-nine (39.8%) data sets reported Hedges’ g
expect them to be regularly applied.
as effect size measure, 29 (29.6%) Cohen’s d, 3 (3.1%)
The 83 meta-analyses included a total number of
a standardized mean difference, 7 (7.1%) a raw mean
2,110 data sets, of which 98 (4.6%) data sets from 26
difference, 16 (16.3%) risk ratio, 2 (2.0%) log odds ra-
meta-analyses fulfilled all inclusion criteria and
tio, and 2 (2.0%) data sets Glass’ delta.
were eligible for publication bias assessment (see
The median number of effect sizes in a data set
flowchart in Figure 1). Figure 2 is a histogram of the
was 7 (first quartile 7, third quartile 10). Since publi-
number of effect sizes per data sets before data sets
cation bias tests have low statistical power if the
were excluded due to less than six studies and het-
number of effect sizes is small in a meta-analysis
erogeneous true effect size. The results show that
(Begg & Mazumdar, 1994; Sterne et al., 2000; van As-
the majority of data sets contained less than six ef-
sen et al., 2015), the characteristics of many of the
fect sizes, and that only a small number of data sets
data sets are not well-suited for methods to detect
included more than 15 effect sizes.
publication bias. Additionally, p-uniform cannot be
Many data sets were excluded because there
applied if there are no statistically significant effect
were less than six studies (1,510 data sets), and due
sizes in a meta-analysis, because a requirement is
to heterogeneity in true effect size (309 data sets).
that at least one study in a meta-analysis is statisti-
All meta-analyses of which data sets were included
cally significant. The median number of statistically
in our study are marked with an asterisk in the list
significant effect sizes in the data sets was 3 (34.3%;
of references.
first quartile 1 (13%), third quartile 6 (80.4%)), and 77
data sets (78.6%) included at least one significant ef-
fect size (see Appendix A, which also reports the
number of studies included in each data set).
PUBLICATION BIAS IN META-ANALYSES OF POSTTRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER INTERVENTIONS 9
Consequently, conditions were also not well-suited We also studied in the simulations whether for
for p-uniform in particular, since this method uses each data set the statistical power of a publication
only the statistically significant effect sizes. The me- bias test was larger than 0.8. This enabled us to se-
dian I2-statistic was 0% (first quartile 0%, third lect the data sets where publication bias tests would
quartile 28.7%). be reasonable powered to detect publication bias if
it was present. Statistical power of none of the
Publication Bias Test methods was larger than 0.8 for any data set if pub
< 0.95 (results are available at
Before applying the publication bias tests to the https://osf.io/6bnc5/ for the rank-correlation
data sets, we conducted a Monte-Carlo simulation test, https://osf.io/ufdps/ for Egger’s test,
study to examine whether statistical power of the https://osf.io/5yehp/ for the TES, and
tests is large enough (> 0.8) to warrant applying https://osf.io/feux3/ for p-uniform). It is highly
these tests. Type-I error rate and statistical power unlikely that publication bias is this extreme in the
of the rank-correlation test (open circles), Egger’s included data sets, because many data sets con-
test (triangles), TES (diamonds), and p-uniform’s tained statistically nonsignificant effect sizes (me-
publication bias test (solid circles) as a function of dian percentage of nonsignificant effect sizes in a
publication bias (pub) are shown in Figure 3. The re- data set 65.7%). The publication bias tests would be
sults in the figure were obtained by averaging over most likely severely underpowered when applied to
the 98 data sets and the 10,000 replications in the the published meta-analyses on PTSD, and it follows
Monte-Carlo simulation study. Type-I error rate of from these results that the tests should not be ap-
all publication bias tests was smaller than (cid:1)=.05 im- plied here. Therefore, we only report the results of
plying that the tests were conservative. These re- applying the publication bias tests to the data sets as
sults indicate that statistical power of all methods supplement in the online repository
was not above 0.5 for pub < 0.95. Statistical power of (https://osf.io/49cke/) for completeness.
only the TES was larger than 0.8 in case of extreme
publication bias (pub = 1). Effect Size Corrected for Publication Bias
The data set with ID 77 (from the meta-analysis
by Kehle-Forbes et al., 2013) was excluded for esti-
mating effect sizes corrected for publication bias
because not enough information was available to
transform the log relative risks to Cohen’s d. Hedges’
g effect sizes could not be transformed into Cohen’s
d for 12 data sets and Hedges’ g was used instead (see
Appendix A). Descriptive results of the effect size es-
timates of traditional meta-analysis, trim and fill,
PET-PEESE, p-uniform, and the selection model ap-
proach are presented in Table 1. P-uniform could
only be applied to data sets with at least one statis-
tically significant result (77 data sets), and the selec-
tion model approach did not converge for two data
sets. Results showed that especially estimates of
PET-PEESE were closer to zero than traditional
meta-analysis and that the standard deviation of the
Figure 3. Type-I error rate and statistical power ob- estimates of PET-PEESE and p-uniform was larger
tained with the Monte-Carlo simulation study of the than traditional meta-analysis, trim and fill, and the
rank-correlation test (open circles), Egger’s test (tri- selection model approach. See Appendix A for the
angles), test of excess significance (TES; diamonds), results of the effect size estimates corrected for
and p-uniform’s publication bias test (solid circles) publication bias per data set.
10
NIEMEYER*, VAN AERT*, SCHMID, UELSMANN, KNAEVELSRUD & SCHULTE-HERBRUGGEN
Table 1. than half the (cid:1)-level.3 This is in line with the rec-
Descriptive results of data sets analyzed with meta- ommendation by van Aert et al. (2016). Setting this
analysis (fixed-effect or random-effects model de- effect size to zero resulted in a mean of the differ-
pending on the model that was used in the original ence in effect size estimate between p-uniform and
meta-analysis), trim and fill, PET-PEESE, p-uniform, traditional meta-analysis of -0.019 (Mdn = 0.04, SD =
and the selection model approach. 0.364). The change in difference in effect size esti-
mate was caused by setting the effect size estimates
Mean, me- [min.; max.], (SD) of
of p-uniform in seven data sets to zero, in which p-
dian estimates
uniform originally substantially corrected for publi-
Table for-
cation bias. The mean of the difference scores be-
0.603, 0.532 [0.015;1.85], (0.447)
mat
tween PET-PEESE and traditional meta-analysis
when computed based on this subset of 77 data sets
Trim and [-0.047;1.789],
0.574, 0.467 was -0.129 (Mdn = -0.011, SD = 0.968), for trim and
fill (0.411)
fill the mean of the difference scores was -0.014
PET- [-1.656;3.075], (Mdn = 0, SD = 0.105), and for the selection model
0.219, 0.203
PEESE (0.696) approach the mean of the difference scores was
0.028 (Mdn = 0.024, SD = 0.155).
[-6.681;2.158],
p-uniform 0.556, 0.693 Explaining estimates of p-uniform, the selec-
(1.385)
tion model approach, and PET-PEESE. We illustrate
deficiencies of p-uniform, the selection model ap-
[-0.061;1.828],
Sel. model 0.603, 0.536
proach, and PET-PEESE by discussing the results of
(0.439)
two exemplary data sets. Estimates of p-uniform can
Note. min. is the minimum value, max. is the maximum
be imprecise (i.e., with a wide CI) if they are based
value, and SD is the standard deviation.
on a small number of effect sizes in combination
with p-values of these effect sizes close to the (cid:1)-
The mean of the difference in effect size estimate level. In 29 out of 77 data sets p-uniform’s estimate
between PET-PEESE and the meta-analytic esti- was based on at most three studies. For instance, the
mate was -0.101 (SD = 0.872). However, the median estimated average log relative risk of random-effect
of the difference in effect size estimate was close to meta-analysis of the data set from Bisson et al. (2013,
zero (Mdn = -0.002), suggesting that the estimates ID=20) was -0.177, 95% CI [-0.499, 0.145] and p-uni-
of PET-PEESE and traditional meta-analysis were form’s estimate was based on a single study and
close. The mean of the difference between the esti- equaled -0.504, 95% CI [-3.809, 8.174]. The effect
mates of trim and fill and traditional meta-analysis size estimate of p-uniform, as for any other method,
(-0.009, Mdn = 0, SD = 0.104) and the selection is more precise the larger the number of effect sizes
model approach and traditional meta-analysis was in a data set or the larger the primary study’s sample
negligible (0.026, Mdn = 0.026, SD = 0.145). sizes.
Analyses for data sets including significant ef- The selection model approach also suffers from a
fect sizes. P-uniform was applied to a subset of 77 small number of statistically significant effect sizes.
data sets (see Appendix A), because this method re- The computed weights for the intervals of the
quires that at least one study is statistically signifi- method’s selection model are imprecisely estimated
cant. The mean of the difference in effect size esti- if only a small number of effect sizes are within an
mate of p-uniform and traditional meta-analysis interval. In an extreme situation where no effect
was -0.174 (Mdn = 0.04, SD = 1.273). The large stand- sizes are observed in an interval of the selection
ard deviation is caused by situations in which an ex- model, the implementation of the selection model
treme effect size was estimated because a primary approach by Vevea and Hedges (1995) in the R pack-
study’s effect size was only marginally significant age “weightr” assigns a weight of 0.01 to this interval.
(i.e., p-value just below .05). In order to counteract Bias in effect size estimation increases the more this
these extreme effect size estimates, we set p-uni- weight deviates from its true value.
form’s effect size estimate to zero when the average PET-PEESE also did not result in reasonable ef-
of the statistically significant p-values was larger fect size estimates in each of the data sets, and
PUBLICATION BIAS IN META-ANALYSES OF POSTTRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER INTERVENTIONS 11
especially not if the standard errors of the primary was closer to zero than traditional meta-analysis
studies were highly similar (i.e., were based on sim- (0.260, 95% CI [-0.057, 0.578]) but had a wider CI.
ilar sample sizes). Figure 4 shows the funnel plot The data set from Diehle et al. (2014) comparing two
based on the data set from Bisson et al. (2007) com- different treatments of TF-CBT (ID=44) is presented
paring TF-CBT versus wait list and active controls in the right panel of Figure 4. PET-PEESE was hin-
(ID=14; left panel) with the filled circles being the 15 dered by the highly similar studies’ standard error,
observed effect sizes. The studies’ standard errors which ranged from 0.227 to 0.478. Hence, the effect
diverged from each other, which makes it possible size estimate of PET-PEESE (0.44, 95% CI [-1.079, -
to fit a regression line through the observed effect 1.958]) was unrealistically larger than the estimate
sizes in the data set (dashed black line). PET-PEESE’s traditional meta-analysis (-0.153, 95% CI [-0.084,
effect size estimate was -0.027 (95% CI [-0.663, 0.39]), and its CI was wider.
0.609]) denoted by the asterisk in Figure 4), which
Figure 4. Funnel plots of the data sets from Bisson et al. (2013) (ID=14; left panel) and Diehle et al. (2014) (ID=44;
right panel). Filled circles are the observed effect sizes in a meta-analysis, the dashed black line is the fitted
regression line through the observed effect sizes, the asterisks indicate the estimate of PET-PEESE.
meta-analysis. Others recommend to re-analyze
published meta-analyses to study the extent of pub-
Discussion
lication bias in whole fields of research (Ioannidis,
2009; Ioannidis & Trikalinos, 2007a; van Assen et al.,
Publication bias is widespread in the psychology
2015) by using multiple publication bias methods
research literature (Bakker et al., 2012; Fanelli, 2012;
(Coburn & Vevea, 2015; Kepes et al., 2012). However,
Sterling et al., 1995) resulting in overestimated effect
the question is whether routinely assessing publica-
sizes in primary studies and meta-analyses (Kra-
tion bias is indeed a good recommendation, because
emer, Gardner, Brooks, & Yesavage, 1998; Lane &
researchers may end up in applying publication bias
Dunlap, 1978). Guidelines such as the MARS (Ameri-
methods in situations where these do not have ap-
can Psychological Association, 2010) and PRISMA
propriate statistical properties, potentially leading
(Moher, Liberati, Tetzlaff, & Altman, 2009) recom-
to drawing faulty conclusions. We tried to answer
mend to routinely correct for publication bias in any
12
NIEMEYER*, VAN AERT*, SCHMID, UELSMANN, KNAEVELSRUD & SCHULTE-HERBRUGGEN
this question by re-analyzing a large number of statistical power of publication bias tests for each
meta-analyses published on the efficacy of psycho- data set was low if extreme publication bias was ab-
therapeutic treatment for PTSD. sent and CIs of methods that provided estimates
We re-analyzed 98 data sets from 26 meta-anal- corrected for publication bias were wide. These re-
yses studying a wide variety of psychotherapeutic sults even call for revising the recommendation by
treatments for PTSD. We had to exclude a large por- Sterne et al. (2011) to apply publication bias tests
tion of data sets (95.4%) mainly due to heterogeneity only to meta-analyses with more than 10 studies.
in true effect size and data sets containing less than Our results are also corroborated by a recent study
six primary studies. These exclusion criteria were of Renkewitz and Keiner (2019) who concluded
necessary, because publication bias methods do not based on a simulation study that publication bias
perform well in case of heterogeneity in true effect could only be reliably detected with at least 30 stud-
size (Ioannidis, 2005) and a small number of primary ies. However, a caveat here is that these recommen-
studies yields low power of publication bias meth- dations heavily depend on the severity of publica-
ods and imprecise effect size estimation (Sterne et tion bias that is assumed to be present in a meta-
al., 2000). analysis. Hence, most important is that researchers
The included data sets were characterized by in- are aware of the fact that publication bias tests suf-
cluding a small number of primary studies (median 7 fer from low statistical power and that a nonsignifi-
studies) resulting in challenging conditions for any cant publication bias test does not imply that publi-
publication bias method. Before applying publica- cation bias is absent.
tion bias tests, we studied whether these tests
would have sufficient statistical power (>0.8). We Recommendations
conducted a Monte-Carlo simulation study in which
data were generated in a way to stay as close as pos- We consider it important to give practical advice
sible to the included data sets. The statistical power to researchers. We recommend researchers to fol-
of the publication bias tests was only larger than 0.8 low the MARS guidelines, apply publication bias
in case of extreme publication bias (i.e., nonsignifi- tests, and report effect size estimates corrected for
cant effect sizes having a probability of 0.05 or publication bias. However, a well-informed choice
smaller to be included in a meta-analysis). Hence, has to be made to select the publication bias meth-
we concluded that it was not warranted to apply ods with the best statistical properties as no method
publication bias tests. Of note is that the median outperforms all other methods in all conditions
percentage of nonsignificant effect sizes in a data (Carter et al., 2019; Renkewitz & Keiner, 2019). Carter
set was 65.7% suggesting that extreme publication and colleagues (2019) conclude that it has not been
bias was absent. investigated yet whether the application of publica-
Publication bias methods that correct the effect tion bias methods is warranted in real data in psy-
size for bias are also affected by a small number of chology, and that this ultimately is an empirical
primary studies, because the effect size estimates question which should be the focus of future re-
become then imprecise (i.e., a wide CI). However, search. Routinely applying publication bias methods
comparing estimates of these methods with those of without paying attention to their statistical proper-
traditional meta-analysis that does not correct for ties for the characteristics of the respective meta-
publication bias still provides insights about the se- analysis cannot be recommended. Hence, research-
verity of publication bias. This analysis revealed no ers need to consider the characteristics of the data
evidence for severe overestimation caused by pub- sets and check the properties of publication bias
lication bias as the corrected estimates were close methods for these data sets before actually applying
to those of traditional meta-analysis. these methods. Such a “method performance check”
Our results imply that following up on the guide- has also been recommended by Carter et al. (2019)
lines to assess publication bias in any meta-analysis for methods to correct effect size for publication
is far from straightforward in practice. Many data bias and can be conducted by their meta explorer
sets in our study where too heterogeneous for pub- web application
lication bias analyses. Moreover, even after the ex- (http://www.shinyapps.org/apps/metaExplorer/)
clusion of data sets with less than six studies, or simulation studies. A complicating factor,
PUBLICATION BIAS IN META-ANALYSES OF POSTTRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER INTERVENTIONS 13
however, is that a method performance check re- Limitations
quires information about the true effect size, true
heterogeneity in true effect size, and the extent of Heterogeneous data sets had to be excluded, be-
publication bias that is not available. Hence, re- cause assessing publication bias with the included
searchers are advised to use multiple levels for these methods is only accurate when based on meta-anal-
parameters in a method performance check as a yses with no or small heterogeneity in true effect
sensitivity analyses. size (Ioannidis & Trikalinos, 2007a; Terrin et al.,
As there is no single publication bias method that 2003). For that reason, data sets were excluded from
outperforms all other methods and selecting a the analyses if the I2-statistic was larger than 50%,
method depends on unknown parameters, we rec- but the I2-statistic is generally imprecise and espe-
ommend to apply multiple publication bias methods cially if the number of effect sizes in a meta-analysis
that show acceptable performance in a method per- is small (Ioannidis, Patsopoulos, & Evangelou, 2007).
formance check. A so-called triangulation (Kepes et This is also reflected in the wide confidence inter-
al., 2012; Coburn & Vevea, 2015) following a methods vals around the I2-statistics of the included data sets
performance check, rather than applying only one in the analyses (see Appendix A). Moreover, there is
publication bias method, will yield more insight into also an effect of publication bias on the I2-statistic
the presence and severity of publication bias, be- which has been shown to be large, complex and
cause each method uses its own approach to exam- non-linear, such that publication bias can both dra-
ine publication bias. Researchers should refrain matically decrease and increase the I2-statistic (Au-
from testing for publication bias if a method perfor- gusteijn, van Aert, & van Assen, 2019). Therefore, a
mance check by means of a power analysis reveals consequence of using a selection criterion based on
that publication bias is unlikely to be detected in the I2-statistic in the current study is that this may
their meta-analysis. Applying methods to correct ef- have led to the inclusion of data sets with heteroge-
fect size for publication bias is still useful in case of neity in true effect size, which may, in turn, also have
a small number of studies in a meta-analysis, be- biased the results of the publication bias methods
cause estimates corrected for publication bias can because these methods do not perform well under
be compared to the uncorrected estimate to assess substantial heterogeneity (Ioannidis, 2005; Terrin et
the severity of publication bias. al., 2003; van Assen et al., 2015).
We consider it important to emphasize that the Data sets affected by publication bias may also
reporting of publication bias methods should be in- have been excluded by limiting ourselves to homo-
dependent of their results. The analysis procedure geneous data sets. Imagine a data set consisting of
of the meta-analysis as well as the publication bias multiple statistically significant effect sizes because
tests is preferred to be preregistered in a pre-anal- of publication bias and one nonsignificant effect size
ysis plan before the analyses are actually conducted. that is not influenced by publication bias. The inclu-
Moreover, conflicting results of publication bias sion of this nonsignificant effect size likely causes
methods are an interesting and important finding on the I2-statistic to be larger than 50% while the true
its own that has to be discussed in the paper. effect size in fact may be homogeneous. Hence,
publication bias may also have resulted in the exclu-
sion of homogeneous data sets. Another limitation is
that questionable research practices, known as p-
hacking (i.e., all behaviors researchers can use to ob-
tain the desired results; Simmons, Nelson, & Simon-
sohn, 2011), may have further biased the results of
the publication bias methods as well as the tradi-
tional meta-analysis (van Aert et al., 2016).
Of note is also that the data sets in the current
investigation often contained multiple statistically
nonsignificant effect sizes when an active treatment
was compared to a passive or active control group,
which is not expected in case of extreme publication
14
NIEMEYER*, VAN AERT*, SCHMID, UELSMANN, KNAEVELSRUD & SCHULTE-HERBRUGGEN
bias. Especially comparisons between two active Author Contact
treatments resulted in very few significant differ-
ences in efficacy. These meta-analyses with nonsig- Helen Niemeyer
nificant comparative effects might also be affected Freie Universität Berlin
by publication bias. For example, when a new treat- Department of Clinical Psychological Intervention
ment is found to be as efficacious as an established Schwendenerstr. 27
one, this might be newsworthy and have a larger 14195 Berlin
chance to get published than a finding demonstrat- Germany
ing the well-known superiority of the state-of-the-
art treatment. This implies that publication bias lead Phone 0049/3083854798
to the publication of statistically nonsignificant ra- helen.niemeyer@fu-berlin.de
ther than significant effects. Publication bias will not
be detected by any of the methods in such a situa-
Conflict of Interest and Funding
tion in this study.
All authors declare no conflict of interest. The
Conclusion
preparation of this article was supported by Grant
406-13-050 from the Netherlands Organization for
Routinely assessing publication bias in any meta-
Scientific Research (RvA).
analysis is recommended by guidelines such as
MARS and PRISMA. We have shown, however, that
the characteristics of meta-analyses in research on Author Contributions
PTSD treatments are generally unfavorable for pub-
lication bias methods. That is, heterogeneity and HN and RvA designed the study. HN and SSch de-
small numbers of studies in meta-analyses result in veloped the search strategy and SSch coordinated
low statistical power and imprecise corrected esti- the literature search. SSch, HN and DU served as in-
mates. Of note is that interpreting results from small dependent raters in the process of the selection of
data sets cautiously accounts in general for meta- the meta-analyses. HN and SSch conducted the data
analyses. The characteristics of the meta-analyses collection, coding and data management. SSch con-
in our study on PTSD treatments are deemed to be tacted the authors of all primary studies for which
typical for psychotherapy research, and potentially data were missing. DU developed the treatment
for other areas of clinical psychology, as well. coding scheme, and HN, DU and SSch categorized
The development of new publication bias meth- the treatment and control conditions. RvA per-
ods and the improvement of existing methods is formed all statistical analyses. HN and RvA drafted
necessary that allow the true effect size to be heter- the manuscript. CK and OSH supervised the whole
ogeneous and perform well in case of a small num- conduction of the meta-meta-analysis and revised
ber of effect sizes in a meta-analysis. Promising de- the manuscript.
velopments are p-uniform being extended to enable
accurate effect size estimation in the presence of
Open Science Practices
heterogeneity in true effect size (van Aert & van As-
sen, 2020). Other promising developments are
Bayesian methods to correct for publication bias
(Du, Liu, & Wang, 2017; Guan & Vandekerckhove,
2016) and the increased attention for selection
model approaches (Citkowicz & Vevea, 2017;
This article earned the Open Data and the Open
McShane et al., 2016).
Materials badge for making the data and materials
We hope that our work creates awareness for the
openly available. It has been verified that the analy-
limitations of publication bias methods and recom-
sis reproduced the results presented in the article.
mend researchers to apply and report multiple pub-
It should be noted that the coding of the literature
lication bias methods that have shown good statisti-
has not been verified; only the final analysis. The
cal properties for the meta-analysis under study.
PUBLICATION BIAS IN META-ANALYSES OF POSTTRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER INTERVENTIONS 15
entire editorial process, including the open reviews, Banks, G. C., Kepes, S., & Banks, K. P. (2012). Publi-
are published in the online supplement. cation bias: the antagonist of meta-analytic re-
views and effective policymaking. Educational
Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 34(3), 259-277.
Acknowledgements
doi:10.3102/0162373712446144
Banks, G. C., Kepes, S., & McDaniel, M. A. (2012).
The authors would like to thank Helen-Rose and
Publication bias: a call for improved meta‐ana-
Sinclair Cleveland, Andrea Ertle, Manuel Heinrich,
lytic practice in the organizational sciences.
Marcel van Assen, Josephine Wapsa and Jelte
International Journal of Selection and Assess-
Wicherts who helped in proof reading the article.
ment, 20(2), 182-197. doi:10.1111/j.1468-
2389.2012.00591.x
Becker, B. J. (2005). Failsafe N or file-drawer num-
ber. In H. R. Rothstein, A. J. Sutton, & M. Boren-
References
stein (Eds.), Publication bias in meta-analysis:
Prevention, assessment and adjustments (pp.
Aguinis, H., Dalton, D. R., Bosco, F. A., Pierce, C. A., 111-125). Chichester, England: Wiley.
& Dalton, C. M. (2010). Meta-analytic choices Begg, C. B., & Mazumdar, M. (1994). Operating char-
and judgment calls: Implications for theory acteristics of a rank correlation test for publi-
building and testing, obtained effect sizes, and cation bias. Biometrics, 50, 1088-1101.
scholarly impact. Journal of Management, 37(1), Benish, S. G., Imel, Z. E., & Wampold, B. E. (2008).
5-38. doi:10.1177/0149206310377113 The relative efficacy of bona fide psychothera-
Aguinis, H., Gottfredson, R. K., & Wright, T. A. (2011). pies for treating post-traumatic stress disor-
Best‐practice recommendations for estimating der: A meta-analysis of direct comparisons.
interaction effects using meta‐analysis. Journal Clinical psychology review, 28(5), 746-758.
of Organizational Behavior, 32(8), 1033-1043. doi:10.1016/j.cpr.2007.10.005
doi:10.1002/job.719 Berlin, J. A., & Ghersi, D. (2005). Preventing publica-
American Psychiatric Association. (1987). Diagnostic tion bias: Registries and prospective meta-
and statistical manual of mental disorders (3rd analysis. In H. R. Rothstein, A. J. Sutton, & M.
ed.). Washington, DC: Author. Borenstein (Eds.), Publication bias in meta-
American Psychiatric Association. (1994). Diagnos- analysis: Prevention, assessment and adjust-
tic and statistical manual of mental disorders ments (pp. 35-48). Chichester, England: Wiley.
(4th ed.). Washington, DC: Author. Bisson, J. I., Roberts, N. P., Andrew, M., Cooper, R.,
American Psychiatric Association. (2000). Diagnos- & Lewis, C. (2013). Psychological therapies for
tic and statistical manual of mental disorders chronic post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
(4th ed.). Washington, DC: Author. in adults. Cochrane Database of Systematic Re-
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnos- views, 12. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD003388.pub4
tic and statistical manual of mental disorders Borenstein, M. (2009). Effect sizes for continuous
(5th ed.). Washington, DC: Author. data. In H. Cooper, L. V. Hedges, & J. C. Valen-
American Psychological Association. (2010). Publi- tine (Eds.), The handbook of research synthesis
cation manual of the American Psychological and meta-analysis (pp. 221-236). New York, NY:
Association. Washington, DC: Author. Russell Sage Foundation.
Augusteijn, H. E. M., van Aert, R. C. M., & van Assen, Borenstein, M., Hedges, L. V., Higgins, J. P. T., &
M. A. L. M. (2019). The effect of publication bias Rothstein, H. R. (2009). Introduction to meta-
on the Q test and assessment of heterogeneity. analysis. Chichester, England: Wiley.
Psychological Methods, 24(1), 116-134. Bornstein, H. A. (2004). A meta-analysis of group
doi:10.1037/met0000197 treatments for post-traumatic stress disorder:
Bakker, M., van Dijk, A., & Wicherts, J. M. (2012). The How treatment modality affects symptoms.
rules of the game called psychological science. (64), ProQuest Information & Learning, US. Re-
Perspectives On Psychological Science, 7(6), trieved from
543-554. doi:10.1177/1745691612459060
16
NIEMEYER*, VAN AERT*, SCHMID, UELSMANN, KNAEVELSRUD & SCHULTE-HERBRUGGEN
http://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?di- Duval, S., & Tweedie, R. (2000a). A nonparametric
rect=true&db=psyh&AN=2004-99008- “trim and fill” method of accounting for publi-
373&site=ehost-live Available from EBSCOhost cation bias in meta-analysis. Journal of the
psyh database. American Statistical Association, 95(449), 89-
Carter, E. C., Schönbrodt, F. D., Gervais, W. M., & 98.
Hilgard, J. (2019). Correcting for bias in psy- Duval, S., & Tweedie, R. (2000b). Trim and fill: A
chology: A comparison of meta-analytic meth- simple funnel-plot-based method of testing
ods. Advances in Methods and Practices in Psy- and adjusting for publication bias in meta-anal-
chological Science, 2, 1 - 24. Retrieved from ysis. Biometrics, 56(2), 455-463.
osf.io/preprints/psyarxiv/9h3nu doi:10.1111/j.0006-341X.2000.00455.x
Chard, K. M. (1995). A meta-analysis of posttrau- Egger, M., Smith, G. D., Schneider, M., & Minder, C.
matic stress disorder treatment outcome stud- (1997). Bias in meta-analysis detected by a sim-
ies of sexually victimized women. (55), ple, graphical test. Brithish Medical Journal,
ProQuest Information & Learning, US. Re- 315(7109), 629-634. doi:10.1136/bmj.315.7109.629
trieved from http://search.ebsco- Ehlers, A., Bisson, J., Clark, D. M., Creamer, M., Pill-
host.com/login.aspx?di- ing, S., Richards, D., . . . Yule, W. (2010). Do all
rect=true&db=psyh&AN=1995-95007- psychological treatments really work the same
211&site=ehost-live Available from EBSCOhost in posttraumatic stress disorder? Clinical Psy-
psyh database. chology Review, 30(2), 269-276.
Citkowicz, M., & Vevea, J. L. (2017). A parsimonious Ehlers, A., Clark, D. M., Hackmann, A., McManus, F.,
weight function for modeling publication bias. & Fennell, M. (2005). Cognitive therapy for
Psychological Methods, 22(1), 28-41. post-traumatic stress disorder: development
doi:doi:10.1037/met0000119 and evaluation. Behaviour research and ther-
Coburn, K. M., & Vevea, J. L. (2015). Publication bias apy, 43(4), 413-431.
as a function of study characteristics. Psycho- Ellis, P. D. (2010). The essential guide to effect sizes:
logical Methods, 20(3), 310-330. Statistical power, meta-analysis, and the inter-
doi:10.1037/met0000047 pretation of research results. New York: Cam-
Coburn, K. M., & Vevea, J. L. (2019). weightr: Esti- bridge University Press.
mating Weight-Function Models for Publica- Fanelli, D. (2012). Negative results are disappearing
tion Bias. R package version 2.0.1. doi: from most disciplines and countries. Scien-
https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=weightr tometrics, 90(3), 891-904. doi:10.1007/s11192-
Dickersin, K. (2005). Publication bias: Recognizing 011-0494-7
the problem, understanding its origins and Ferguson, C. J., & Brannick, M. T. (2012). Publication
scope, and preventing harm. In H. R. Rothstein, bias in psychological science: prevalence,
A. J. Sutton, & M. Borenstein (Eds.), Publication methods for identifying and controlling, and
bias in meta-analysis: Prevention, assessment implications for the use of meta-analyses. Psy-
and adjustments (pp. 11-33). Chichester, Eng- chological Methods, 17(1), 120-128.
land: Wiley. doi:10.1037/a0024445
Driessen, E., Hollon, S. D., Bockting, C. L. H., & Field, A. P., & Gillett, R. (2010). How to do a meta‐
Cuijpers, P. (2017). Does Publication Bias Inflate analysis. British Journal of Mathematical and
the Apparent Efficacy of Psychological Treat- Statistical Psychology, 63(3), 665-694.
ment for Major Depressive Disorder? A Sys- doi:10.1348/000711010X502733
tematic Review and Meta-Analysis of US Na- Fleiss, J. L. (1971). Measuring nominal scale aggree-
tional Institutes of Health-Funded Trials. PLOS ment among many raters. Psychological Bulle-
ONE, 10(9), e0137864. doi:doi:10.1371/jour- tin, 76, 378-382. doi:10.1037/h0031619
nal.pone.0137864 Foa, E. B., & Rothbaum, B. O. (1998). Treating the
Du, H., Liu, F., & Wang, L. (2017). A Bayesian "fill-In" trauma of rape: Cognitive-behavioral therapy
method for correcting for publication bias in for PTSD. New York, NY: Guilford Press.
meta-analysis. Psychological Methods, 22(4), Forbes, D., Creamer, M., Bisson, J. I., Cohen, J. A.,
799-817. doi:10.1037/met0000164 Crow, B. E., Foa, E. B., . . . Ursano, R. J. (2010). A
PUBLICATION BIAS IN META-ANALYSES OF POSTTRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER INTERVENTIONS 17
guide to guidelines for the treatment of PTSD Publication bias in meta-analysis: Prevention,
and related conditions. Journal of traumatic assessment and adjustments (pp. 49-72).
stress, 23(5), 537-552. Chichester, England: Wiley.
Forbes, D., Creamer, M., Phelps, A., Bryant, R., Ioannidis, J. P. (2005). Differentiating biases from
McFarlane, A., Devilly, G. J., . . . Newton, S. genuine heterogeneity: distinguishing artifac-
(2007). Australian guidelines for the treatment tual from substantive effects. In H. R. Roth-
of adults with acute stress disorder and post- stein, A. J. Sutton, & M. Borenstein (Eds.), Publi-
traumatic stress disorder. Aust N Z J Psychia- cation bias in meta-analysis: prevention, as-
try, 41(8), 637-648. sessment and adjustments (pp. 287-302). Sus-
doi:10.1080/00048670701449161 sex, England: Wiley.
Francis, G. (2013). Replication, statistical con- Ioannidis, J. P. (2008). Why most discovered true
sistency, and publication bias. Journal of Ma- associations are inflated. Epidemiology, 19(5),
thematical Psychology, 57(5), 153-169. 640-648. doi:10.1097/EDE.0b013e31818131e7
doi:10.1016/j.jmp.2013.02.003 Ioannidis, J. P. (2009). Integration of evidence from
Gerger, H., Munder, T., Gemperli, A., Nüesch, E., multiple meta-analyses: A primer on umbrella
Trelle, S., Jüni, P., & Barth, J. (2014). Integrating reviews, treatment networks and multiple
fragmented evidence by network meta-analy- treatments meta-analyses. Canadian Medical
sis: relative effectiveness of psychological in- Association Journal, 181(8), 488-493.
terventions for adults with post-traumatic doi:10.1503/cmaj.081086
stress disorder. Psychol Med, 44(15), 3151-3164. Ioannidis, J. P., Patsopoulos, N. A., & Evangelou, E.
doi:10.1017/S0033291714000853 (2007). Uncertainty in heterogeneity estimates
Gilbody, S., & Song, F. (2000). Publication bias and in meta-analyses. British Medical Journal,
the integrity of psychiatry research. Psycho- 335(7626), 914-916.
logical Medicine, 30, 253-258. doi:10.1136/bmj.39343.408449.80
doi:10.1017/S0033291700001732 Ioannidis, J. P., & Trikalinos, T. A. (2007a). The ap-
Guan, M., & Vandekerckhove, J. (2016). A Bayesian propriateness of asymmetry tests for publica-
approach to mitigation of publication bias. Psy- tion bias in meta-analyses: a large survey. Ca-
chonomic Bulletin & Review, 23(1), 74-86. nadian Medical Association Journal, 176(8),
doi:doi:10.3758/s13423-015-0868-6 1091-1096. doi:10.1503/cmaj.060410
Head, M. L., Holman, L., Lanfear, R., Kahn, A. T., & Ioannidis, J. P., & Trikalinos, T. A. (2007b). An ex-
Jennions, M. D. (2015). The extent and conse- ploratory test for an excess of significant find-
quences of p-hacking in science. PLoS Biol, ings. Clinical Trials, 4(3), 245-253.
13(3), e1002106. doi:10.1371/jour- doi:10.1177/1740774507079441
nal.pbio.1002106 Iyengar, S., & Greenhouse, J. B. (1988). Selection
Hedges, L. V., & Vevea, J. L. (2005). Selection models and the file drawer problem. Statistical
method approaches. In H. R. Rothstein, A. J. Science, 3, 109-135.
Sutton, & M. Borenstein (Eds.), Publication bias Jaycox, L. H., & Foa, E. B. (1999). Cost-effectiveness
in meta-analysis: Prevention, assessment and issues in the treatment of post-traumatic
adjustments (pp. 145-174). Chichester, UK: stress disorder. In N. E. Miller & M. K. M (Eds.),
Wiley. Cost-effectiveness of psychotherapy: A guide
Higgins, J., & Thompson, S. G. (2002). Quantifying for practitioners, researchers, and policymak-
heterogeneity in a meta‐analysis. Statistics in ers. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Medicine, 21(11), 1539-1558. Karen, R. M. (1990). Shame and guilt as the treat-
doi:10.1002/sim.1186 ment focus in Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder:
Hinkle, D. E., Wiersma, W., & Jurs, S. G. (2003). Ap- A meta-analysis. (51), ProQuest Information &
plied statistics for the behavioral sciences. Learning, US. Retrieved from
Boston, Mass.: Houghton Mifflin Company. http://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?di-
Hopewell, S., Clarke, M., & Mallett, S. (2005). Grey rect=true&db=psyh&AN=1991-51715-
literature and systematic reviews. In H. R. 001&site=ehost-live Available from EBSCOhost
Rothstein, A. J. Sutton, & M. Borenstein (Eds.), psyh database.
18
NIEMEYER*, VAN AERT*, SCHMID, UELSMANN, KNAEVELSRUD & SCHULTE-HERBRUGGEN
Kepes, S., Banks, G. C., McDaniel, M., & Whetzel, D. Psychological Science, 11(5), 730-749.
L. (2012). Publication bias in the organizational doi:doi:10.1177/1745691616662243
sciences. Organizational Research Methods, Moher, D., Liberati, A., Tetzlaff, J., & Altman, D. G.
15(4), 624-662. (2009). Preferred reporting items for system-
Kessler, R. C., Petukhova, M., Sampson, N. A., atic reviews and meta-analyses: the PRISMA
Zaslavsky, A. M., & Wittchen, H. U. (2012). statement. Annals of internal medicine, 151(4),
Twelve‐month and lifetime prevalence and 264-269.
lifetime morbid risk of anxiety and mood disor- Mokken, R. J. (1971). A theory and procedure of scale
ders in the United States. International journal analysis: With applications in political research
of methods in psychiatric research, 21(3), 169- (Vol. 1): Walter de Gruyter.
184. Moreno, S. G., Sutton, A. J., Ades, A. E., Stanley, T.
Kraemer, H. C., Gardner, C., Brooks, J., & Yesavage, D., Abrams, K. R., Peters, J. L., & Cooper, N. J.
J. A. (1998). Advantages of excluding underpow- (2009). Assessment of regression-based meth-
ered studies in meta-analysis: Inclusionist ver- ods to adjust for publication bias through a
sus exclusionist viewpoints. Psychological comprehensive simulation study. BMC Medical
Methods, 3(1), 23-31. doi:doi:10.1037/1082- Research Methodology, 9(2). doi:10.1186/1471-
989X.3.1.23 2288-9-2
Lane, D. M., & Dunlap, W. P. (1978). Estimating ef- National Collaborating Centre for Mental Health.
fect size: Bias resulting from the significance (2005). Post-traumatic stress disorder: The
criterion in editorial decisions. British Journal management of PTSD in adults and children in
of Mathematical and Statistical Psychology, primary and secondary care. (NICE Clinical
31(2), 107-112. Guidelines, No. 26). In. Leicester, UK: Gaskell.
Light, R., & Pillemer, D. (1984). Summing up: The Niemeyer, H., Musch, J., & Pietrowsky, R. (2012).
science of research reviewing. In. Cambridge, Publication bias in meta-analyses of the effi-
MA: Harvard University Press. cacy of psychotherapeutic interventions for
Lipsey, M. W., & Wilson, D. B. (2001). Practical schizophrenia. Schizophrenia research, 138(2),
meta-analysis. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publi- 103-112.
cations. Niemeyer, H., Musch, J., & Pietrowsky, R. (2013).
Loevinger, J. (1948). The technique of homogeneous Publication bias in meta-analyses of the effi-
tests compared with some aspects of scale cacy of psychotherapeutic interventions for
analysis and factor analysis. Psychological Bul- depression. Journal of consulting and clinical
letin, 45(6), 507-529. doi:10.1037/h0055827 psychology, 81(1), 58-74.
Macaskill, P., Walter, S. D., & Irwig, L. (2001). A com- Niemeyer, H., Pieper, A., Uelsmann, D., Schulte-
parison of methods to detect publication bias Herbrüggen, O., & Knaevelsrud, C. (2017). Evi-
in meta‐analysis. Statistics in Medicine, 20(4), dence based psychotherapy for complex post-
641-654. traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), and PTSD
Maljanen, T., Knekt, P., Lindfors, O., Virtala, E., Till- following complex traumatization: An over-
man, P., Härkänen, T., & Helsinki Psychot- view. Manuscript in preparation.
herapy Study Group. (2016). The cost-effec- Norcross, J. C. (1990). An eclectic definition of psy-
tiveness of short-term and long-term psycho- chotherapy. In J. K. Zeig & W. M. Munion (Eds.),
therapy in the treatment of depressive and What is psychotherapy? Contemporary per-
anxiety disorders during a 5-year follow up. spectives (pp. 218-220). San Francisco, CA:
Journal of Affective Disorders, 190, 254-263. Jossey-Bass.
doi:10.1016/j.jad.2015.09.065 Orwin, R. G. (1983). A fail-safe N for effect size in
Margraf, J. (2009). Kosten und Nutzen der Psycho- meta-analysis. Journal of Educational Statis-
therapie. Heidelberg: Springer Medizin. tics, 8, 157-159. doi:10.2307/1164923
McShane, B. B., Böckenholt, U., & Hansen, K. T. Peters, J. L., Sutton, A. J., Jones, D. R., Abrams, K. R.,
(2016). Adjusting for publication bias in meta- & Rushton, L. (2007). Performance of the trim
analysis: An evaluation of selection methods and fill method in the presence of publication
and some cautionary notes. Perspectives On bias and between‐study heterogeneity.
PUBLICATION BIAS IN META-ANALYSES OF POSTTRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER INTERVENTIONS 19
Statistics in Medicine, 26(25), 4544-4562. Sloan, D. M., Feinstein, B. A., Gallagher, M. W., Beck,
doi:10.1002/sim.2889 J. G., & Keane, T. M. (2013). Efficacy of group
R Core Team. (2019). R: A language and environ- treatment for posttraumatic stress disorder
ment for statistical computing. symptoms: A meta-analysis. Psychological
Renkewitz, F., & Keiner, M. (2019). How to detect Trauma: Theory, Research, Practice, and Pol-
publication bias in psychological research? A icy, 5(2), 176-183.
comparative evaluation of six statistical meth- Stanley, T. D., & Doucouliagos, H. (2014). Meta‐re-
ods. Zeitschrift für Psychologie, 227(4), 261 - gression approximations to reduce publication
279. doi:10.31234/osf.io/w94ep selection bias. Research Synthesis Methods,
Resick, P. A., & Schnicke, M. K. (1993). Cognitive 5(1), 60-78.
processing therapy for rape victims: A treat- Stanley, T. D., Doucouliagos, H., & Ioannidis, J. P.
ment manual. Newbury Park, CA: Sage. (2017). Finding the power to reduce publication
Rhodes, K. M., Turner, R. M., & Higgins, J. P. (2015). bias. Statistics in Medicine.
Predictive distributions were developed for the doi:10.1002/sim.7228
extent of heterogeneity in meta-analyses of Sterling, T. D., Rosenbaum, W. L., & Weinkam, J. J.
continuous outcome data. Journal of Clinical (1995). Publication decisions revisited: The ef-
Epidemiology, 68(1), 52-60. fect of the outcome of statistical tests on the
Rosenthal, R. (1979). The file drawer problem and decision to publish and vice versa. The Ameri-
tolerance for null results. Psychological Bulle- can Statistician, 49(1), 108-112.
tin, 86(3), 638-641. doi:10.1037/0033- doi:10.2307/2684823
2909.86.3.638 Sterne, J. A. C., Becker, B. J., & Egger, M. (2005). The
Rothstein, H. R., & Bushman, B. J. (2012). Publication funnel plot. In H. R. Rothstein, A. J. Sutton, & M.
bias in psychological science: comment on Fer- Borenstein (Eds.), Publication bias in meta-
guson and Brannick (2012). Psychological analysis: Prevention, assessment and adjust-
Methods, 17, 129-136. doi:10.1037/a0027128 ments (pp. 111-125). Chichester, England: Wiley.
Rothstein, H. R., & Hopewell, S. (2009). Grey litera- Sterne, J. A. C., Gavaghan, D., & Egger, M. (2000).
ture. In H. Cooper, L. V. Hedges, & J. C. Valen- Publication and related bias in meta-analysis:
tine (Eds.), The handbook of research synthesis power of statistical tests and prevalence in the
and meta-analysis (2nd ed., pp. 103-125). New literature. Journal of clinical epidemiology,
York: Russell Sage Foundation. 53(11), 1119-1129.
Rothstein, H. R., Sutton, A. J., & Borenstein, M. Sterne, J. A. C., Sutton, A. J., Ioannidis, J. P., Terrin,
(2005). Publication bias in meta-analysis: Pre- N., Jones, D. R., Lau, J., . . . Schmid, C. H. (2011).
vention, assessment and adjustments. Chiches- Recommendations for examining and inter-
ter, England: Wiley preting funnel plot asymmetry in meta-anal-
Shapiro, F., & Forrest, M. S. (2001). Eye movement yses of randomised controlled trials. Brithish
desensitization and reprocessing: Basic princi- Medical Journal, 343(7818), 1-8.
ples, protocols and procedures. New York, NY: doi:10.1136/bmj.d400210.3102/016237371244614
Guilford Press. 4
Simmons, J. P., Nelson, L. D., & Simonsohn, U. (2011). Terrin, N., Schmid, C. H., & Lau, J. (2005). In an em-
False-positive psychology undisclosed flexibil- pirical evaluation of the funnel plot, research-
ity in data collection and analysis allows pre- ers could not visually identify publication bias.
senting anything as significant. Psychological Journal of clinical epidemiology, 58(9), 894-901.
science, 22(11), 1359-1366. doi:10.1016/j.jclinepi.2005.01.006
doi:10.1177/0956797611417632 Terrin, N., Schmid, C. H., Lau, J., & Olkin, I. (2003).
Simonsohn, U., Nelson, L. D., & Simmons, J. P. Adjusting for publication bias in the presence
(2014). p-Curve and effect size correcting for of heterogeneity. Statistics in Medicine, 22(13),
publication bias using only significant results. 2113-2126. doi:10.1002/sim.1461
Perspectives On Psychological Science, 9(6), Turner, R. M., Jackson, D., Wei, Y., Thompson, S. G.,
666-681. doi:10.1177/1745691614553988 & Higgins, J. P. T. (2015). Predictive distribu-
tions for between-study heterogeneity and
20
NIEMEYER*, VAN AERT*, SCHMID, UELSMANN, KNAEVELSRUD & SCHULTE-HERBRUGGEN
simple methods for their application in Bayes- PTSD. Clinical Psychology Review, 30(8), 923-
ian meta-analysis. Statistics in Medicine, 34(6), 933.
984-998. Wilen, J. S. (2015). A systematic review and network
Valentine, J. C. (2009). Judging the quality of pri- meta-analysis of psychosocial interventions for
mary research. In H. Cooper, L. V. Hedges, & J. adults who were sexually abused as children.
C. Valentine (Eds.), The handbook of research (75), ProQuest Information & Learning, US. Re-
synthesis and meta-analysis (Vol. 2, pp. 129- trieved from http://search.ebsco-
146). New York, NY: Russel Sage Foundation. host.com/login.aspx?di-
van Aert, R. C. M. (2019). puniform: Meta-Analysis rect=true&db=psyh&AN=2015-99031-
Methods Correcting for Publication Bias. R 072&site=ehost-live Available from EBSCOhost
package version 0.1.1. doi:https://CRAN.R-pro- psyh database.
ject.org/package=puniform
van Aert, R. C. M., & van Assen, M. A. L. M. (2020).
Correcting for Publication Bias in a Meta-Anal-
ysis with the P-Uniform* Method.
doi:10.31222/osf.io/zqjr9
van Aert, R. C. M., Wicherts, J. M., & van Assen, M.
A. L. M. (2016). Conducting meta-analyses
based on p-values: Reservations and recom-
mendations for applying p-uniform and p-
curve. Perspectives On Psychological Science,
11, 713-729. doi:doi:10.1177/1745691616650874
van Assen, M. A. L. M., van Aert, R. C. M., &
Wicherts, J. M. (2015). Meta-analysis using ef-
fect size distributions of only statistically sig-
nificant studies. Psychological Methods, 20(3),
293-309. doi:10.1037/met0000025
Veronen, L. J., & Kilpatrick, S. (1983). Stress man-
agement for rape victims. In D. Meichenbaum
& M. E. Jaremko (Eds.), Stress reduction and
prevention (pp. 341-374). London, England: Ple-
num.
Vevea, J. L., & Hedges, L. V. (1995). A general linear
model for estimating effect size in the pres-
ence of publication bias. Psychometrika, 60(3),
419-435. doi:10.1007/BF02294384
Vevea, J. L., & Woods, C. M. (2005). Publication bias
in research synthesis: Sensitivity analysis using
a priori weight functions. Psychological Meth-
ods, 10(4), 428-443. doi:10.1037/1082-
989X.10.4.428
Viechtbauer, W. (2007). Confidence intervals for the
amount of heterogeneity in meta-analysis. Sta-
tistics in Medicine, 26(1), 37-52.
Viechtbauer, W. (2010). Conducting meta-analysis
in R with the metafor package. Journal of Sta-
tistical Software, 36(3), 1-48.
Wampold, B. E., Imel, Z. E., Laska, K. M., Benish, S.,
Miller, S. D., Flűckiger, C., . . . Budge, S. (2010).
Determining what works in the treatment of
PUBLICATION BIAS IN META-ANALYSES OF POSTTRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER INTERVENTIONS 21
Footnotes
1 We also coded the treatment that was studied in
the meta-analyses to compare the results of the
publication bias methods between the treatments.
Additional information on the coding of the treat-
ments can be found in an online repository
(https://osf.io/gh729/) as well as the results split
per treatment (https://osf.io/usm9f/).
2 The four unpublished dissertations were: Born-
stein, 2004; Chard, 1995; Karen, 1990; Wilen, 2015.
3 We assumed that two-tailed hypothesis tests
with (cid:1) = .05 were used in the primary studies.
Hence, p-uniform’s effect size estimate was set
equal to zero if the average of statistically significant
p-value was smaller than (cid:1)/4.
22
NIEMEYER*, VAN AERT*, SCHMID, UELSMANN, KNAEVELSRUD & SCHULTE-HERBRUGGEN
Appendix A
Table A
Results of traditional meta-analysis, Begg and Mazumdar’s rank-correlation test, Egger’s regression test, TES, p-uniform, trim and fill, PET-PEESE, and the selec-
tion model approach of Vevea and Hedges (1995) grouped by treatment category.
No. of Selection
Data studies† Trim and fill PET- model [and
set Intervention / Original Replicated (No. of Begg (τ) p-uniform [and [and 95% CI], PEESE 95% CI]
No. dependent measure / effect size effect size, I2 sign. and Egger 95% CI], pub. No. of studies [and 95%
(ID) Author time of measurement [and 95% CI] [and 95% CI] studies) (z) TES bias test (!"#) imputed (kimp) CI]
74 Jonas et al. TF-CBT vs. WL / depres- WMD = -8.03 [- -8.02 [-10.07, - 7 (5) τ = 0.24, A = 0.01 -7.06 [-9.61, - -8.02 [-10.07, - -8.68 [-11.3, -7.93 [-
(2013) sive symptoms (BDI, sensi- 10.14, -5.93] (RE) 5.96], I2 = 0 [0, z = 0.33 1.33], $%# = 0.74 5.96], kimp = 0 -6.06] 10.32, -
tivity analysis including high 42.5] 5.53]
risk of bias studies) / post
69 Jonas et al. TF-CBT vs. WL / PTSD d = -1.13 [-1.33, - -1.13 [-1.34, - 9 (8) τ = 0.11, A = 0.15 -1.11 [-1.36, -0.81], -1.13 [-1.34, - -1.09 [-1.51, -1.11 [-1.35,
(2013) symptoms (sensitivity anal- 0.92] (RE) 0.92], I2 = 0 [0, z = -0.27 $%# = 0.19 0.92], kimp = 0 -0.67] -0.86]
ysis including high risk of 54.2]
bias studies) / post
71 Jonas et al. TF-CBT vs. WL / PTSD WMD = -27.21 [- -27.13 [-32.07, - 6 (6) τ = 0.47, A = 0.19 -26.3 [-31.14, - -30.02 [-34.25, -32.55 [- -26.78 [-
(2013) symptoms (CAPS, sensitivity 32.29, -22.13] (RE) 22.2], I2 = 0 [0, z = 0.93 20.18], $%# = 0.33 -25.8], kimp = 3 45.84, - 34.2, -
analysis including high risk 66.4] 19.26] 19.35]
of bias studies) / post
64 Hofmann & TF-CBT vs. active controls g = 0.62 [0.28, 0.62 [0.28, 0.97], 6 (3) τ = 0.2, A = 0 0.75 [0.15, 1.45], $%# 0.62 [0.28, -0.02 [- 0.63 [0.13,
Smits / PTSD symptoms / post 0.96] (RE) I2 = 48.1 [0, 92.5] z = 0.61 = -0.54 0.97], kimp = 0 3.13, 3.1] 1.13]
(2008)
2 ACPMH TF-CBT vs. WL & active MH-RR = 0.51 0.52 [0.46, 0.6], I2 10 (9) τ = -0.64*, A = 4.87* 0.56 [0.45, 0.81], 0.55 [0.48, 0.58 [0.48, 0.66 [0.41,
(2013) controls / PTSD diagnosis [0.44, 0.59] (FE) = 0 [0, 0] z = -1.9 $%# = 0.63 0.62], kimp = 4 0.7] 1.08]
(ITT) / post
4 ACPMH TF-CBT vs. WL & active d = -0.59 [-0.76, - -0.59 [-0.76, - 11 (6) τ = -0.02, A = 0.19 -0.59 [-0.87, -0.1], -0.59 [-0.76, - -0.64 [-1.12, -0.49 [-
(2013) controls / depressive 0.41] (FE) 0.41], I2 = 0 [0, 0] z = 0.51 $%# = -0.02 0.41], kimp = 0 -0.16] 0.82, -0.16]
symptoms (ITT) / post
5 ACPMH TF-CBT vs. WL & active d = -0.64 [-0.88, - -0.64 [-0.89, - 8 (4) τ = -0.43, A = 0.17 -0.67 [-1.23, 0.12], -0.47 [-0.69, - 0.84 [-0.26, -0.54 [-1.2,
(2013) controls / anxiety symp- 0.39] (FE) 0.39], I2 = 0 [0, 0] z = -2.23* $%# = -0.09 0.25], kimp = 3 1.93] 0.13]
toms (ITT) / post
6 ACPMH TF-CBT vs. WL & active MH-RR = 1.48 1.29 [0.84, 1.98], I2 10 (1) τ = 0.02, A = 0.42 00 [0, 0.8], $%# = 1.29 [0.84, 1.98], 1 [0.34, 1.25 [0.64,
(2013) controls / attrition (ITT) / [0.99, 2.21] (FE) = 0 [0, 0] z = 0.71 1.66* kimp = 0 2.92] 2.42]
post
14 Bisson et TF-CBT vs. WL & active MH-RR = 1.42 1.3 [0.94, 1.78], I2 15 (0) τ = -0.24, A = 0.93 No significant 1.16 [0.86, 1.57], 0.97 [0.52, 1.38 [0.98,
al. (2007) b controls / withdrawal rate [1.05, 1.94] (FE) = 0 [0, 0] z = 1.12 studies kimp = 4 1.84] 1.94]
/ post
PUBLICATION BIAS IN META-ANALYSES OF POSTTRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER INTE2RV3E NTIONS
No. of Selection
Data studies† Trim and fill PET- model [and
set Intervention / Original Replicated (No. of Begg (τ) p-uniform [and [and 95% CI], PEESE 95% CI]
No. dependent measure / effect size effect size, I2 sign. and Egger 95% CI], pub. No. of studies [and 95%
(ID) Author time of measurement [and 95% CI] [and 95% CI] studies) (z) TES bias test (!"#) imputed (kimp) CI]
17 Bisson et TF-CBT vs. WL & active MH-RR = 1.64 1.45 [1.15, 1.84], I2 29 (2) τ = -0.09, A = 0.06 0.050 [0, 9.1], $%# = 1.32 [1.05, 1.65], 1.12 [0.68, 1.92 [1.12,
al. (2013) controls / leaving the study [1.30, 2.06] (FE) = 0 [0, 0] z = 1.24 1.07 kimp = 4 1.83] 3.29]
early / post
29 Bisson et TF-CBT (individual & group) MH-RR = 1.21 1.19 [0.93, 1.52], I2 7 (0) τ = 0.24, A = 0.54 No significant 1.19 [0.93, 1.52], 1.1 [0.76, 1.18 [NaN,
al. (2013) vs. WL & active controls / [0.94, 1.55] (FE) = 0 [0, 0] z = 0.44 studies kimp = 0 1.59] NaN]
leaving the study early /
post
97 Bisson et TF-CBT vs. WL & active SMD = -0.81 [- -0.8 [-1.02, - 17 (10) τ = -0.06, A = 0.04 -0.95 [-1.22, - -0.8 [-1.02, - -0.18 [-1.38, -0.82 [-1.15,
al. (2013) controls / anxiety / post 1.03, -0.59] (RE) 0.58], z = -0.76 0.61], $%# = -1.09 0.58], kimp = 0 1.02] -0.49]
I2=43.3 [0, 71.3]
67 Jonas et al. TF-CBT vs. WL & active d = -1.27 [-1.54, - -1.27 [-1.54, -1], I2 7 (7) τ = -0.33, A = 0.73 -1.29 [-1.6, -1.01], -1.11 [-1.4, - -0.53 [-1.51, -1.2 [-1.49,
(2013) controls / PTSD symptoms 1.00] (RE) = 23.7 [0, 85.7] z = -1.84 $%# = -0.39 0.82], kimp = 3 0.45] -0.92]
/ post
68 Jonas et al. TF-CBT vs. WL & active d = -1.19 [-1.38, - -1.2 [-1.4, -1], I2 = 11 (10) τ = -0.09, A = 0.31 -1.2 [-1.46 ,-0.93], -1.12 [-1.34, - -1.01 [-1.45, -1.16 [-1.39,
(2013) controls / PTSD symptoms 0.99] (RE) 0 [0, 68.5] z = -1.09 $%# = -0.04 0.89], kimp = 2 -0.57] -0.93]
(sensitivity analysis includ-
ing high risk of bias studies)
/ post
70 Jonas et al. TF-CBT vs. WL & active WMD = -27.92 [- -27.88 [-32.68, - 7 (7) τ = 0.05, A = 0.43 -27.6 [-32.55, - -27.88 [-32.68, - -26.1 [- No conver-
(2013) controls / PTSD symptoms 32.87, -22.96] 23.07], I2 = 0 [0, z = -0.13 21.87], $%# = 0.11 23.07], kimp = 0 38.42, - gence
(CAPS, sensitivity analysis (RE) 69.5] 13.78]
including high risk of bias
studies) / post
72 Jonas et al. TF-CBT vs. WL & active WMD = -8.21 [- -8.21 [-10.25, - 6 (6) τ = -0.2, A = 1.36 -6.93 [-9.32, - -8.21 [-10.25, - -7.79 [- -7.3 [-9.26,
(2013) controls / depressive 10.30, -6.12] (RE) 6.17], I2 = 0 [0, z = -0.27 2.52], $%# = 1.05 6.17], kimp = 0 11.21, -4.38] -5.33]
symptoms (BDI) / post 29.7]
73 Jonas et al. TF-CBT vs. WL & active WMD = -7.85 [- -7.82 [-9.72, - 9 (6) τ = 0.39, A = 0 -6.93 [-9.32, - -8.04 [-9.89, - -8.97 [- -7.75 [-10, -
(2013) controls / depressive 9.80, -5.89] (RE) 5.92], I2 = 0 [0, z = 0.69 2.52], $%# = 0.72 6.18], kimp = 1 11.21, -6.73] 5.51]
symptoms (BDI, sensitivity 32.8]
analysis including high risk
of bias studies) / post
75 Jonas et al. TF-CBT vs. WL & active WMD = -6.91 [- -6.96 [-8.91, - 7 (7) τ = -0.33, A = 2.84 -6.02 [-8.63, - -5.86 [-7.79, - -1.97 [-7.02, -5.2 [-9.42,
(2013) controls (including PCT) / 8.86, -4.96] (RE) 5.01], I2 = 23.2 [0, z = -2.08* 2.76], $%# = 0.38 3.93], kimp = 3 3.07] -0.98]
depressive symptoms (BDI, 75.6]
sensitivity analysis includ-
ing PCT) / post
24
NIEMEYER*, VAN AERT*, SCHMID, UELSMANN, KNAEVELSRUD & SCHULTE-HERBRUGGEN
No. of Selection
Data studies† Trim and fill PET- model [and
set Intervention / Original Replicated (No. of Begg (τ) p-uniform [and [and 95% CI], PEESE 95% CI]
No. dependent measure / effect size effect size, I2 sign. and Egger 95% CI], pub. No. of studies [and 95%
(ID) Author time of measurement [and 95% CI] [and 95% CI] studies) (z) TES bias test (!"#) imputed (kimp) CI]
76 Jonas et al. TF-CBT vs. WL & active WMD = -6.29 [- -6.38 [-7.99, - 11 (7) τ = 0.31, A = 0.45 -6.02 [-8.63, - -6.38 [-7.99, - -6.26 [- -5.92 [-
(2013) controls (including PCT) / 7.84, -4.75] (RE) 4.76], I2 = 6.4 [0, z = -0.12 2.76], $%# = 0.17 4.76], kimp = 0 9.01, -3.52] 8.17, -3.67]
depressive symptoms (BDI, 68.7]
sensitivity analysis includ-
ing PCT and high risk of
bias studies) / post
45 DiMauro TF-CBT within group / d = 0.69 [0.35, 0.68 [0.27, 1.09], 6 (1) τ = 0.6, A = 0.26 -6.580 [-51.19, 0.6 [0.21, 0.99], -0.1 [-0.78, 0.87 [NaN,
(2014) PTSD symptoms / post 1.02] (RE) I2 = 0 [0, 95.2] z = 1.6 5.44], $%# = 1.01 kimp = 2 0.58] NaN]
8 ACPMH CBT combined (mostly TF- d = -0.43 [-0.65, - -0.43 [-0.65, - 7 (2) τ = -0.33, A = 0 -0.34 [-1.3, 1.26], -0.38 [-0.6, - 0.42 [-0.68, -0.44 [-
(2013) CBT, individual & group) vs. 0.20] (FE) 0.2], I2 = 0 [0, 0] z = -1.58 $%# = 0.19 0.17], kimp = 1 1.53] 0.61, -0.26]
active controls / PTSD
symptoms (clinician rated)
/ 2-3 months follow-up
9 ACPMH CBT combined (mostly TF- d = -0.68 [-0.92, - -0.68 [-0.92, - 8 (4) τ = -0.29, A = 0.01 -0.59 [-1.18, 1.14], -0.56 [-0.77, - -0.12 [-1.01, -0.67 [-1.14,
(2013) CBT) vs. active controls / 0.44] (FE) 0.45], I2 = 0 [0, 0] z = -1.33 $%# = 0.32 0.35], kimp = 3 0.77] -0.19]
depressive symptoms /
post
10 ACPMH CBT combined (mostly TF- MH-RR = 1.36 1.27 [0.79, 2.05], I2 10 (0) τ = 0.38, A = 0.51 No significant 1.18 [0.74, 1.87], 0.76 [0.34, 1.25 [NaN,
(2013) CBT, individual & group) vs. [0.86, 2.15] (FE) = 0 [0, 0] z = 1.15 studies kimp = 2 1.7] NaN]
active controls / attrition /
post
1 ACPMH CBT combined (mostly TF- d = -1.14 [-1.32, - -1.14 [-1.32, - 11 (10) τ = -0.24, A = 0.47 -1.12 [-1.37, -0.9], -1.14 [-1.32, - -1.03 [- -1.11 [-1.31,
(2013) CBT) vs. WL & active con- 0.95] (FE) 0.95], I2 = 0 [0, 0] z = -1.11 $%# = 0.14 0.95], kimp = 0 1.39, -0.68] -0.9]
trols / PTSD symptoms
(self-rated) / post
3 ACPMH CBT combined (mostly TF- d = -1.06 [-1.30, - -1.08 [-1.32, - 6 (5) τ = -0.07, A = 0.15 -1.03 [-1.37, -0.71], -1.08 [-1.32, - -1.01 [-1.6, -1.05 [-1.31,
(2013) CBT) vs. WL & active con- 0.82] (FE) 0.84], I2 = 0 [0, 0] z = -0.7 $%# = 0.37 0.84], kimp = 0 -0.43] -0.8]
trols / PTSD symptoms
(self-rated, ITT) / post
7 ACPMH CBT combined (mostly TF- d = -1.25 [-1.57, - -1.26 [-1.57, - 6 (5) τ = 0.33, A = 0.03 -1.22 [-1.59, - -1.29 [-1.59, - -1.4 [-2.13, -1.24 [-1.5,
(2013) CBT, individual & group) vs. 0.94] (FE) 0.94], I2 = 0 [0, 0] z = 0.6 0.65], $%# = 0.18 0.98], kimp = 1 -0.68] -0.97]
WL & active controls /
PTSD symptoms (self-rated,
motor vehicle accident) /
post
30 Casement CBT combined (mostly TF- g = 0.82 [0.57, 0.82 [0.66, 0.98], 7 (6) τ = -0.33, A = 0 0.75 [0.45, 0.95], 0.86 [0.72, 1.01], 0.84 [0.46, 0.82 [0.66,
& Swanson CBT) within group / night- 1.07] (RE) I2 = 2.8 [0, 83.3] z = -0.13 $%# = 0.77 kimp = 2 1.22] 0.99]
(2012) mare frequency / post
PUBLICATION BIAS IN META-ANALYSES OF POSTTRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER INTE2RV5E NTIONS
No. of Selection
Data studies† Trim and fill PET- model [and
set Intervention / Original Replicated (No. of Begg (τ) p-uniform [and [and 95% CI], PEESE 95% CI]
No. dependent measure / effect size effect size, I2 sign. and Egger 95% CI], pub. No. of studies [and 95%
(ID) Author time of measurement [and 95% CI] [and 95% CI] studies) (z) TES bias test (!"#) imputed (kimp) CI]
31 Casement CBT combined (mostly TF- g = 0.71 [0.46, 0.69 [0.5, 0.88], I2 7 (5) τ = 0.24, A = 0.05 0.77 [0.55, 1.05], 0.66 [0.46, 0.56 [0.23, 0.68 [0.49,
& Swanson CBT) within group / PTSD 0.95] (RE) = 28.4 [0, 91] z = 1.12 $%# = -0.91 0.86], kimp = 1 0.88] 0.88]
(2012) symptoms / post
48 Dorrepaal CBT combined (mostly TF- d = 1.7 (FE) 1.68 [1.36, 2], I2 = 8 (8) τ = 0.43, A = 0.78 1.86 [1.34, 2.27], $%# 1.43 [1.14, 1.71], -0.55 [- 1.56 [1.24,
et al. (2014) CBT, individual & group) 0 [0, 0] z = 2.76* = -0.74 kimp = 3 2.23, 1.14] 1.87]
within group / PTSD symp-
toms (completer) / post
49 Dorrepaal CBT combined (mostly TF- d = 1.3 (FE) 1.29 [1.05, 1.52], I2 8 (7) τ = 0.64*, A = 0.98 1.45 [1.14, 1.75], $%# 1.15 [0.94, 1.37], -1.66 [-3.8, 1.36 [1.06,
et al. (2014) CBT, individual & group) = 0 [0, 0] z = 2.73* = -1.07 kimp = 2 0.49] 1.66]
within group / PTSD symp-
toms (ITT) / post
52 Dorrepaal CBT combined (mostly TF- d = 1.6 (FE) 1.54 [1.18, 1.9], I2 = 6 (6) τ = 0.47, A = 0.82 1.64 [1.03, 2.18], $%# 1.17 [0.86, 1.47], -0.46 [- 1.33 [0.98,
et al. (2014) CBT, individual & group) 0 [0, 0] z = 2.31* = -0.34 kimp = 3 2.71, 1.78] 1.68]
within group / PTSD symp-
toms (completer, complex
PTSD) / post
53 Dorrepaal CBT combined (mostly TF- d = 1.2 (FE) 1.17 [0.91, 1.44], I2 6 (5) τ = 0.73, A = 0.96 1.31 [0.97, 1.67], $%# 1.08 [0.84, 1.33], -1.51 [-5.15, 1.26 [0.95,
et al. (2014) CBT, individual & group) = 0 [0, 0] z = 1.99* = -0.8 kimp = 1 2.13] 1.57]
within group / PTSD symp-
toms (ITT, complex PTSD) /
post
32 Chen et al. EMDR vs. active controls g = -0.45 [-0.65, - -0.45 [-0.65, - 11 (3) τ = -0.2, A = 0 -0.22□ [-1.25, -0.45□ [-0.65, - -0.07□ [- -0.44 [-
(2014) (including PE, SIT/PE) / 0.25] (RE) 0.25], I2 = 0 [0, z = -0.83 2.67], $%# = 0.39 0.25], kimp = 0 0.96, 0.82] 0.71, -0.18]
depressive symptoms / 63.3]
post
34 Chen et al. EMDR vs. active controls g = -0.41 [-0.62, - -0.41 [-0.62, - 8 (4) τ = -0.21, A = 2.11 0.340,□ [-0.39, -0.41□ [-0.62, - -0.41□ [- -0.16 [NaN,
(2014) (including TTP) / anxiety 0.21] (RE) 0.2], I2 = 0 [0, z = 0 1.93], $%# = 2* 0.2], kimp = 0 1.16, 0.34] NaN]
symptoms (equivalent 74.5]
group) / post
35 Chen et al. EMDR vs. active controls g = -0.57 [-0.81, - -0.57 [-0.81, - 8 (2) τ = -0.14, A = 0.47 -0.43□ [-1.19, -0.57□ [-0.81, - -0.68□ [- -0.73 [-
(2014) (including TTP, Exp) / sub- 0.33] (RE) 0.33], I2 = 0 [0, z = 0.53 26.29], $%# = 0.13 0.33], kimp = 0 1.3, -0.05] 1.09, -0.36]
jective distress (equivalent 64]
group) / post
37 Chen et al. EMDR vs. active controls g = -0.58 [-0.73, - -0.57 [-0.73, - 13 (5) τ = 0.1, A = 0.64 -0.67□ [-0.94, - -0.7□ [-0.87, - -0.63□ [- -0.66 [-
(2014) (including TTP, PE, CBT, 0.42] (RE) 0.42], I2 = 3 [0, z = 0.56 0.34], $%# = -0.76 0.52], kimp = 4 0.94, -0.32] 0.87, -0.46]
SIT/PE, Exp, SM) / PTSD 63.3]
symptoms (equivalent
group) / post
26
NIEMEYER*, VAN AERT*, SCHMID, UELSMANN, KNAEVELSRUD & SCHULTE-HERBRUGGEN
No. of Selection
Data studies† Trim and fill PET- model [and
set Intervention / Original Replicated (No. of Begg (τ) p-uniform [and [and 95% CI], PEESE 95% CI]
No. dependent measure / effect size effect size, I2 sign. and Egger 95% CI], pub. No. of studies [and 95%
(ID) Author time of measurement [and 95% CI] [and 95% CI] studies) (z) TES bias test (!"#) imputed (kimp) CI]
15 Bisson et EMDR vs. WL & active con- MH-RR = 1.21 1.27 [0.69, 2.35], I2 6 (0) τ = -0.07, A = 0.31 No significant 1.66 [1, 2.77], kimp 1.66 [0.8, 1.25 [0.77,
al. (2007) b trols / withdrawal rate / [0.66, 2.22] (RE) = 0 [0, 55.1] z = -0.88 studies = 3 3.43] 2]
post
24 Bisson et EMDR vs. WL & active con- MH-RR = 1.05 1.04 [0.6, 1.8], I2 = 7 (0) τ = 0.14, A = 0.2 No significant 1.19 [0.71, 2], kimp 1.64 [0.51, 1 [0.68,
al. (2013) trols / leaving the study [0.62, 1.79] (FE) 0 [0, 0] z = -0.77 studies = 2 5.25] 1.47]
early / post
25 Bisson et EMDR vs. WL & active con- d = -1.15 [-1.52, - -1.15 [-1.52, - 7 (5) τ = 0.2, A = 0.5 -1.32 [-1.71, -0.91], -1.15 [-1.52, - -1.47 [-4.8, -1.26 [-1.63,
al. (2013) trols / depressive symp- 0.78] (RE) 0.78], I2 = 38.3 [0, z = 0.15 $%# = -0.82 0.78], kimp = 0 1.86] -0.88]
toms / post 88.2]
26 Bisson et EMDR vs. WL & active con- d = -1.02 [-1.36, - -1.02 [-1.35, - 6 (5) τ = 0.2, A = 0.78 -0.19 [-1.14, 1.95], -1.02 [-1.35, - -1.49 [-2.71, -0.62 [-
al. (2013) trols / anxiety symptoms / 0.69] (FE) 0.69], I2 = 0 [0, 0] z = 0.94 $%# = 1.6 0.69], kimp = 0 -0.27] 1.64, 0.39]
post
33 Chen et al. EMDR vs. WL & active con- g = -0.63 [-0.83, - -0.64 [-0.83, - 17 (6) τ = -0.09, A = 1.51 -0.78□ [-1.27, - -0.64□ [-0.83, - -0.72□ [- -0.83 [-1.12,
(2014) trols / depressive symp- 0.44] (RE) 0.44], I2 = 37.1 [0, z = 0.21 0.11], $%# = -0.45 0.44], kimp = 0 1.17, -0.26] -0.54]
toms (adults) / post 69.4]
36 Chen et al. EMDR vs. WL & active con- g = -0.50 [-0.74, - -0.5 [-0.74, - 10c (4) τ = -0.2, A = 0.01 -0.57□ [-1.02, -0.5□ [-0.74, - -0.5□ [-1.4, -0.48 [-
(2014) trols (including CBT, Expo- 0.27] (RE) 0.26], I2 = 35.6 [0, z = -0.18 0.64], $%# = -0.27 0.26], kimp = 0 0.4] 0.84, -0.13]
sure) / PTSD symptoms 78.7]
(<60 min/session) / post
38 Chen et al. EMDR vs. WL & active con- g = -0.55 [-0.74, - -0.55 [-0.74, - 18c (5) τ = -0.08, A = 1.39 -0.62□ [-1.26, -0.6□ [-0.79, - -0.7□ [-1.14, -0.75 [-
(2014) trols (including TTP, 0.36] (RE) 0.36], I2 = 35.7 [0, z = 0.53 0.27], $%# = -0.13 0.41], kimp = 2 -0.26] 1.05, -0.44]
SIT/PE, SM) / depressive 66.9]
symptoms (with manual) /
post
39 Chen et al. EMDR vs. WL & active con- g = -0.30 [-0.55, - -0.3 [-0.55, - 6c (0) τ = 0.47, A = 1.04 No significant -0.4□ [-0.62, - -0.59□ [- -0.45 [-
(2014) trols / depressive symp- 0.04] (RE) 0.04], I2 = 0 [0, z = 0.74 studies 0.18], kimp = 3 1.13, -0.04] 0.63, -0.27]
toms (<60 min/session) / 44.8]
post
40 Chen et al. EMDR vs. WL & active con- g = -0.35 [-0.58, - -0.35 [-0.57, - 6c (3) τ = -0.07, A = 2.34 0.50,□ [-0.45, -0.35□ [-0.57, - -0.31□ [- -0.08 [-
(2014) trols / anxiety symptoms 0.13] (RE) 0.13], I2 = 0 [0, z = -0.18 3.24], $%# = 1.72* 0.13], kimp = 0 1.41, 0.79] 0.63, 0.47]
(<60 min/session) / post 88.4]
61 Gerger et Other therapies within g = -0.71 [-1.02, - -0.71 [-1.02, -0.4], 6 (4) τ = -0.6, A = 0.08 -0.65□ [-1.31, - -0.71□ [-1.02, - 0.35□ [-1.16, -0.62 [-
al. (2014) b group / PTSD symptoms 0.40] (RE) I2 = 42.5 [0, 88.4] z = -1.97* 0.13], $%# = 0.08 0.4], kimp = 0 1.87] 1.03, -0.2]
(non-complex problems) /
post
81 Peleikis & Combined therapies d = 0.44 [0.25, 0.43 [0.23, 0.63], 8 (2) τ = 0.14, A = 0.13 0.91 [-0.58, 1.57], 0.43 [0.23, -0.18 [-1.41, 0.66 [0.08,
Dahl (2005) (mostly other therapies, 0.64] (w=n) I2 = 0 [0, 0] z = 1.54 $%# = -0.98 0.63], kimp = 0 1.05] 1.24]
group) vs. WL / trauma
symptoms / post
PUBLICATION BIAS IN META-ANALYSES OF POSTTRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER INTE2RV7E NTIONS
No. of Selection
Data studies† Trim and fill PET- model [and
set Intervention / Original Replicated (No. of Begg (τ) p-uniform [and [and 95% CI], PEESE 95% CI]
No. dependent measure / effect size effect size, I2 sign. and Egger 95% CI], pub. No. of studies [and 95%
(ID) Author time of measurement [and 95% CI] [and 95% CI] studies) (z) TES bias test (!"#) imputed (kimp) CI]
87 Sloan et al. Combined therapies g = 0.56 [0.31, 0.56 [0.32, 0.79], 6 (3) τ = 0.6, A = 0.02 0.21 [-1.27, 0.9], $%# 0.5 [0.28, 0.72], -0.95 [- 0.53 [0.26,
(2013) (mostly CBT, group) vs. WL 0.82] (RE) I2 = 0 [0, 71] z = 1.27 = 0.93 kimp = 1 2.85, 0.95 0.79]
/ PTSD symptoms / post
89 Taylor & Combined therapies g = 0.89 [0.58, 0.89 [0.58, 1.21], I2 6 (4) τ = -0.2, A = 0.04 0.88 [-0.28, 1.46], 0.89 [0.58, 1.21], 3.12 [-3.23, 0.72 [-0.01,
Harvey (mostly TF-CBT) vs. WL / 1.21] (FE) = 0 [0, 0] z = -1.29 $%# = 0.03 kimp = 0 9.48] 1.45]
(2009) mixed outcome measures
(7-9 sessions) / post
90 Taylor & Combined therapies g = 0.98 [0.70, 0.99 [0.71, 1.26], I2 7 (5) τ = 0.14, A = 0.02 1.04 [-0.18, 1.43], 0.99 [0.71, 1.26], 1 [-0.11, 0.86 [0.2,
Harvey (mostly TF-CBT) vs. WL / 1.26] (FE) = 0 [0, 0] z = -0.34 $%# = -0.24 kimp = 0 2.11] 1.51]
(2009) mixed outcome measures
(practitioner as therapist) /
post
78 Lambert & Combined therapies g = 0.63 [0.35, 0.69 [0.36, 1.03], 9 (2) τ = 0.56*, A = 0.46 1.77 [0.6, 2.6], $%# = 0.69 [0.36, -0.36 [- 1.19 [0.2,
Alhassoon (mostly TF-CBT, individual 0.92] (RE) I2 = 28.7 [0, 86.3] z = 2.23* -1.87 1.03], kimp = 0 1.42, 0.69] 2.18]
(2014) b & group) vs. active controls
(including SIT) / depressive
symptoms / post
88 Sloan et al. Combined therapies g = 0.09 [-0.03, 0.15 [0, 0.3], I2 = 10 (2) τ = 0.47, A = 1.18 0.38 [-3.25, 1.59], 0.1 [-0.08, 0.28], -0.18 [- 0.06 [-
(2013) (mostly CBT, group) vs. ac- 0.22] (RE) 39.4 [0, 94.6] z = 2.66* $%# = -0.3 kimp = 2 0.47, 0.1] 0.06, 0.18]
tive controls / PTSD symp-
toms / post
79 Nenova et Combined therapies (in- delta = -0.09 [- -0.1 [-0.32, 0.11], 13 (0) τ = -0.18, A = 0.56 No significant -0.1 [-0.32, -0.1 [-0.21, -0.1 [-0.26,
al. (2013) cluding SN, individual & 0.41, 0.26] I2 = 0 [0, 0] z = 0.11 studies 0.11], kimp = 0 0.01] 0.07]
group, combined delivery) (Bayesian RE)
vs. WL & active controls /
PTSD symptoms (intrusion)
/ post
80 Nenova et Combined therapies (in- delta = 0.00 [- 0.04 [-0.13, 0.22], 13 (0) τ = -0.13, A = 0.41 No significant 0.06 [-0.12, 0.06 [0.02, No conver-
al. (2013) cluding SN, individual & 0.37, 0.31] I2 = 0 [0, 0] z = -0.66 studies 0.23], kimp = 6 0.1] gence
group, combined delivery) (Bayesian RE)
vs. WL & active controls /
PTSD symptoms (avoid-
ance) / post
84 Sherman Combined therapies (indi- g = 0.52 [0.37, 0.52 [0.38, 0.66], 23 (4) τ = 0.37*, A = 2.06 0.62 [-0.35, 1.2], 0.42 [0.29, -0.11 [-0.71, 0.72 [0.1,
(1998) vidual & group) vs. WL & ac- 0.67]b I2 = 0 [0, 0] z = 1.54 $%# = -0.28 0.55], kimp = 6 0.5] 1.35]
tive controls (one study re-
moved) / mixed outcomes
/ post
85 Sherman Combined therapies (indi- g = 0.64 [0.47, 0.64 [0.48, 0.81], 19 (10) τ = 0.3, A = 0.97 0.7 [0.25, 1.03], $%# 0.59 [0.43, 0.02 [-0.84, 0.49 [0.22,
(1998) vidual & group) vs. WL & ac- 0.81]b I2 = 0 [0, 0] z = 1.74 = -0.28 0.75], kimp = 2 0.89] 0.76]
tive controls / mixed
28
NIEMEYER*, VAN AERT*, SCHMID, UELSMANN, KNAEVELSRUD & SCHULTE-HERBRUGGEN
No. of Selection
Data studies† Trim and fill PET- model [and
set Intervention / Original Replicated (No. of Begg (τ) p-uniform [and [and 95% CI], PEESE 95% CI]
No. dependent measure / effect size effect size, I2 sign. and Egger 95% CI], pub. No. of studies [and 95%
(ID) Author time of measurement [and 95% CI] [and 95% CI] studies) (z) TES bias test (!"#) imputed (kimp) CI]
outcome measures (one
study removed) / follow-up
86 Sloan et al. Combined therapies g = 0.24 [0.09, 0.28 [0.13, 0.43], 16 (5) τ = 0.65*, A = 2.92 0.26 [-0.9, 0.89], 0.13 [-0.04, 0.3], -0.25 [- 0.09 [-0.01,
(2013) (mostly CBT, group) vs. WL 0.39] (RE) I2 = 48.8 [8, 87] z = 4.33* $%# = -0.17 kimp = 6 0.46, -0.04] 0.19]
& active controls / PTSD
symptoms / post
93 Tol et al. Combined therapies vs. WL g = -0.38 [-0.55, - -0.38 [-0.56, - 9 (3) τ = -0.39, A = 0.01 -0.56 [-0.9, - -0.35 [-0.53, - 0.34 [-0.62, -0.43 [-
(2011) & active controls / PTSD 0.20] (RE) 0.2], I2 = 22.1 [0, z = -1.77 0.06], $%# = -0.99 0.17], kimp = 1 1.29] 0.75, -0.11]
symptoms / post 78.4]
46 Dorrepaal Combined therapies (mostly d = 1.7 (FE) 1.65 [1.35, 1.95], I2 9 (9) τ = 0.5, A = 0.92 1.77 [1.3, 2.17], $%# = 1.34 [1.08, 1.6], -0.6 [-2.14, 1.51 [1.23,
et al. (2014) CBT, individual & group) = 0 [0, 0] z = 2.78* -0.54 kimp = 4 0.95] 1.79]
within group / PTSD symp-
toms (completer) / post
47 Dorrepaal Combined therapies (mostly d = 1.3 (FE) 1.28 [1.06, 1.51], I2 9 (8) τ = 0.44, A = 0.5 1.41 [1.12, 1.69], $%# 1.17 [0.96, 1.37], -1.12 [-3.19, 1.34 [1.06,
et al. (2014) TF-CBT, individual & group) z = 2.44* = -0.91 kimp = 2 0.96] 1.62]
= 0 [, 0]
within group / PTSD symp-
toms (ITT) / post
50 Dorrepaal Combined therapies (mostly d = 1.6 (FE) 1.52 [1.19, 1.85], I2 7 (7) τ = 0.62, A = 0.96 1.56 [1.05, 2.06], 1.34 [1.04, 1.64], -0.48 [- 1.33 [1.03,
et al. (2014) CBT, individual & group) = 0 [0, 0] z = 2.3* $%# = -0.17 kimp = 2 2.38, 1.41] 1.63]
within group / PTSD symp-
toms (completer, complex
PTSD) / post
51 Dorrepaal Combined therapies (mostly d = 1.2 (FE) 1.18 [0.93, 1.43], I2 7 (6) τ = 0.52, A = 0.4 1.28 [0.97, 1.6], $%# 1.18 [0.93, 1.43], -0.74 [- 1.24 [0.95,
et al. (2014) CBT) within group / PTSD = 0 [0, 0] z = 1.72 = -0.67 kimp = 0 3.55, 2.08] 1.53]
symptoms (ITT, complex
PTSD) / post
106 Ehring et Combined therapies g = 1.83 [1.60, 1.85 [1.53, 2.17], I2 7 (7) τ = 0.43, A = 0.1 1.89 [1.56, 2.26], 1.79 [1.46, 2.11] , 0.36 [-1.1, 1.83 [1.55,
al. (2014) (trauma-focused) within 2.09] (RE) = 22.6 [0, 84] z = 2.12* $%# = -0.4 kimp = 1 1.83] 2.11]
group / PTSD symptoms /
follow-up
91 Taylor & Combined therapies (mostly g = 1.11 [0.90, 1.32] 1.08 [0.91, 1.25], I2 6 (6) τ = 0.6, A = 1.34 1.16 [0.97, 1.66], $%# 1.02 [0.86, 1.19], 0.91 [0.77, 1.05 [0.89,
Harvey TF-CBT) within group / (FE) = 0 [0, 0] z = 2.49* = -0.75 kimp = 2 1.05] 1.21]
(2009) mixed outcome measures /
post
92 Taylor & Combined therapies (mostly g = 1.03 [0.83, 1 [0.84, 1.17], I2 = 0 7 (6) τ = 0.14, A = 0.06 1.06 [0.88, 1.35], 1 [0.84, 1.17], kimp 0.89 [0.58, 0.99 [0.82,
Harvey TF-CBT, individual & group) 1.23] (FE) [0, 0] z = 1.13 $%# = -0.65 = 0 1.2] 1.17]
(2009) within group / mixed out-
come measures (therapist
as main contact for assess-
ment and treatment) / post
PUBLICATION BIAS IN META-ANALYSES OF POSTTRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER INTE2RV9E NTIONS
No. of Selection
Data studies† Trim and fill PET- model [and
set Intervention / Original Replicated (No. of Begg (τ) p-uniform [and [and 95% CI], PEESE 95% CI]
No. dependent measure / effect size effect size, I2 sign. and Egger 95% CI], pub. No. of studies [and 95%
(ID) Author time of measurement [and 95% CI] [and 95% CI] studies) (z) TES bias test (!"#) imputed (kimp) CI]
43 Diehle et TF-CBT (cognitive restruc- g = 0.27 [0.03, 0.26 [0.02, 0.5], I2 7 (1) τ = -0.43, A = 0 0.62 [-0.32, 1.18], 0.3 [0.05, 0.56], 0.59 [- 0.28 [-0.02,
al. (2014) turing + exposure) vs. TF- 0.50] (RE) = 18.2 [0, 85.8] z = -1.37 $%# = -1.08 kimp = 1 0.06, 1.25] 0.58]
CBT (exposure only) /
trauma-related cognitions
/ post
44 Diehle et TF-CBT (cognitive restruc- g = 0.15 [-0.08, 0.15 [-0.08, 0.39], 7 (0) τ = -0.14, A = 0.58 No significant 0.19 [-0.05, 0.44 [-1.08, No conver-
al. (2014) turing + exposure) vs. TF- 0.39] (RE) I2 = 16.1 [0, 87] z = -0.57 studies 0.43], kimp = 1 1.96] gence
CBT (exposure only) /
trauma-related cognitions
/ follow-up
77 Kehle- TF-CBT (exposure only) vs. RR = 0.97 [0.66, 0.97 [0.66, 1.41], I2 8 (1) τ = -0.36, A = 0.3 00 [0, 1.91], $%# = 1.09 [0.73, 1.62], 1 [0.41, 2.4] 0.87 [0.71,
Forbes et TF-CBT (exposure plus) / 1.41] (RE) = 40.5 [0, 92.2] z = -0.82 1.5 kimp = 2 1.07]
al. (2013) dropout / post
18 Bisson et TF-CBT vs. Non-TF-CBT / MH-RR = 1.19 1.12 [0.67, 1.89], I2 7 (0) τ = -0.05, A = 0.26 No significant 1.05 [0.63, 1.74], 0.76 [0.24, 1.2 [0.5,
al. (2013) leaving the study early / [0.71, 2.00] (FE) = 0 [0, 0] z = 0.67 studies kimp = 1 2.41] 2.88]
post
19 Bisson et TF-CBT vs. Non-TF-CBT / d = -0.27 [-0.56, -0.27 [-0.56, 6 (0) τ = 0.2, A = 0.72 No significant -0.27 [-0.56, -0.33 [- -0.26 [-
al. (2013) depressive symptoms / 0.03] (FE) 0.03], I2 = 0 [0, 0] z = 0.08 studies 0.03], kimp = 0 2.85, 2.19] 0.56, 0.03]
post
20 Bisson et TF-CBT vs. Non-TF-CBT / MH-RR = 0.83 0.84 [0.61, 1.16], I2 6 (1) τ = -0.47, A = 0.83 0.6 [0.02, 0.84 [0.61, 1.16], 1.56 [0.55, 0.93 [0.72,
al. (2013) PTSD diagnosis / post [0.60, 1.17] (RE) = 36.9 [0, 97.6] z = -1.82 3549.05], $%# = - kimp = 0 4.38] 1.22]
0.18
98 Bisson et TF-CBT vs. Non-TF-CBT / SMD = -0.27 [- -0.26 [-0.62, 0.1], 7 (1) τ = 0.05, A = 0.1 -1.19 [-2.3, 0.68], -0.26 [-0.62, 0.32 [-1.99, -0.3 [-1.36,
al. (2013) PTSD diagnosis clinician 0.63, 0.10] (RE) I2 = 48.1 [0, 92.8] Z = -0.82 $%# = -1.3 0.1], kimp = 0 2.63] 0.75]
rated / post
21 Bisson et TF-CBT vs. Other therapies MH-RR = 1.39 1.36 [0.98, 1.87], I2 11 (1) τ = -0.06, A = 0.03 0.310 [0, 12.22], $%# 1.38 [1.01, 1.9], 1.36 [0.76, 1.33 [0.93,
al. (2013) (including TAU) / leaving [1.01, 1.92] (FE) = 0 [0, 97.6] z = -0.03 = 0.69 kimp = 2 2.46] 1.9]
the study early / post
22 Bisson et TF-CBT vs. Other therapies d = -0.37 [-0.63, - -0.38 [-0.64, - 9 (3) τ = -0.39, A = 1.11 -0.33 [-1.04, 2.1], -0.26 [-0.56, 0.01 [-0.48, -0.18 [-
al. (2013) (including TAU) / depres- 0.11] (RE) 0.11], I2 = 42.7 [0, z = -1.73 $%# = -0.07 0.03], kimp = 2 0.49] 0.39, 0.02]
sive symptoms (self-rated) 90.4]
/ post
23 Bisson et TF-CBT vs. Other therapies MH-RR = 0.75 0.76 [0.6, 0.96], I2 7 (1) τ = -0.52, A = 0.03 0.71 [0.17, 25.4], $%# 0.83 [0.64, 1.53 [0.77, 0.52 [0.18,
al. (2013) (including TAU) / PTSD di- [0.59, 0.96] (RE) = 34.3 [0, 91.5] z = -2.31* = -0.12 1.08], kimp = 2 3.03] 1.48]
agnosis / post
57 Gerger et TF-CBT vs. Other therapies g = -0.17 [-0.39, -0.16 [-0.38, 7 (2) τ = -0.05, A = 1.03 -0.34 [-0.71, 0.36], -0.16 [-0.38, -0.26 [- -0.06 [-0.3,
al. (2014) b / PTSD symptoms (struc- 0.06] (RE) 0.06], I2 = 44.3 [0, z = 0.18 $%# = -1 0.06], kimp = 0 0.94, 0.41] 0.18]
tural equivalence) / post 89.2]
30
NIEMEYER*, VAN AERT*, SCHMID, UELSMANN, KNAEVELSRUD & SCHULTE-HERBRUGGEN
No. of Selection
Data studies† Trim and fill PET- model [and
set Intervention / Original Replicated (No. of Begg (τ) p-uniform [and [and 95% CI], PEESE 95% CI]
No. dependent measure / effect size effect size, I2 sign. and Egger 95% CI], pub. No. of studies [and 95%
(ID) Author time of measurement [and 95% CI] [and 95% CI] studies) (z) TES bias test (!"#) imputed (kimp) CI]
58 Gerger et TF-CBT vs. Other therapies g = -0.11 [-0.32, -0.11 [-0.31, 0.09], 6 (1) τ = -0.07, A = 0.14 -0.36 [-0.61, -0.31 [-0.55, - -0.23 [- -0.08 [-
al. (2014) b / PTSD symptoms (complex 0.09] (RE) I2 = 33.5 [0, 83.6] z = 0.88 0.02], $%# = -1.36 0.06], kimp = 3 0.62, 0.15] 0.34, 0.17]
problem & structural equiv-
alence) / post
11 ACPMH TF-CBT vs. Combined ther- d = -0.12 [-0.38, -0.12 [-0.38, 7 (0) τ = -0.05, A = 0.37 No significant -0.12 [-0.38, 0.08 [-1.83, -0.2 [0.4,
(2013) apies / depressive symp- 0.15] (FE) 0.15], I2 = 0 [0, 0] z = -0.3 studies 0.15], kimp = 0 1.99] 0]
toms / post
12 ACPMH TF-CBT vs. Combined ther- d = -0.09 [-0.39, -0.1 [-0.39, 0.2], 6 (0) τ = -0.33, A = 0.28 No significant -0.1 [-0.39, 0.2], 0.07 [-1.81, -0.14 [-
(2013) apies / anxiety symptoms / 0.20] (FE) I2 = 0 [0, 0] z = -0.22 studies kimp = 0 1.94] 0.41, 0.13]
post
13 ACPMH TF-CBT vs. Combined ther- MH-RR = 1.17 1.1 [0.64, 1.9], I2 = 6 (0) τ = -0.07, A = 0.21 No significant 1.02 [0.6, 1.73], 0.71 [0.16, 1.07 [0.6,
(2013) apies / attrition / post [0.69, 2.00] (FE) 0 [0, 0] z = 0.7 studies kimp = 1 3.13] 1.9]
65 Imel et al. TF-CBT vs. Combined ther- LOR = -0.05‡ [- 0.05 [-0.52, 0.62], 7 (0) τ = 0.62, A = 0.21 No significant -0.08 [-0.63, -0.56 [- 0.11 [-0.42,
(2013) apies (mostly EMDR) / 0.52, 0.62] (RE) I2 = 0 [0, 78.7] z = 0.97 studies 0.46], kimp = 2 1.93, 0.81] 0.64]
dropout / post
103 Powers et TF-CBT vs. Combined ther- g = -0.07 [-0.42, -0.07 [-0.43, 6 (1) τ = -0.07, A = 2.87 -0.46 [-1.3, 1.36], -0.07 [-0.43, 0.23 [-2.22, 0.06 [-0.22,
al. (2010) apies / PTSD symptoms / 0.28] (RE) 0.29], I2 = 48.5, z = -0.04 $%# = -0.78 0.29], kimp = 0 2.68] 0.34]
post [0, 91.6]
16 Bisson et EMDR vs. TF-CBT/ with- MH-RR = 0.87 0.87 [0.57, 1.32], I2 8 (0) τ = 0.14, A = 0.34 No significant 0.8 [0.54, 1.2], 0.61 [0.21, 0.82 [NaN,
al. (2007) b drawal rate / post [0.58, 1.30] (FE) = 0 [0, 0] z = 0.87 studies kimp = 2 1.82] NaN]
27 Bisson et EMDR vs. TF-CBT / leaving MH-RR = 1.00 1.02 [0.75, 1.39], I2 8 (0) τ = -0.21, A = 0.23 No significant 1.02 [0.75, 1.39], 1.12 [0.51, 0.95 [0.75,
al. (2013) the study early / post [0.74, 1.35] (FE) = 0 [0, 0] z = -0.38 studies kimp = 0 2.46] 1.21]
28 Bisson et EMDR vs. TF-CBT / PTSD d = -0.30 [-0.60, -0.3 [-0.6, 0.01], 7 (1) τ = 0.05, A = 0.02 2.940 [-0.78, -0.3 [-0.6, 0.01], -0.34 [- -0.32 [-
al. (2013) symptoms (self-rated) / 0.01] (RE) I2 = 32.4 [0, 90.2] z = 0.11 18.31], $%# = 1.44 kimp = 0 1.39, 0.71] 0.61, -0.03]
post
41 Chen et al. EMDR vs. TF-CBT / PTSD d = -0.37 [-0.68, - -0.38 [-0.69, - 6 (1) τ = -0.47, A = 0 -1.14 [-2.29, 0.85], -0.21 [-0.5, 1.07 [-1.1, -0.92 [-
(2015) symptoms (intrusion) / post 0.06] (FE) 0.07], I2 = 0 [0, 0] z = -2.19* $%# = -1.11 0.07], kimp = 2 3.25] 2.24, 0.39]
42 Chen et al. EMDR vs. TF-CBT / PTSD d = -0.83 [-1.08, - -0.84 [-1.06, - 8 (3) τ = -0.07, A = 1.46 -0.98 [-1.48, - -0.84 [-1.06, - -0.8 [-1.18, -0.98 [-
(2015) symptoms (total, sensitivity 0.58] (FE) 0.61], I2 = 0 [0, 0] z = -0.07 0.66], $%# = -1.02 0.61], kimp = 0 -0.43] 1.18, -0.77]
analysis with 3 studies re-
moved) / post
63 Ho et al. EMDR vs. TF-CBT / PTSD g = 0.23 [-0.03, 0.23 [-0.03, 8 (0) τ = -0.14, A = 0.77 No significant 0.23□ [-0.03, 0.57□ [-1.69, 0.22 [0.01,
(2012) symptoms / post 0.49] (FE) 0.49], I2 = 0 [0, 0] z = -0.42 studies 0.49], kimp = 0 2.83] 0.44]
82 Seidler & EMDR vs. TF-CBT / de- g = 0.40 [0.05, 0.39 [0.12, 0.66], 7 (2) τ = -0.14, A = 0.44 0.66 [-0.29, 1.29], 0.39 [0.12, 1.51 [-1.8, 0.27 [-0.14,
Wagner pressive symptoms / post 0.76] (FE) I2 = 0 [0, 0] z = -1.14 $%# = -0.81 0.66], kimp = 0 4.81] 0.67]
(2006)
83 Seidler & EMDR vs. TF-CBT / de- g = 0.12 [-0.24, 0.12 [-0.15, 0.4], I2 7 (0) τ = -0.43, A = 0.38 No significant 0.28 [0.02, 0.76 [-0.35, 0.21 [-0.25,
Wagner pressive symptoms / fol- 0.48] (FE) = 0 [0, 0] z = -1.62 studies 0.53], kimp = 2 1.87] 0.67]
(2006) low-up
PUBLICATION BIAS IN META-ANALYSES OF POSTTRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER INTE3RV1E NTIONS
No. of Selection
Data studies† Trim and fill PET- model [and
set Intervention / Original Replicated (No. of Begg (τ) p-uniform [and [and 95% CI], PEESE 95% CI]
No. dependent measure / effect size effect size, I2 sign. and Egger 95% CI], pub. No. of studies [and 95%
(ID) Author time of measurement [and 95% CI] [and 95% CI] studies) (z) TES bias test (!"#) imputed (kimp) CI]
54 Gerger et Combined therapies g = -0.23 [-0.42, - -0.25 [-0.46, - 12 (3) τ = -0.15, A = 0.36 -0.63 [-1.26, - -0.25 [-0.46, - -0.17 [- -0.22 [-
al. (2014) b (mostly CBT) vs. Other ther- 0.04] (RE) 0.05], I2 = 49.1 [0, z = -0.55 0.31], $%# = -2.29 0.05], kimp = 0 0.66, 0.31] 0.48, 0.05]
apies / PTSD symptoms 87.5]
(complex problems) / post
55 Gerger et Combined therapies g = -0.87 [-1.20, - -0.88 [-1.21, - 6 (5) τ = -0.2, A = 0.35 -0.85 [-1.26, - -0.88 [-1.21, - 0.32 [-1.19, -0.76 [-
al. (2014) b (mostly EMDR) vs. Other 0.53] (RE) 0.55], I2 = 40.6 [0, z = -2.15* 0.45], $%# = -0.01 0.55], kimp = 0 1.83] 0.96, -0.56]
therapies / PTSD symp- 95.5]
toms (non-complex prob-
lems) / post
56 Gerger et Combined therapies g = -0.40 [-0.59, - -0.42 [-0.61, - 15 (6) τ = -0.03, A = 0.66 -0.67 [-1.01, - -0.42 [-0.61, - -0.31 [- -0.32 [-
al. (2014) b (mostly TF-CBT) vs. Other 0.21] (RE) 0.22], I2 = 44.3 [0, z = -0.49 0.35], $%# = -1.61 0.22], kimp = 0 0.83, 0.21] 0.58, -
therapies / PTSD symp- 82.8] 0.06]
toms (without or unclear
adequate credibility) / post
59 Gerger et Combined therapies g = -0.43 [-0.61, - -0.44 [-0.63, - 16 (7) τ = -0.03, A = 0.61 -0.68 [-0.95, - -0.44 [-0.63, - -0.39 [- -0.35 [-
al. (2014) b (mostly TF-CBT) vs. Other 0.25] (RE) 0.26], I2 = 45.1 [0, z = -0.3 0.41], $%# = -1.75 0.26], kimp = 0 0.71, -0.07] 0.62, -
therapies / PTSD symp- 82.1] 0.08]
toms (outliers excluded) /
post
60 Gerger et Combined therapies g = -0.20 [-0.36, - -0.21 [-0.38, - 11 (2) τ = 0.02, A = 0.02 -0.48 [-0.91, - -0.37 [-0.57, - -0.25 [- -0.21 [-
al. (2014) b (mostly TF-CBT) vs. Other 0.04] (RE) 0.03], I2 = 32.5 [0, z = 0.36 0.2], $%# = -1.85 0.17], kimp = 4 0.52, 0.02] 0.46, 0.04]
therapies / PTSD symp- 75.1]
toms (outliers excluded +
complex problem) / post
105 Gerger et Combined therapies (struc- g = -0.68 [-0.96, - -0.69 [-0.97, - 11 (6) τ = -0.29, A = 0.36 -0.86 [-1.28, - -0.69 [-0.97, - 0.08 [- -0.56 [-
al. (2014) b tural equivalence no / un- 0.40] (RE) 0.4], I2 = 47.9 [0, z = -1.68 0.49], 0.4], kimp = 0 0.98, 1.14] 0.92, -0.19]
clear) vs. Other therapies / 89.5] $%#= -1.25
PTSD symptoms /post
94 Torchalla Combined therapies (mostly g = 0.08 [-0.03, 0.08 [-0.03, 0.19], 8 (0) τ = -0.29, A = 0.6 No significant 0.11 [0, 0.22], 0.1 [-0.03, 0.08 [-
et al. (2012) other therapies) vs. Other 0.19] (RE) I2 = 0 [0, 63.2] z = -0.72 studies kimp = 2 0.24] 0.03, 0.19]
therapies / PTSD symp-
toms / follow up
66 Imel et al. Combined therapies LOR = 0.27 [- 0.27 [-0.28, 0.82], 9 (0) τ = -0.11, A = 0.47 No significant 0.36 [-0.17, 0.44 [-0.06, 0.38 [-0.23,
(2013) (mostly TF-CBT) vs. com- 0.34, 0.81] (RE) I2 = 0 [0, 15.2] z = -0.66 studies 0.89], kimp = 2 0.94] 1]
bined therapies (mostly
CBT) (individual & group) /
dropout / post
32
NIEMEYER*, VAN AERT*, SCHMID, UELSMANN, KNAEVELSRUD & SCHULTE-HERBRUGGEN
Note. Column 1: The treatments are grouped by treatment category and therefore the ID of the data sets is not ordered from 1 to 93. Column 3: Interventions in
bold indicate the direction of the effect. Parentheses specify the interventions. If not otherwise mentioned interventions can be classified as individual therapy
and face-to-face delivery. 95% confidence intervals for the I2-statistic were computed with the Q-profile method (Viechtbauer, 2007); A = Test statistic of TES;
ACPMH = Australian Centre for Posttraumatic Mental Health; AMR = Applied Muscle Relaxation; BDI = Beck Depression Inventory; CAPS = Clinician-Administered
PTSD Scale; CBT = Cognitive Behavioral Therapy; CI = Confidence interval; d = Cohen´s d; delta = Glass' Delta; EMDR = Eye Movement Desensitization and
Reprocessing; Exp = Exposure; FE = Fixed-effects model; g = Hedges´ g; ITT = Intention to treat; LOR = Log odds ratio; MH-RR = Mantel-Haenszel risk ratio; OR
= Odds ratio; PCT = Present Center Therapy; PE = Prolonged exposure; RE = Random-effects model with DerSimonian and Laird estimator for the between-
study variance; RR = Relative risk; SIT = Stress Inoculation Training; SM = X; SN = Structured Nursing; TAU = Treatment as usual; TF-CBT = Trauma-focused
Cognitive Behavior Therapy; TTP = Trauma Treatment Protocol; WL = Wait list; WMD = Weighted mean difference; w=n = Effect sizes in meta-analysis weighted
by sample size. † number of studies or number of comparisons (if a study included more than one comparison). b the integration model was not specified in the
paper.0 effect size estimate of p-uniform was set equal to zero (if the effect size measure was relative risk or odds ratio p-uniform’s estimate was set equal to
1). c includes one to two children studies. ‡ sign in front of the original effect size appeared to be incorrect after contacting the corresponding author. □ not
enough information to transform Hedges’ g to Cohen’s d. * p < .05, two-sided."