Articles
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-020-00935-3
Inferring latent learning factors in large-scale
cognitive training data
Mark Steyvers 1 ✉ and Robert J. Schafer 2 ✉
The flexibility to learn diverse tasks is a hallmark of human cognition. To improve our understanding of individual differences
and dynamics of learning across tasks, we analyse the latent structure of learning trajectories from 36,297 individuals as they
learned 51 different tasks on the Lumosity online cognitive training platform. Through a data-driven modelling approach using
probabilistic dimensionality reduction, we investigate covariation across learning trajectories with few assumptions about
learning curve form or relationships between tasks. Modelling results show substantial covariation across tasks, such that an
entirely unobserved learning trajectory can be predicted by observing trajectories on other tasks. The latent learning factors
from the model include a general ability factor that is expressed mostly at later stages of practice and additional task-specific
factors that carry information capable of accounting for manually defined task features and task domains such as attention,
spatial processing, language and math.
A
n enduring challenge in psychology is to understand indi- range of demographic characteristics in terms of age, gender and
vidual differences in intellectual abilities. Early theories of educational background. Second, users practice the cognitive tasks
intelligence have explained performance on cognitive tests multiple times and performance on tasks typically improves with
in terms of broad factors such as general intelligence shared among practice10–12. Therefore, the data are not restricted to a single snap-
all cognitive tests as well as domain-specific factors1,2. Cognitive shot of performance across tasks but instead offer a dynamic view
theories have been developed to explain covariation across tests of of performance over time. In our data sample, we will analyse per-
mental ability in terms of shared cognitive resources across tasks formance on the platform during a 6-yr period (the average user in
such as working memory and executive processes3,4, the speed of this set spends about 2.5 yr on the platform during this time span).
information processing at various levels of processing5,6, associative The aim of this work is to analyse the latent structure of the learn-
learning7, as well as developmental models involving mutually inter- ing trajectories across cognitive tasks. We apply a dimensionality
acting cognitive processes8. Recent research has started to examine reduction approach on the basis of a Bayesian principal component
neurobiological mechanisms that influence individual differences analysis (PCA)13,14. This approach has proved useful for predictive
in mental ability9. modelling of human preferences in large-scale datasets15,16. The
In this research, the goal is to understand individual differences particular Bayesian PCA approach adopted here models time in
in performance on cognitive tasks when individuals practice over a discrete fashion and makes no assumption about the functional
an extended period of time, and to understand how learning tra- form of the learning curve. There are several other approaches that
jectories covary across tasks. To what degree is the learning trajec- could be applied to the data, including continuous-time models17
tory in one task predictive of the learning trajectory in another task? and various forms of latent growth models to learn the covariance
Can we predict how well an individual will perform after extended structure of latent parameters governing the changes over time (for
practice on a task by observing how well this individual performs example, refs. 18–22).
at the start of practice on the same task, or on others? We scale up We use a predictive evaluation approach to assess the model’s
the investigation of individual differences in learning trajectories by ability to account for covariation across learning trajectories and
analysing large-scale data from Lumosity, an online cognitive train- forecast future performance23,24. There are two types of prediction
ing platform. On this platform, users perform a variety of gamified problems we use for model evaluation, as illustrated in Fig. 1. In
cognitive tasks that assess a wide range of cognitive abilities in areas the first prediction problem (Fig. 1a), the goal is to predict an entire
such as memory, attention and reasoning. Some of the games on the learning trajectory for a particular user and a single cognitive task
platform correspond directly to well-known cognitive paradigms on the basis of the learning trajectories from other cognitive tasks
(for example, the Erikson flanker task and n-back tasks) whereas the user engaged with. Because the to-be-predicted learning curve
others involve complex planning and visualization tasks not typi- is missing entirely, the prediction has to be based on the latent struc-
cally studied in the laboratory. ture that captures covariation across tasks as well as covariation
The Lumosity platform offers unique advantages to study indi- across different stages of practice. The challenge in this prediction
vidual differences. First, the platform has a very large and diverse task goes beyond extrapolating learning curves11,23 or predicting
user base. As of 2018, over 90 million users from 182 countries future errors on the same learning task25. In the second prediction
signed up to participate. We analyse a sample of the Lumosity problem (Fig. 1b,c), the goal is to predict the user performance on
data that includes the performance of 36,297 users on 51 differ- a specific task at a later stage of practice based on observations of
ent cognitive games (see Methods). Unlike most laboratory studies learning trajectories on other tasks, as well as partially observed
of cognition, the users in our sample are associated with a diverse performance at the initial stages of practice on the target task.
1Department of Cognitive Sciences, University of California, Irvine, CA, USA. 2Lumos Labs, San Francisco, CA, USA. ✉e-mail: mark.steyvers@uci.edu;
bschafer@lumoslabs.com
NatuRe HuMaN BeHavIouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTurE HuMaN BEHaviour
a b c
Lost in migration 2 Train of thought Lost in migration 2 Train of thought
(attention) (attention) (attention) (attention)
5 5
2.5 2.5
4 4
2.0 2.0
3 3
1.5 1.5
2 2
1.0 1.0
0.5 1 0.5 1
0 0 0 0
0 20 40 60 0 20 40 60 0 20 40 60 0 20 40 60
Speed match 2 Ebb and flow Speed match 2 Ebb and flow
(memory) (flexibility) (memory) (flexibility)
4 4
3 3
3 3
2 2
2 2
1 1
1 1
0 0 0 0
0 20 40 60 0 20 40 60 0 20 40 60 0 20 40 60
Practice (gameplay) Practice (gameplay) Practice (gameplay) Practice (gameplay)
By systematically varying the amount of observed information the model to the three-way data of individuals × tasks × practice
about early task performance and number of other tasks observed, stages (time).
we can assess the predictive utility of different sources of informa- Let x be an N × 1 vector that represents the normalized per-
j
tion. Overall, these prediction problems are related to real-world formance scores across N tasks for individual j. In probabilistic
situations involving decisions to invest in costly training of a par- PCA13,14, the individual performances x are modelled as a weighted
ticular individual on the basis of prior performance on the same, linear combination of orthogonal latent factors (also known as
or other, tasks. components):
We also examine whether the latent learning factors correspond
x Wz μ ε 1
to interpretable dimensions of performance. To avoid relying on j ¼ j þ þ j ð Þ
subjective judgement when assessing the interpretability of the The N × K matrix W captures the latent factors where K corresponds
latent factors, we use a predictive approach to evaluate whether the to the number of latent factors. The K × 1 vector z represents the
j
latent structure discovered by the model can be mapped to known user-specific scores on the latent factors that determines how high
types of cognitive activities associated with a task, as well as the or low the user scores are on the latent factor. The N × 1 vector μ
types of stimuli used in the task. For this purpose, we characterized is a mean offset term to capture baseline differences in the tasks.
each Lumosity game in terms of a number of predefined task fea- This term is needed when modelling incomplete data and cannot be
tures related to the particular cognitive task (for example, memory, removed by subtracting the data mean13. Finally, the N × 1 vector ϵ
selective attention and logical reasoning) as well as stimulus features represents the noise in the data.
(for example, words, single digits and objects). These task features A key assumption in probabilistic PCA is that the noise is nor-
are not mutually exclusive—a particular task can be associated with mally distributed, independent across factors and has the same
a number of cognitive task features and involve multiple types of standard deviation σ across factors:
stimulus features. If the latent structure discovered by the model
carries information about mental activities involved in each task, ε j 0;σ2I 2
Nð Þ ð Þ
a model-based mapping between the latent factors and predefined
task features should lead to accurate predictions of the types of cog- where the symbol I represents the identity matrix. In contrast, fac-
nitive activities involved in a particular task. tor analysis uses the same model as in equation (1) but has a more
flexible error term that allows variances to differ across factors:
applying Bayesian PCa to the learning data ε j 0;ψ . Therefore, probabilistic PCA can be considered a
Nð Þ
To explain the Bayesian PCA approach as applied to the learn- tyIpe of factor analysis model but with a restricted error model13,26.
ing trajectories, we will first ignore the temporal dimension of the Previous commentaries on the differences between PCA and fac-
data and assume that each individual is associated with a single tor analysis have focused on non-probabilistic PCA, which lacks
(potentially missing) performance score for each task. We will then an error model27, but these distinctions do not apply to our current
show how the representation of the data can be extended to apply modelling approach.
erocS
×104
erocs
emaG
erocs
emaG
erocs
emaG
erocs
emaG
Ebb and flow
×104 ×104 ×104 ×104 (flexibility)
3
2
1
0
0 20 40 60
Practice (gameplay)
×104 ×104 ×104 ×104
Fig. 1 | Illustration of different learning curve prediction problems for one user. a, For one task (Ebb and flow), the entire learning curve is missing and needs
to be predicted from the user’s performance on three other tasks (Lost in migration, Train of thought and Speed match). b, The performance on ‘Ebb and flow’
is partially observed and the goal is to predict the performance at the last stage of practice from the early performance on that task as well as the performance
on other tasks. c, The performance on ‘Ebb and flow’ is partially observed and the goal is to predict the performance at the last stage of practice without any
knowledge of performance on other tasks. Dotted lines show the 95% range in scores for each stage of practice.
NatuRe HuMaN BeHavIouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTurE HuMaN BEHaviour Articles
0.46
0.44
0.42
0.40
0.38
0.36
0.34
2 4 6 8 10 12
Number of factors
Common scores, different latent factors across stages of practice. factors (K). The prediction problem corresponds to reconstructing
There are several ways to apply probabilistic PCA to the three-way an entire missing learning curve for a user on the basis of all other
data of individuals × tasks × practice stages. Here, we make the observed learning curves for the user (Fig. 1a). The prediction error
assumption that each practice stage t is associated with its own set is assessed on the original untransformed data by the normalized
of latent factors W allowing for the covariation pattern across tasks mean absolute deviation (see Methods). For the observed learning
t
to be dependent on the amount of practice. For example, two tasks curves, increasing the number of latent learning factors leads to bet-
A and B might not covary at the start of practice but as practice ter reconstructions (lower in-sample prediction errors). However,
progresses the score in task A might start to covary with the score in for learning curves withheld from the model, increasing the num-
task B as the two tasks begin to depend on the same latent factors. ber of factors leads to diminishing out-of-sample predictive perfor-
To constrain the latent factors across stages of practice, we assume mance beyond seven factors. The Supplementary Results show the
that each individual has a single set of scores z that is shared among predictive performance for three other metrics, each consistent with
j
the latent factors associated with each stage of practice. Fig. 2a and suggesting that predictive performance for out-of-sample
Specifically, let x be the N × 1 vector of task performance scores learning curves reaches a maximal value for solutions in the range
t,j
for user j at practice stage t. The model can be written as an exten- of five to eight factors. All our subsequent analyses will focus on the
sion of equation (1) by stacking the performance scores x and model solution with six latent learning factors, as this solution pro-
t,j
latent factors W across stages of practice: vides good predictive performance while not leading to overly com-
t
plex visualizations of the factors (see the Supplementary Methods
x W
1;j 1;j for additional description of predictive performance metrics and
2 . .. 3 2 . .. 3z j μ ε j 3 Extended Data Figs. 3 and 4 for inferred solutions with K = 5 and
¼ þ þ ð Þ K = 7 latent factors). Note the substantial data compression that this
6 6x T;j7
7
6 6W T;j7
7
implies: the variations in learning trajectories across all tasks for a
4 5 4 5 user are captured by only six coefficients in the user scores (z).
j
Therefore, the observed performance of a user at practice stage t is
based on a weighted combination of latent factors specific to t but Predicting performance at the end of practice. Figure 2b shows
where the scores z are shared across time. Because of the sharing of the prediction error when the model is predicting user performance
j
user-specific scores, the latent factors W cannot arbitrarily change at the end of practice (between 51 and 60 gameplays, corresponding
t
across stages of practice. Note that the models in equations (3) and to the problem illustrated in Fig. 1b,c). The results show that predic-
(1) are equivalent but only differ in the representation of the data x tions at the end of practice improve as a larger portion of the learning
and the interpretation of the latent factors W. curve is observed. In addition, prediction performance increases as
more performances on other tasks are observed. Of particular inter-
Results est is that observing user performance on other tasks is as informa-
Bayesian inference. We first normalize the data such that perfor- tive as observing about the first 10–25 performances on the learning
mance scores across tasks are on the same scale. In addition, we curve for the target task itself. This shows that covariation between
truncate the learning curves to the first 60 gameplays and discretize cognitive tasks can be used to form predictions about performance
the temporal dimension into eight stages of practice (see Methods). on a new task in the absence of any observations on that task.
We apply a variational Bayesian inference procedure (see Methods) Optimal prediction performance is obtained when observing as
to infer model parameters. The main results presented here are based much of the learning curve for the target task as possible while not
on the posterior mean of W which represents the latent factors and observing the performance on any other tasks (that is, the curves
z which represents the scores on the latent factors for each user j. in Fig. 2b cross over). This result demonstrates that the model is
j
not optimized to solve this particular prediction problem—the
Number of latent learning factors. Figure 2a shows the predic- goal of the model is to reconstruct all observed learning curves as
tive model performance as a function of number of latent learning best as possible and more observed learning curves can deteriorate
rorre
noitciderP
100
80
60
Withheld
40
Observed
20
0
0 10 20 30 40
Observed practice (gameplays) of the target task
rorre
noitciderp
egatnecreP
a b
Other tasks
observed
0
1–3
4–15
16+
Fig. 2 | Predictive model performance. a, Error in predicting learning curves on a task from learning curves on other tasks as a function of the number of
factors. In the prediction task, the learning curves are either observed (in-sample prediction error) or missing (out-of-sample prediction error). Prediction
error is assessed by normalized mean absolute deviation. b, Error in predicting performance at the final practice stage of a particular task, depending on
the amount of practice observed for the task (horizontal axis) and the number of learning curves observed from other tasks (colours and markers). Error
is expressed in percentage of prediction error for the case where there is no historical performance data available for the user. Shaded areas indicate the
s.e.m. across partitions of the data.
NatuRe HuMaN BeHavIouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTurE HuMaN BEHaviour
1 2 3 4 5 6
Familiar faces
Tidal treasures
Taking root
Word snatchers
Word bubbles 3
Word bubbles
Word bubbles rising
Rhyme workout
Organic order
Memory serves web
Word sort
By the rules
Fuse clues
Pet detective
Pirate passage
Masterpiece
Rotation matrix
Pinball recall
Memory matrix 2
Speed pack
Penguin pursuit
Memory match
Birdwatching
Eagle eye
Lost in migration 2
Ebb and flow
Sp. speed match 2
Speed match 2
Brain shift 2
Speed match ovd.
Brain shift ovd. 2
Color match 2
Disillusion 2
Memory match 2
Disillusion
Star search
Train of thought
Highway hazards
Assist ants
Moneycomb
Eagle eye 2
Follow that frog
Playing koi
River ranger
Trouble brewing
Splitting seeds
Observation tower
Raindrops
Chalkboard chall. 2
Raindrops 2
Speed match web
Attention Language Memory
–0.62 0 0.62
Flexibility Math Reasoning
Fig. 3 | Inferred latent learning factors as a function of practice. The heatmap visualizes the six latent learning factors (columns) across games (rows).
Positive (or negative) values are visualized by brown (or blue) colours. Each latent learning factor corresponds to a group of eight columns, where the
columns within a group correspond to different stages of practice (practice increases from left to right). The hierarchical clustering solution to the left of
the heatmap visualizes the similarity structure between cognitive tasks on the basis of the latent factors. Cognitive tasks are coloured according to primary
task domain. Sp, spatial; ovd, overdrive.
predictive performance on any particular segment of any particular Another potentially relevant factor is the reliability of scores as
learning curve. a function of practice. An increase in the first learning factor over
stages of practice could be attributed to an increase in reliability (for
Inferred latent learning factors. Figure 3 shows the inferred latent example, smaller performance fluctuations over practice). However,
learning factors broken down by stage of practice. The first latent Fig. 4c shows that the reliability of scores, assessed by the correla-
learning factor is associated with positive scores across all tasks, tion in task scores of consecutive gameplays, ramps up quickly and
consistent with a general ability factor often found in factor analysis remains constant after the third stage of practice (that is, after six
of mental abilities2. While the first latent learning factor is positive gameplays), showing that the changes in factor scores cannot be
across all tasks, there is also an increase over stages of practice attributed to changes in performance variability (within person)
(Fig. 4a). This increase in part reflects changes in the correlations in over time.
performance scores across tasks (Fig. 4b). A user who performs well The tree diagram of Fig. 3 shows the similarity structure between
in one task tends to perform well in other tasks and this correlation tasks on the basis of the latent learning factors. The tasks cluster
increases with practice. along the primary task domains: language tasks are similar to other
Some of the changes in the first factor scores can be attributed language tasks, math tasks are similar to other math tasks, etc. This
to task differences related to adaptivity. In some tasks the level of suggests that while the domain independent factor (the first factor)
difficulty adapts between gameplays (see Methods). For these has a large influence on performance, the remaining factors modu-
between-game adaptive tasks, idiosyncratic effects might influence late the learning curves for particular sets of tasks depending on the
the performance scores in initial stages of practice, which would primary cognitive processing demands of the tasks. Note that, with
decrease the dependence on general ability and thus lower the first the exception of the first factor, the values have no natural interpre-
factor scores at at those stages. For example, a user who has high tation of higher-is-better. It is the sign of the user score along with
ability might only be able to express this ability once the game has the sign of the latent factor value that is important for interpretation.
adapted to an appropriate level. However, the first learning factor
also increases with practice for tasks that maintain the same scoring Interpretation of latent learning factors. We examine whether the
system and difficulty level across stages of practice (that is, those latent learning factors described by this six-factor solution can be
with no between-game adaptivity). related to known features of the tasks such as the types of cognitive
NatuRe HuMaN BeHavIouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTurE HuMaN BEHaviour Articles
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Stage of practice
processing demands imposed by the task, the type of stimulus, (see Extended Data Fig. 5 for the resulting factors and factor cor-
method of input or aspects of game design (for example, the pres- relations). As with the original orthogonal solution, the first fac-
ence of leveling in difficulty or the presence of time pressure). Table 1 tor retains positive scores across all tasks, consistent with a general
shows a list of task features we used in our analysis. Each feature ability factor. Though still positive, first factor scores are weakest
is binary: a task is either associated with the feature or it is not. for tasks involving language. The second factor is also similar to its
(Extended Data Figs. 1 and 2 show the full task × feature matrix and counterpart before rotation but the signs have been reversed such
a definition of the task features.) that visuospatial tasks now correspond to negative values. The larg-
Figure 5 shows the correlations between latent learning factors est positive scores are for language tasks. Positive scores on the third
and task features corresponding to cognitive processes and stimulus factor are found for tasks involving spatial reasoning, with negative
types. The hierarchical tree visualizes the similarity structure in the scores relating to tasks demanding response inhibition and other
pattern of correlations. We use the primary task domains in Fig. 3 and aspects of executive function. The fourth factor has strongest scores
the task features in Fig. 5 to guide an interpretation of the individual for tasks involving visualization of spatial transformations or spatial
factors. The first factor, as described above, is associated with higher recall. The fifth factor relates to mathematical ability, similar to the
performance across all tasks and is consistent with a general ability orthogonal solution. The sixth factor is a hybrid that relates to tasks
factor. The second factor is related to visuospatial abilities: it is has practicing executive attention and also to reasoning and language.
highest scores in tasks requiring spatial recall, route planning or the
integration of visual information from across the visual field. Scores Predicting individual task features from the latent learning fac-
are correlated with the use of locations and objects as the task stimuli. tors. The previous analysis focused on a qualitative interpretation of
The third factor is related to executive attention, with highest scores the latent learning factors. We can also perform a more fine-grained,
in tasks requiring the maintenance of goal-directed information or quantitative analysis that examines whether the pattern of informa-
the inhibition of inappropriate responses and activation of appropri- tion contained in the latent learning factors is predictive of indi-
ate ones. An increased score on this factor improves performance on vidual task features. We build a predictive model that has the goal
tasks requiring selective attention. The fourth factor is primarily asso- of predicting (out-of-sample) the presence or absence of each task
ciated with comprehension knowledge related to math and language feature for any particular task on the basis of the latent learning fac-
tasks, that is crystallized intelligence, although it also has high scores tors associated with the task. Table 1 shows the diagnosticity of the
in several tasks requiring spatial reasoning or visualization. The fifth predictive model expressed by area under the curve (AUC). This
factor is related to mathematical ability—note the high correlation corresponds to the probability that the model assigns a higher score
with task features involving numbers and math. The sixth factor is a of ‘feature present’ to a new task where the feature is indeed present
hybrid factor that combines executive attention and math. than a new task without the feature. For 16 of 28 task features, pre-
While this interpretation of the factors is consistent with the dictive model performance exceeds the 95% performance interval
task features and primary task domains, there might be others as associated with chance-level performance. For example, whether
well. In addition, the interpretation of these factors is constrained a task involves cognitive processes such as selective attention, task
by the orthogonality of these factors, which tends to lead to tasks switching, word generation, calculation, spatial reasoning and
being associated with multiple factors. To examine the effect of response inhibition can be determined by the latent learning factors
orthogonality on the interpretability of the factors, we applied fac- associated with the task. Some of the other cognitive processes can-
tor rotation methods using the promax method28, which leads to not be reliably identified in part because the feature was only associ-
non-orthogonal factors where the variance of each task is redistrib- ated with a few tasks (N in Table 1), which makes generalization to
uted across factors such that tasks are associated with fewer factors new tasks more challenging.
erocs
rotcaf
tsriF
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
Between game adaptivity
No
0.2
Yes
0.1
0
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Stage of practice
sksat
neewteb
snoitalerroc
erocs
emaG
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Stage of practice
ytilibailer
yalper–yalP
a b c
Fig. 4 | analysis of the first learning factor. a–c, Mean score of the first learning factor (a), game score correlations between tasks (b) and play–replay
reliability as a function of stage of practice (c). Results are broken down by tasks with and without between-game adaptivity (colours). Shaded areas
represent 25–75% percentiles. Correlations were first computed for each gameplay before aggregating over gameplays corresponding to a stage of practice.
NatuRe HuMaN BeHavIouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTurE HuMaN BEHaviour
Contributions of individual latent factors to the shape of the
Table 1 | Performance (auC) of predicting task features from
learning curve. To better understand the contributions of indi-
the latent learning factors
vidual latent learning factors to the shape of the learning curve,
Feature type task feature auC Confidence N Fig. 6 shows the posterior predicted learning curves in the origi-
interva nal (untransformed) data space for the set of games that maintain
the same difficulty levels and scoring across all stages of practice
Process Memory 0.65 (0.26, 0.71) 24
(Extended Data Fig. 6 shows results across all games). The curves
Process Memory updating 0.71 (0.21, 0.76) 10
show the predictions for simulated individuals who have individ-
Process Multiple object 0.91 (0.08, 0.91) 3 ual scores on a factor that score in the top 10% (red), bottom 10%
monitoring (blue) or at 50% (black) while scoring at 50% on all other factors.
Process Selective attention 0.82* (0.18, 0.73) 11 Consistent with Fig. 3, the first factor predicts improved learning
outcomes across all tasks. The remaining factors primarily shape the
Process Divided attention 0.71 (0.23, 0.74) 13
learning curve at later stages of practice and for subsets of tasks. For
Process Task switching 0.86* (0.15, 0.83) 5
example, the fifth factor primarily differentiates performance on the
Process Vocabulary knowledge 0.93 (0.04, 0.97) 2 math tasks and has a relatively small impact on other tasks.
Process Word generation 0.85* (0.13, 0.80) 6
Relating individual scores to demographics. Figure 7 shows the
Process Planning 0.80 (0.12, 0.84) 6
distribution of individual scores (z) for each latent learning fac-
Process Calculation 0.98* (0.12, 0.86) 4 j
tor as a function of age and educational background. The first fac-
Process Quantitative reasoning 0.52 (0.14, 0.85) 4 tor strongly differentiates between age groups. Older age groups
Process Spatial reasoning 0.81* (0.22, 0.77) 10 score lower on this factor, predicting lower performance across all
tasks, consistent with cognitive slowing theories of aging that affect
Process Logical reasoning 0.77 (0.11, 0.86) 4
a broad range of tasks30. Note that the general learning factor we
Process Response inhibition 0.90* (0.24, 0.73) 17 found does not depend on the presence of different age groups. The
Stimulus Objects 0.78* (0.27, 0.72) 33 same learning factor emerges when the model is applied to indi-
Stimulus Locations 0.90* (0.26, 0.72) 25 vidual age groups, consistent with previous research that general
intelligence factors can be found across different subpopulations31.
Stimulus Single letters 0.79 (0.08, 0.91) 3
In terms of educational differences, individuals with more advanced
Stimulus Words 0.90* (0.20, 0.77) 10 education score higher on the general learning factor and lower on
Stimulus Single digits 0.59 (0.14, 0.83) 6 the second factor, corresponding to higher math and language per-
formance scores. However, overall there are no strong effects of edu-
Stimulus Numbers 0.98* (0.10, 0.90) 4
cational background.
Input method Cursor keys 0.76* (0.25, 0.72) 17
Input method Keyboard entry 0.83* (0.20, 0.77) 9 Discussion
Input method Mouse pointer 0.89* (0.26, 0.70) 27 Large-scale datasets offer unique opportunities to study cognition
at scale32,33. The Lumosity dataset offers a unique multivariate and
Game design Within-game adaptivity 0.95* (0.25, 0.71) 29
longitudinal set for studying learning across a number of cognitive
Game design Algorithmic leveling 0.73 (0.23, 0.74) 14
tasks and users. To avoid making strong assumptions about the
Game design User-selected leveling 0.67 (0.25, 0.72) 17 data, we started this investigation with a data-driven Bayesian PCA
Game design Response-time pressure 0.89* (0.25, 0.71) 31 approach to discover the statistical patterns of covariation across
learning trajectories. The model infers a set of latent factors that
Game design Briefly presented stimuli 0.82* (0.23, 0.74) 11
can change as a function of the stage of practice, similar to other
Values denoted with an asterisk show performances outside the 95% confidence interval given approaches that allow for the organization of cognitive abilities to
between parentheses. AUC, area under the curve; N, number of tasks with the feature present. vary as a function of ability34,35. The modelling results showed that
the learning trajectories show substantial covariation across tasks.
Individuals who are good at learning one task typically are also
good at learning other tasks, analogous to the standard finding of
The particular Bayesian PCA approach we adopted allows for Spearman’s general intelligence factor1 and a positive manifold in
different latent factors W to be associated with each stage of prac- tests of cognitive ability where performance across tests tends to be
t
tice (t), which raises the question whether the factors assess the positively correlated.
same construct over time29. Because of the sharing of scores across A key finding is that the general learning factor was expressed
stages of practice, there are constraints on the latent factors that mostly at later stages of practice. Across tasks, asymptotic perfor-
prevent them from arbitrary changes across stages of practice. For mance correlates more strongly than baseline performance. The
example, a user who scores high on a particular factor will upweight increase in the general learning factor over stages of practice was
the contribution of the corresponding column of all matrices W especially prevalent for tasks with adaptive difficulty, consistent
t
regardless of stage of practice t, which constrains model flexibility with the possibility that tasks with adaptive difficulty may take some
during inference. In model simulations (Supplementary Methods), time to reach an individual’s challenge level. However, the effect was
we verified that the task feature prediction model retains high per- also found for non-adaptive tasks, which suggests that the type of
formance when the model is trained on the latent factors associated learning in early stages (that is, learning how to complete the task,
with a particular stage of practice and validated on other stages of not necessarily how to perform it well) may not map as well to this
practice. general factor. Overall, the temporal pattern for the general learning
Overall, these results show that the latent learning factors factor suggests that early performance on these cognitive tasks is in
carry not only information about general learning ability but also part influenced by idiosyncratic, task-specific factors.
task-specific information related to the type of cognitive process The finding that general ability is expressed to a higher degree
involved, the type of stimulus being processed, the input method after extended practice is also consistent with cognitive and devel-
and additional aspects of game design. opmental theories of intelligence such as mutualism8 and process
NatuRe HuMaN BeHavIouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTurE HuMaN BEHaviour Articles
1 2 3 4 5 6
Word generation
Words
Vocabulary knowledge
Logical reasoning
Calculation
Numbers
Quantitative reasoning
Single digits
Memory
Spatial reasoning
Planning
Divided attention
Locations
Multiple object monitoring
Objects
Selective attention
Task switching
Response inhibition
Single letters
Memory updating
Process Stimulus
–1.00 0 1.00
Fig. 5 | Correlations between latent learning factors and manually derived task features. Each group of columns corresponds to the different time slices
of a single latent factor. Positive (or negative) correlations are illustrated by red (or blue) colours. The hierarchical tree visualizes the similarity between the
task features on the basis of the pattern of correlations between task features and latent factors. Task features are grouped by process and stimulus type.
overlap theory4. The mutualism theory of intelligence views the on other cognitive tasks as observing performance at the very early
cognitive system as a set of basic cognitive abilities and growth stages of practice for that particular task. This result has implica-
in one ability is partly based on growth in other abilities. During tions for real-world forecasting scenarios where the most promising
development, initially uncorrelated abilities become correlated individuals need to be selected for expensive and time-consuming
as a result of the mutually beneficent interactions between these training of a particular task. Some of the future performance can be
abilities. For example, there is evidence for a coupling between fluid forecasted without engaging in the target task at all.
and crystallized abilities such that higher starting point in one abil- By making the Lumosity dataset publicly available, we aim to fos-
ity is associated with greater developmental gains in the other36,37. ter new research on individual differences and the development of
Process overlap theory, on the other hand, proposes that perfor- new modelling approaches to account for covariation across learn-
mance on a task depends on interactions between domain-specific ing trajectories. There are several research directions that are likely
as well as domain-general cognitive processes such as attentional to improve the prediction results and interpretability of the latent
and executive processes. Task performance is constrained by factors. For example, we can improve the treatment of the temporal
whichever required process an individual is weakest in. In the dimension of the data by building an explicit continuous-time model
initial stages, task-specific skills need to be acquired, which lim- for the learning trajectory for each individual17,38 and applying
its the observed correlations between tasks. During later learning multivariate latent growth models to learn the covariance structure of
stages, more domain-general abilities may set an upper limit on the latent parameters governing the changes over time (for example,
learning ability. refs. 18–22,36,37). In addition, future research could focus on a cognitive
The model also inferred additional latent factors that captured modelling approach to explain observed performance in terms of
performance variations related to specific types of tasks. In fact, the latent cognitive processes39. One Lumosity task (the task-switching
latent learning factors encode information related to a number of game ‘Ebb and flow’) has already been modelled to understand
different cognitive processes, types of stimuli, ways of assessing user the cognitive processes at the level of individual trials as well as the
responses and general design features of the tasks. Therefore, the cognitive changes across sessions10. Finally, while our approach reveals
relatively low-dimensional factor structure captures a substantial changes in covariation of performance across tasks as practice pro-
amount of information about the mental activities in each task. gresses, it does not directly address the question of whether or how
We also showed that the model can be used to predict task per- cognitive training might transfer between tasks, which has been a topic
formance from observed performance on other tasks. Specifically, of recent debate40,41. Future modelling could allow for transfer effects
we found that performance at a later stage of practice on a particu- arising from mutually coupled cognitive processes36,37 to account for
lar task can be predicted as accurately from observing performance the possibility that performance is impacted by the order in which
NatuRe HuMaN BeHavIouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTurE HuMaN BEHaviour
1
2
3
4
5
6
tasks are practiced in interleaved practice. Ultimately, the predictive cognitive tasks, this dataset only included users if 5% or fewer of their gameplays
were repetitions of the previous game. This criterion excludes individuals who
evaluation approach introduced in this research will facilitate com-
choose to repeat specific games rather than play from the broader game library.
parison between different modelling approaches.
In addition, individuals were selected who signed up between 1 August 2013 and
31 December 2016, with an age at signup between 18 and 90 yr. The country of
Methods origin was restricted to the United States, Canada or Australia with English as
The Lumosity platform provides several games that tap memory, attention, the user’s preferred language. Finally, individuals were included if at least 99% of
flexibility, speeded processing and problem solving. In the Lumosity program, their lifetime Lumosity gameplays were on the web product (as opposed to mobile
individuals are given a recommended daily training session of five different apps) and only the web data were included in the data sample. In total, the dataset
cognitive training games. One five-game session takes approximately 15 min to contains the full gameplay history across tasks spanning a period from 1 August
complete. Outside of the training sessions, Lumosity users can also opt to select and 2013 to 30 June 2019. Most users in this sample (80%) signed up with Lumosity
play games directly from the entire library of available games. before 1 January 2015. Users in this sample spent a median of 2 yr on the platform.
Data sample. We performed a retrospective analysis of a sample of gameplay data Demographics of participants. Basic demographic information is available on the
on the basis of 84 distinct cognitive games. The de-identified data sample provided basis of information provided by users when signing up for Lumosity. In our data
by Lumosity includes the gameplay event history for 36,297 individuals, 1,442,555 sample, most individuals are female (50%), with 39% males and 11% individuals
individual learning curves and 50,374,056 gameplay events. No statistical methods who did not provide gender information. We coded the age of individuals in seven
were used to predetermine sample sizes but our sample sizes are larger than bins leading to the following breakdown of the user sample: 18–30 (5%), 31–40 (5%),
those typically reported. The data sample was selected from the overall Lumosity 41–50 (12%), 51–60 (25%), 61–70 (32%), 71–80 (17%) and 81+ (4%). Therefore,
database by focusing on active users who have at least 500 lifetime gameplays. the user sample skews towards an older demographic. Individuals reported their
In addition, because the focus of our research is on analysing correlations across educational attainment according to the following categories: some high school (2%),
2 noitargim
ni
tsoL
tiusrup
niugneP
sdees
gnittilpS
wolf
dna
bbE
2 hctam
roloC
2 tfihs
niarB
2 .dvo tfihs
niarB
gnisir selbbub
droW
selbbub
droW
2 .llahc draobklahC 2 spordniaR spordniaR 2 hctam
deepS
serusaert
ladiT
2 hctam deeps
.pS
hctam
yromeM
gorf taht
wolloF
2 hctam
yromeM
.dvo hctam
deepS
bew hctam
deepS
Fig. 6 | Changes in predicted learning curves based on changes in individual scores for individual factors. For each factor (row), the blue, black and red
lines show the predicted learning curves for 10, 50 and 90% percentile scores on that particular factor and median scores on all other factors. Therefore,
the red (blue) lines show the predicted learning curves for individuals who score high (low) on that factor while holding constant the contribution of other
factors. Intercept differences are highlighted with circles at the start of the learning curve. To facilitate comparison, the vertical axis is the same for each
particular task (column) but is different across tasks. Tasks are ordered by primary domain (colour) consistent with Fig. 3. Only the subset of tasks without
between-game adaptivity is shown.
2.5
2.0 Age group Education
1.5 18–30 Some high school
1.0 31–40 High school
0.5 41–50 Some college
0 51–60 Associates degree
Bachelors degree
–0.5 61–70 Professional degree
–1.0 71–80 Masters degree
–1.5 81+ PhD
erocS
1 2 3 4 5 6
1.0
0.5
0
–0.5
–1.0
–1.5
erocS
a b
1 2 3 4 5 6
Fig. 7 | Distribution of individual scores for latent learning factors across demographic categories. a,b, Latent learning factors (columns) across age
groups (a) and educational levels (b). Boxes represent interquartile ranges (that is, 25–75% percentile scores) and the median (horizontal line).
NatuRe HuMaN BeHavIouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTurE HuMaN BEHaviour Articles
high school (13%), some college (22%), Associates degree (4%), Bachelors degree In this notation, w ik is an element of matrix W with indices i = 1, …, N and
(31%), Professional degree (6%), Masters degree (19%) and PhD (3%). k = 1, …, K and the variable z ij is the ith element of individual vector z j.
We use the variational Bayesian inference procedure (VBPCA) described in
Data filtering. For some of the cognitive tasks in the dataset, the available learning ref. 13 to infer model parameters. The algorithm provides estimates of the posterior
data were sparse in terms of the number of individuals who performed the task or mean and covariance of W, z and μ as well as estimates of the hyperparameters
the total number of times individuals performed the task. To ensure that sufficient σ, σw and σ μ. Finally, the algorithm provides estimates of the variance of withheld
data were available for our analyses, we filtered out any cognitive task that had observations of the x. The VBPCA algorithm was run for 30 iterations.
j
fewer than 200 individuals at the twentieth gameplay attempt. At the learning
curve level, we truncated the learning curve to the first 60 gameplays. The final Predictive tests. We assess model performance on two types of prediction
dataset created after these filtering steps includes the gameplay event history for problems. In the first prediction problem (illustrated in Fig. 1a), the goal is to
51 cognitive games, 36,297 individuals, 1,255,175 individual learning curves and predict the entire learning curve for a task for a particular user given the observed
36,736,286 single gameplay events. learning curves from other tasks that the user engaged in. We created a validation
set by withholding for each user the performance scores from one cognitive task
Data sparsity. The observed data are sparse as users do not perform all cognitive chosen at random from all tasks that the user engaged in. Because of the size of the
tasks. The tasks vary by popularity from 99.8% to as few as 1.5% of users in this data, we only created a single partition of the data into a training and validation set
sample performing the task. On average, users perform a median of 32 distinct to assess predictive performance.
tasks. An additional factor that influences sparsity is that learning curves for a In the second prediction problem (illustrated in Fig. 1b,c), the goal is to predict
particular user and a particular task might not be complete—a user might stop the user performance at the last stage of practice (51–60 gameplays) from some
playing the game before our cutoff of 60 gameplays. Across tasks, users and first 60 combination of observed performance on earlier stages of practice on the task as
gameplays, only 33% of the data are observed. Supplementary Fig. 3 illustrates the well as practice on other tasks. We created 36 partitions of the data into validation
pattern of sparsity across games as well as stages of practice. and training sets. For each partition, we first randomly selected 20% of users and
selected for each user a single target learning curve without any missing practice
Performance scores. At the end of each gameplay event, users are given feedback data. The data for the last stage of practice (gameplays 51–60) of the target learning
on a variety of performance scores depending on the type of game. Some games curves were then placed in the validation set. For each of the target learning curves,
provide feedback on mean response time per trial and/or mean accuracy. Our the number of observed stages of practice for the training data was randomly
dataset only includes data on the total score per gameplay, which all games provide. determined, uniformly from the B − 1 = 7 remaining practice stages. For each of the
This performance score is based on a combination of accuracy, speed of processing, selected users, we selected a random number of learning curves from tasks other
as well as bonus points accumulated from a variety of factors (for example, streaks than the target tasks, uniformly from the number of other tasks the user engaged
of correct responses or completing more challenging trials). in. The selected learning curves were placed in the training set. For the remaining
80% of users, all observed data were placed in the training data. We repeated this
Adaptivity within and between games. Some of the Lumosity games have a procedure of partitioning data into training and validation data 36 times. The
level of difficulty that adapts to the user’s performance. For different games, model was applied to each partition and predictions for the last practice stage for
this adaptivity may occur either within or between gameplays. Between-game the validation learning curves were recorded.
adaptivity is achieved either through user-selected leveling, in which users unlock
more challenging levels by reaching certain performance targets, or algorithmic Assessing predictive performance. We use the normalized mean absolute
leveling, in which the level of difficulty is adjusted algorithmically across gameplays deviation (NMAD) metric to assess the predictive performance of the model. The
on the basis of performance. For within-game adaptivity, the level of difficulty can mean absolute deviation (MAD) for particular cognitive task i is defined as
increase or decrease during gameplay depending on user performance but each
1
g taa sm kse p arla ey
a
b sse og cin ias
t
ea dt t wh ie
t
hsa em ace
h
d ti yff pic eu olt fy
a
dle av pe tl i.
v
E itx yt .e Fn od re td
h
D
e
pat ua
r
pF oig s.
e
1
o
s fh oo uw
r
s
a
w nah li yc sh
e s,
MADi¼
jΩijXðj;t
Þ2Ωijy ijt�^y
ijtj
ð5
Þ
we distinguish between tasks that have no between-game adaptivity (20 total),
which maintain the same level of difficulty and scoring system across gameplays, where y ijt is the withheld performance of user j on task i at time t and ^y ijt is the
and tasks that have a form of between-game adaptivity (31 total). corresponding model prediction. The variable Ωi denotes the set of wiIthheld data
pairs j and t for task i and ∣Ωi∣ is the number of withheld data pairs for task i. To
combine the MAD across tasks, we normalize the scores before averaging:
Data transformations. We applied several transformation steps to prepare the data
f po er
r
ft oh re
m
P aC nA
ce
a slg coo rr eit sh am cr, or se sd cu oc ge nth ite
iv
c eo tm asp ku s.t a Tt oio in na tl
r
oc dom ucp el e nx oi tt ay
t
ia on nd
,
n wo er dm ea nl oiz te
e
t th he
e
NMAD ¼N1 N
j
MADi=Si ð6
Þ
observed performance scores by a three-way array Y with elements y ijt referenced X
by indices i = 1, …, L (tasks), j = 1, …, M (individuals) and t = 1, …, T (number where S i is the standard deviation of performance scores (across all practice
of gameplays). We transform the three-way array to a matrix of scores X with trials) for task i. This step normalizes the arbitrary scoring ranges associated with
elements x ij referenced by i = 1, …, N (combination of task and stage of practice) individual tasks. The Supplementary Methods show three additional predictive
and j = 1, …, M (individual). It should be noted that the predictive performance performance metrics for model evaluation.
of the PCA model is assessed on the original untransformed data (Y) to facilitate
comparison to other models that might use the same data. Determining the number of factors. There are several methods to determine
In the first data transformation step, we reduced the dimensionality of the K, the number of latent factors in a dimensionality reduction algorithm such as
temporal component of the data by discretizing time into B temporal bins. We PCA. We use a generalization test where we assessed the model’s performance on
set B = 8 and defined the following stages of practice by the number of gameplays predicting learning curves that are withheld from the model. We calculated the
completed: 1 or 2 gameplays, 3–5, 6–10, 11–20, 21–30, 31–40, 41–50 and 51–60. normalized mean absolute deviations (NMAD) for K = 1 up to K = 12 and chose
All (observed) performance outcomes were averaged within these bins. The bins the number of latent factors such that generalization performance was adequate
were chosen to be smaller for the early stages of the learning curve as these are the and no substantial gains could be obtained by selecting solutions with a higher
stages where performance typically changes the most. number of latent factors. In our simulations, about six latent factors were sufficient
In the second data transformation step, we normalized the performance to maximize predictive performance. Supplementary Figs. 1 and 2 show that
outcomes across cognitive tasks and temporal bins. For each task, the performance similar results were obtained with three other predictive performance metrics.
scores were normalized by the standard deviation of the performance scores in
Determining the primary cognitive domains and task features. The tasks
the last temporal bin (gameplays 51–60). No correction was applied to the mean.
included in the dataset span a range of cognitive skills. For the purpose of
After this transformation step, the data are of size M = 36,297 (individuals) × L = 51
visualizing and interpreting the results of the probabilistic PCA, we classified the
(cognitive tasks) × B = 8 (stages of practice).
games into six primary areas: attention, flexibility, language, math, memory and
In the final data transformation step, we rearrange the data to a matrix
reasoning. These classifications closely follow the primary areas that are listed on
representation. For each individual, we concatenate the L performance scores
the Lumosity platform with a few exceptions (for example, we dropped the speed
across tasks and B stages of practice to create a single (column) vector with
area and reclassified a few games into other areas). Extended Data Fig. 1 shows the
N = L × B performance scores. By combining the M individual vectors, we create
primary cognitive areas designated for each task.
the final N x M matrix X.
While these primary cognitive domain classifications are broadly useful, it
is important to note that each game might require multiple types of cognitive
Priors and model inference. The Bayesian approach to probabilistic PCA
processes. To more fully capture the set of cognitive activities involved in each
completes the model by using the following priors on the model parameters:
task, we enumerated a list of task features shown in Extended Data Fig. 1. The task
wik Nð0;σ2
wÞ
features relate to the type of cognitive process, the type of stimulus, the method of
zij Nð0;1
Þ
ð4
Þ
i tn asp ku t
fe
a an tud
r
o esth we er ra es p ree lc et vs
a
o nf
t
g aa nm
d
e
f
od ce us sig en
d
.
m
Fo ar
in
e la yc oh
n
t a fes ak t,
u
t rh ee
s
a tu ht ah
t
o wr os uas ldse bss ee ad
p
w plh ica at
b le
μ 0;σ2
i Nð μÞ to a range of tasks. For definitions of task features, see Extended Data Fig. 2.
NatuRe HuMaN BeHavIouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTurE HuMaN BEHaviour
Linking latent factors to predefined task features. A (lasso) regularized 16. Bell, R. M. & Koren, Y. Scalable collaborative filtering with jointly derived
logistic regression model was used to predict predefined task features from the neighborhood interpolation weights. In Proc. Seventh IEEE International
pattern of latent factors. For each task feature, a separate model was trained Conference on Data Mining 43–52 (IEEE Computer Society, 2007).
using cross-validation. For each fold, the model was trained on all but two 17. Driver, C. C. & Voelkle, M. C. Hierarchical Bayesian continuous time
tasks and the test set consisted of the two held out tasks with the constraint dynamic modeling. Psychol. Methods 23, 774–799 (2018).
that the feature was present on one task but not the other. The partitioning into 18. Kievit, R. A. et al. Developmental cognitive neuroscience using latent change
training and test sets was done over 200 different combinations to create a test score models: a tutorial and applications. Dev. Cogn. Neurosci. 33, 99–117
set with one feature-present and one feature-absent task. An AUC value was (2018).
calculated from the proportion of test sets where the held out feature-present 19. Isiordia, M. & Ferrer, E. Curve of factors model: a latent growth modeling
task was given a higher score by the logistic regression model than the held out approach for educational research. Educ. Psychol. Meas. 78, 203–231 (2018).
feature-absent task. 20. Ram, N. & Grimm, K. J. in Handbook of Child Psychology and Developmental
In addition, we derived a distribution of AUC that can be expected from Science (ed. Lerner, R. M.) 1–31 (Wiley, 2015).
chance-level performance. In this procedure, we randomly permuted the feature 21. McArdle, J. J., Ferrer-Caja, E., Hamagami, F. & Woodcock, R. W. Comparative
pattern across tasks (losing any connection between the latent learning factors and longitudinal structural analyses of the growth and decline of multiple
task features but preserving the marginal distribution of variables) and calculated intellectual abilities over the life span. Dev. Psychol. 38, 115–142 (2002).
an AUC for the logistic regression model as described earlier. This procedure was 22. Preacher, K. J., Wichman, A. L., MacCallum, R. C. & Briggs, N. E. Latent
repeated 400 times to derive a distribution of AUC values. The 2.5% and 97.5% Growth Curve Modeling (Sage, 2008).
percentiles of this distribution are reported in Table 1. 23. McNeish, D., Dumas, D. G. & Grimm, K. J. Estimating new quantities from
For all simulations of the regression model, a coordinate descent algorithm longitudinal test scores to improve forecasts of future performance.
for model inference was used. Convergence was assessed by the relative change in Multivariate Behav. Res. https://doi.org/10.1080/00273171.2019.1691484
the size of the estimated coefficients. All model simulations converged when the (2019).
relative change dropped below 1 × 10–4. 24. Rosenberg, M. D., Casey, B. & Holmes, A. J. Prediction complements
explanation in understanding the developing brain. Nat. Commun. 9, 589
Reporting Summary. Further information on research design is available in the (2018).
Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article. 25. Settles B., Brust, C., Gustafson, E., Hagiwara, M. & Madnani, N. Second
language acquisition modeling. In Proc. Thirteenth Workshop on Innovative
Data availability Use of NLP for Building Educational Applications (eds Tetreault, J.,
Burstein, J., Kochmar, E., Leacock, C. & Yannakoudakis, H.) 56–65
The original and preprocessed versions of the data can be accessed at https://osf.io/
(ACL, 2018).
g9zkf. Source data are provided with this paper.
26. Luttinen, J. & Ilin, A. Transformations in variational Bayesian factor analysis
to speed up learning. Neurocomputing 73, 1093–1102 (2010).
Code availability
27. Fabrigar, L. R., Wegener, D. T., MacCallum, R. C. & Strahan, E. J. Evaluating
The code used to analyse the data, run the Bayesian PCA model and create figures the use of exploratory factor analysis in psychological research. Psychol.
and tables can be accessed at https://osf.io/g9zkf. Methods 4, 272–299 (1999).
28. Abdi, H. in Encyclopedia for Research Methods for the Social Sciences (ed.
Received: 9 January 2020; Accepted: 15 July 2020; Lewis-Beck, M. S. et al.) 792–795 (Sage, 2004).
Published: xx xx xxxx 29. Widaman, K. F., Ferrer, E. & Conger, R. D. Factorial invariance within
longitudinal structural equation models: measuring the same construct across
time. Child Dev. Perspect. 4, 10–18 (2010).
30. Salthouse, T. A. The processing-speed theory of adult age differences in
References
cognition. Psychol. Rev. 103, 403–428 (1996).
1. Spearman, C. ‘General intelligence’ objectively determined and measured.
31. Jensen, A. R. Regularities in Spearman’s law of diminishing returns.
Am. J. Psychol. 15, 201–293 (1904).
Intelligence 31, 95–105 (2003).
2. Carroll, J. B. et al. Human Cognitive Abilities: A Survey of Factor-Analytic
32. Griffiths, T. L. Manifesto for a new cognitive revolution. Cognition 135,
Studies (Cambridge Univ. Press, 1993).
21–23 (2015).
3. Conway, A. R., Cowan, N., Bunting, M. F., Therriault, D. J. & Minkoff, S. R. A
33. Goldstone, R. L. & Lupyan, G. Discovering psychological principles
latent variable analysis of working memory capacity, short-term memory
by mining naturally occurring data sets. Topics Cogn. Sci. 8,
capacity, processing speed, and general fluid intelligence. Intelligence 30,
548–568 (2016).
163–183 (2002).
34. Molenaar, D., Dolan, C. V., Wicherts, J. M. & van der Maas,
4. Kovacs, K. & Conway, A. R. Process overlap theory: a unified account of the
H. L. Modeling differentiation of cognitive abilities within the higher-
general factor of intelligence. Psychol. Inq. 27, 151–177 (2016).
order factor model using moderated factor analysis. Intelligence 38,
5. Jensen, A. R. Clocking the Mind: Mental Chronometry and Individual
611–624 (2010).
Differences (Elsevier, 2006).
35. Tucker-Drob, E. M. Differentiation of cognitive abilities across the life span.
6. Schubert, A.-L., Hagemann, D. & Frischkorn, G. T. Is general intelligence
Dev. Psychol. 45, 1097–1118 (2009).
little more than the speed of higher-order processing?. J. Exp. Psychol. 146,
36. Kievit, R. A. et al. Mutualistic coupling between vocabulary and reasoning
1498–1512 (2017).
supports cognitive development during late adolescence and early adulthood.
7. Kaufman, S. B., DeYoung, C. G., Gray, J. R., Brown, J. & Mackintosh, N.
Psychol. Sci. 28, 1419–1431 (2017).
Associative learning predicts intelligence above and beyond working memory
37. Kievit, R. A., Hofman, A. D. & Nation, K. Mutualistic coupling between
and processing speed. Intelligence 37, 374–382 (2009).
vocabulary and reasoning in young children: a replication and extension of
8. Van Der Maas, H. L. et al. A dynamical model of general intelligence:
the study by Kievit et al.(2017). Psychol. Sci. 30, 1245–1252 (2019).
the positive manifold of intelligence by mutualism. Psychol. Rev. 113,
38. Evans, N. J., Brown, S. D., Mewhort, D. J. & Heathcote, A. Refining the law of
842–861 (2006).
practice. Psychol. Rev. 125, 592–605 (2018).
9. Barbey, A. K. Network neuroscience theory of human intelligence.
39. Frischkorn, G. & Schubert, A.-L. Cognitive models in intelligence
Trends Cogn. Sci. 22, 8–20 (2018).
research: advantages and recommendations for their application. J. Intell. 6,
10. Steyvers, M., Hawkins, G. E., Karayanidis, F. & Brown, S. D. A large-scale
34 (2018).
analysis of task switching practice effects across the lifespan. Proc. Natl Acad.
40. Melby-LervÅg, M., Redick, T. S. & Hulme, C. Working memory training does
Sci. USA 116, 17735–17740 (2019).
not improve performance on measures of intelligence or other measures of
11. Steyvers, M. & Benjamin, A. S. The joint contribution of participation and
‘far transfer’ evidence from a meta-analytic review. Perspect. Psychol. Sci. 11,
performance to learning functions: exploring the effects of age in large-scale
512–534 (2016).
data sets. Behav. Res. Methods 51, 1531–1543 (2019).
41. Simons, D. J. et al. Do ‘brain-training’ programs work? Psychol. Sci. Public
12. Donner, Y. & Hardy, J. L. Piecewise power laws in individual learning curves.
Interest 17, 103–186 (2016).
Psychon. Bull. Rev. 22, 1308–1319 (2015).
13. Ilin, A. & Raiko, T. Practical approaches to principal component analysis in
acknowledgements
the presence of missing values. J. Machine Learning Res. 11, 1957–2000
(2010). Feedback on the task feature categorization framework was provided by A. Kaluszka,
14. Tipping, M. E. & Bishop, C. M. Probabilistic principal component analysis. O. Claflin, A. Osman and N. Ng. The authors received no specific funding for this work.
J. R. Stat. Soc. B 61, 611–622 (1999).
15. Lim, Y.J. & Teh, Y.W. Variational Bayesian approach to movie rating author contributions
prediction. In Proc. International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and M.S. and R.J.S. planned the research. R.J.S. provided the data. M.S. analysed the data.
Data Mining 15–21 (ACM, 2007). M.S. and R.J.S. interpreted the results and wrote the paper.
NatuRe HuMaN BeHavIouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTurE HuMaN BEHaviour Articles
Competing interests Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to M.S. or R.J.S.
R.J.S. is an employee of Lumos Labs and owns stock in the company. M.S. has no Peer review information Primary Handling Editor: Marike Schiffer.
competing interests.
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
additional information
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
Extended data is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-020-00935-3.
published maps and institutional affiliations.
Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2020
s41562-020-00935-3.
NatuRe HuMaN BeHavIouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
AArrttiicclleess NNaaTTuurrEE HHuuMMaaNN BBEEHHaavviioouurr
Extended Data Fig. 1 | task features for cognitive tasks grouped by process, stimulus, input method, and game design. Solid circles indicate the presence
of the task feature. The primary cognitive area associated with each task is given between parentheses.
NatuRe HuMaN BeHavIouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NNaaTTuurrEE HHuuMMaaNN BBEEHHaavviioouurr AArrttiicclleess
Extended Data Fig. 2 | Glossary of task features. Definitions are provided for each process, stimulus, input method and game design feature used to
describe the cognitive tasks.
NatuRe HuMaN BeHavIouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
AArrttiicclleess NNaaTTuurrEE HHuuMMaaNN BBEEHHaavviioouurr
Extended Data Fig. 3 | See next page for caption.
NatuRe HuMaN BeHavIouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NNaaTTuurrEE HHuuMMaaNN BBEEHHaavviioouurr AArrttiicclleess
Extended Data Fig. 3 | Inferred latent learning factors with five factors. Top panel: the heatmap visualizes the latent learning factors (columns) across
games (rows). Positive (negative) values are visualized by brown (blue) colours. Each latent learning factor corresponds to a group of 8 columns, where
the columns within a group correspond to different stages of practice (practice increases from left to right). Cognitive tasks are coloured according to
primary task domain. Bottom panel: correlations between latent learning factors and manually derived task features. Positive (negative) correlations are
illustrated by red (blue) colours. The hierarchical tree visualizes the similarity between the task features on the basis of the pattern of correlations between
task feature and latent factors. Task features are grouped by process, stimulus, and game design features.
NatuRe HuMaN BeHavIouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
AArrttiicclleess NNaaTTuurrEE HHuuMMaaNN BBEEHHaavviioouurr
Extended Data Fig. 4 | See next page for caption.
NatuRe HuMaN BeHavIouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NNaaTTuurrEE HHuuMMaaNN BBEEHHaavviioouurr AArrttiicclleess
Extended Data Fig. 4 | Inferred latent learning factors with seven factors. Top panel: the heatmap visualizes the latent learning factors (columns) across
games (rows). Positive (negative) values are visualized by brown (blue) colours. Each latent learning factor corresponds to a group of 8 columns, where
the columns within a group correspond to different stages of practice (practice increases from left to right). Cognitive tasks are coloured according to
primary task domain. Bottom panel: correlations between latent learning factors and manually derived task features. Positive (negative) correlations are
illustrated by red (blue) colours. The hierarchical tree visualizes the similarity between the task features on the basis of the pattern of correlations between
task feature and latent factors. Task features are grouped by process, stimulus, and game design features.
NatuRe HuMaN BeHavIouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
AArrttiicclleess NNaaTTuurrEE HHuuMMaaNN BBEEHHaavviioouurr
Extended Data Fig. 5 | See next page for caption.
NatuRe HuMaN BeHavIouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NNaaTTuurrEE HHuuMMaaNN BBEEHHaavviioouurr AArrttiicclleess
Extended Data Fig. 5 | Inferred latent learning factors after oblique rotation (promax) that results in non-orthogonal factors. Top panel: the heatmap
visualizes the latent learning factors (columns) across games (rows). Positive (negative) values are visualized by brown (blue) colours. Each latent learning
factor corresponds to a group of 8 columns, where the columns within a group correspond to different stages of practice (practice increases from left
to right). Cognitive tasks are coloured according to primary task domain. The matrix shows the correlations between factors. Bottom panel: correlations
between latent learning factors and manually derived task features. Positive (negative) correlations are illustrated by red (blue) colours. The hierarchical
tree visualizes the similarity between the task features on the basis of the pattern of correlations between task feature and latent factors. Task features are
grouped by process and stimulus features.
NatuRe HuMaN BeHavIouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
AArrttiicclleess NNaaTTuurrEE HHuuMMaaNN BBEEHHaavviioouurr
Extended Data Fig. 6 | Changes in predicted learning curves based on changes in individual scores for individual factors. For each factor (row), the
blue, black, and red lines show the predicted learning curves for 10, 50, and 90 percentile scores on that particular factor and median scores on all other
factors. Therefore, the red (blue) lines show the predicted learning curves for individuals who score high (low) on that factor while holding constant the
contribution of other factors. Intercept differences are highlighted with circles at the start of the learning curve. To facilitate comparison, the vertical axis is
the same for each particular task (column) but is different across tasks. Tasks are ordered by primary domain (colour).
NatuRe HuMaN BeHavIouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
1
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Corresponding author(s): Mark Steyvers and Robert J. Schafer
Last updated by author(s): 6/11/2020
Reporting Summary
Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency
in reporting. For further information on Nature Research policies, see Authors & Referees and the Editorial Policy Checklist.
Statistics
For all statistical analyses, confirm that the following items are present in the figure legend, table legend, main text, or Methods section.
n/a Confirmed
The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
A statement on whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided
Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.
A description of all covariates tested
A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
A full description of the statistical parameters including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient)
AND variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)
For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted
Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.
For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated
Our web collection on statistics for biologists contains articles on many of the points above.
Software and code
Policy information about availability of computer code
Data collection No software was used for data collection.
Data analysis We used code for Bayesian PCA based on the paper as described by Ilin & Andraiko (2010) in the Journal of Machine Learning Research
(vol 11, pp. 1957–2000). The code is included in repository we make available at https://osf.io/g9zkf
For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors/reviewers.
We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Research guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.
Data
Policy information about availability of data
All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable:
- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets
- A list of figures that have associated raw data
- A description of any restrictions on data availability
The original and preprocessed versions of the data can be accessed at: https://osf.io/g9zkf
Field-specific reporting
Please select the one below that is the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.
Life sciences Behavioural & social sciences Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences
2
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/documents/nr-reporting-summary-flat.pdf
Behavioural & social sciences study design
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
Study description We analyze the latent structure of learning trajectories from 36,297 individuals as they learned 51 different tasks on the Lumosity online
cognitive training platform. Our study is a retrospective data analysis of pre-existing data. The data is longitudinal and tracks user
performance in each task over time. The data is cross-sectional as it allows comparisons of different age groups and educational
backgrounds. Finally, the data is multivariate in the sense that for each user, the data includes performance scores across 51 different
cognitive tasks.
Research sample We performed a retrospective analysis of a sample of gameplay data based on 84 distinct cognitive games. The de-identified data sample
provided by Lumosity includes the gameplay event history for 36,297 individuals, 1,442,555 individual learning curves, and 50,374,056
gameplay events.
Sampling strategy This data sample was selected from the overall Lumosity database by focusing on users who have at least 500 lifetime gameplays. In
addition, because the focus of our research is on analyzing correlations across cognitive tasks, this data set only included users if 5% or
fewer of their gameplays were repetitions of the previous game. This criterion excludes individuals who choose to repeat specific games
rather than play from the broader game library. In addition, individuals were selected who signed up between Aug 1, 2013 and
December 31st, 2016, with an age at signup between 18 and 90. The country of origin was restricted to the US, Canada, or Australia with
English as the user's preferred language. Finally, individuals were included if at least 99% of their lifetime Lumosity gameplays were on
the web product (as opposed to mobile apps) and only the web data was included in the data sample. In total, the data set contains the
full gameplay history across tasks spanning a period from Aug 1, 2013 and June 30, 2019. The majority of users (80%) signed up with
Lumosity before Jan 1 2015. Users in this sample spent a median of 2 years on the platform.
Data collection The Lumosity platform provides a number of games that tap memory, attention, flexibility, speeded processing, and problem solving. In
the Lumosity program, individuals are given a recommended daily training session of five different cognitive training games. One five-
game session takes approximately 15 minutes to complete. Outside of the training sessions, Lumosity users can also opt to select and
play games directly from the entire library of available games. For the purpose of our analysis, we only analyzed the performance score at
the end of each gameplay and not the raw data of individual decisions/button presses within an individual gameplay.
Timing The data is based on a sample of user activity between Aug 1, 2013 and June 30, 2019.
Data exclusions As described in the Method section, for some of the cognitive tasks in the dataset, the available learning data was sparse in terms of the
number of individuals who performed the task or the total number of times individuals performed the task. To ensure that sufficient data
was available for our analyses, we filtered out any cognitive task that had fewer than 200 individuals at the 20th gameplay attempt. At
the learning curve level, we truncated the learning curve to the first 60 gameplays. The final dataset created after these filtering steps
includes the gameplay event history for 51 cognitive games, 36,297 individuals, 1,255,175 individual learning curves, and 36,736,286
single gameplay events.
Non-participation No users declined participation. This study is a retrospective data analysis of pre-existing data.
Randomization Users were not allocated into experimental groups (this was not a randomized study).
Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods
We require information from authors about some types of materials, experimental systems and methods used in many studies. Here, indicate whether each material,
system or method listed is relevant to your study. If you are not sure if a list item applies to your research, read the appropriate section before selecting a response.
Materials & experimental systems Methods
n/a Involved in the study n/a Involved in the study
Antibodies ChIP-seq
Eukaryotic cell lines Flow cytometry
Palaeontology MRI-based neuroimaging
Animals and other organisms
Human research participants
Clinical data