Articles
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-020-0828-7
Local economic benefits increase positivity
toward foreigners
Steven Liao 1, Neil Malhotra 2 ✉ and Benjamin J. Newman 3
Can exposure to discernible economic benefits associated with the presence of a high-socioeconomic status immigrant group
reduce xenophobic and antiforeigner attitudes? We explore this question using the case of Chinese internationals in the United
States and an exogenous influx of foreign capital associated with their presence. Using a difference-in-differences design with
panel data, along with analyses of pooled cross-sectional data, we find that immigration attitudes, as well as views towards
China, became more positive over time among Americans residing in locales whose economies were stimulated by Chinese
foreign investments. Our findings have implications for research on public attitudes towards immigration in an era of growing
flows of high-socioeconomic status immigrants to the United States and other immigrant-receiving nations.
T
o what extent does exposure to discernible economic ben- and economic growth10. These local benefits were especially criti-
efits associated with the presence of a high-socioeconomic cal in many US regions that were still recovering from the housing
status (SES) immigrant group reduce xenophobic attitudes? market crash of the late-2000s11. For example, media reports illus-
Scholarship on immigration politics over the past decade has pro- trate how local governments and companies in Texas were not only
duced a robust body of evidence that citizens in the United States aware of the tax-revenue and consumer-spending benefits that fol-
and other immigrant-receiving nations strongly prefer high- over lowed Chinese FREI but that they even approved development proj-
low-SES migrants1–3. The primary explanation offered for this is that ects and introduced direct flights to court Chinese buyers12. Reports
citizens’ preference for high-SES immigrants is due to economic also depict how local real estate agents have associated the growth
sociotropic considerations: high-SES immigrants are believed to in home purchases with Chinese buyers ‘whose children attend, or
generate more economic benefits (for example, strengthening the plan to attend, nearby colleges’ and recommended buying ‘where
economy and increasing tax revenues) and impose fewer costs (for the Chinese are buying because they perpetuate the price increase’13.
example, driving down wages and consuming public resources) Furthermore, even university administrators have assisted parents
than low-SES immigrants. of Chinese international students who were seeking to purchase US
One critical and testable implication of this research is that homes12. Indeed, while the academic and political discourse on the
the xenophobic and antiforeigner sentiment present among the benefits of high-SES immigration often centres on their provision
populace in many immigrant-receiving nations may be abated by of occupational skills, talent and entrepreneurship14, an increasingly
exposure to economic benefits brought about by the presence of important economic benefit associated with high-SES immigrants
high-SES immigrants. What is distinctly missing from the litera- is foreign capital—particularly given the growth of financial global-
ture, however, is a study that offers an empirically rigorous test of ization. The economic benefits stemming from such capital invest-
whether or not citizens react positively to a discernible economic ment are the focus of this study.
benefit generated by the presence of high-SES immigrants. In this Leveraging the shock, we use a difference-in-differences (DiD)
study, we provide such a test, focusing on an important economic analysis with panel data to assess whether Americans exposed to
benefit associated with the presence of high-SES Chinese immi- Chinese foreign investment became more positive toward foreign-
grants—foreign capital—and assessing whether Americans residing ers following the sudden inflow of capital. We then complement
in locales whose economies were stimulated by an exogenous influx this analysis with an investigation of pooled cross-sectional data.
of Chinese foreign capital became less hostile to immigrants gener- Overall, we find that xenophobic sentiment—specifically, immigra-
ally, and to China specifically, as a result. tion attitudes, as well as views toward China—became more positive
We use new administrative data on the annual number and loca- over time among Americans residing in locales whose economies
tion of Chinese international students4—an empirical proxy for were stimulated by Chinese FREI. Importantly, a range of placebo
recent exposure to the investments—and combine these data with tests rules out the possibility that our findings are driven by pre-
national panel survey data spanning 2010 to 2014. The linchpin treatment trends, unobserved local features, or untheorized tempo-
of our research design is the start of a nationwide anticorruption ral shocks. Finally, consistent with previous research15, the effects
campaign in China in November of 2012 that stimulated an exog- seem to be driven by sociotropic concerns as opposed to naked self-
enous shock in the influx of capital from China to the United States interest: there is limited evidence of a difference in how homeown-
in the form of foreign real estate investment (FREI). This influx of ers and non-homeowners responded to Chinese FREI, even though
FREI was distributed mainly to locales housing affluent Chinese homeowners experienced the most capital appreciation. Indeed, we
international students and led to substantial increases in housing uncover suggestive evidence that the effect of Chinese FREI expo-
values, which have been shown to provide local benefits such as sure on attitudes toward foreigners may be driven by the commu-
increased consumer spending5–7, firm investments8, employment9 notropic benefits it engenders. Specifically, we demonstrate through
1Department of Political Science, University of California, Riverside, Riverside, CA, USA. 2Graduate School of Business, Stanford University, Stanford, CA,
USA. 3Department of Public Policy and Political Science, University of California, Riverside, Riverside, CA, USA. ✉e-mail: neilm@stanford.edu
Nature HuMaN BeHaviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NAtUre HUmAN BeHAviOUr
a series of DiD analyses that Americans residing in locales exposed Hence, the effect of Chinese FREI exposure is ~13% of the effect of
to Chinese FREI witnessed greater increases in median income, education. As shown in Fig. 1b, the DiD estimate from equation (4)
employment, new business establishments and consumer spending based on an alternative operationalization of our exposure variable
than those residing in locales not exposed to Chinese FREI. is similar in size but more imprecisely estimated and not statistically
These findings contribute to a growing literature that uses a significant at the P = 0.05 level (0.41 percentage points, P = 0.07,
design-based, case-driven approach to assess the impact of immi- 95% CI = –0.86 to 0.03).
gration on natives’ attitudes and political behaviour16. Importantly, To assess the robustness of these results, we conduct a variety of
while these previous studies explore the causal effect of an influx of placebo checks. First, we perform temporal placebo checks. For a
people (immigrants), we analyse the causal effect of a discernible placebo version of equation (3), we see if changes in Chinese FREI
economic benefit (foreign capital) associated with the presence of exposure between 2012 and 2014 predict attitude change between
people (high-SES immigrants). While our study focuses on the US 2010 and 2012—before the anticorruption campaign was imple-
case, global trends in Chinese FREI suggest that our findings may be mented. As shown in column 1 of Supplementary Table 5, this DiD
generalizable beyond the United States. Many developed economies estimate is statistically insignificant and the opposite sign of what we
such as the United Kingdom, Canada and Australia experienced a present in Fig. 1. Similarly, when we fit a version of equation (4) in
similar surge in Chinese FREI and an associated boost in their local which we predict the change in attitudes from 2010 to 2012 with the
economies during the same period17. Given that (1) the United States 2012-level of Chinese FREI exposure, we again find that the estimate
is one of the most preferred destinations in the world for Chinese is oppositely signed and statistically insignificant (see column 2 of
homebuyers18, (2) Chinese immigrants are strongly associated with Supplementary Table 5). Finally, we also conduct similar analyses
the model minority stereotype and (3) Chinese economic invest- as in equations (3) and (4) except only examine changes between
ments in the United States expanded at a crucial time in the wake of 2010 and 2012—when there was no anticorruption campaign—as
the Global Financial Crisis, our findings should provide insights on opposed to changes between 2012 and 2014. Again, we observe
the upper bound of a positive communotropic effect of higher-SES insignificant and oppositely signed point estimates (see columns 3
immigrants (a ‘most likely case’). As such, this study is well-designed and 4 of Supplementary Table 5). The results point to an effect of the
for identifying mechanisms that heretofore have been difficult to anticorruption campaign per se as opposed to general secular trends
observe. If we fail to find evidence for economic benefits as a key in both Chinese undergraduate mobility and immigration attitudes.
explanatory variable even in this most likely case, then it suggests Next, we conduct placebo tests using international student pop-
that the literature’s focus on this mechanism may be misguided. ulations demonstrated in the Methods to be unrelated to the geo-
To be sure, prior research documents how exposure to Asian graphic distribution of Chinese FREI in the United States—namely,
immigration reduces xenophobic attitudes19–22. This work, how- Indian undergraduates and Chinese graduate students. First,
ever, relies on model-based approaches using cross-sectional data we re-estimate equations (3) and (4) but use the log of the num-
that are susceptible to concerns over omitted variable bias linked ber of Indian undergraduates. Note that there was no exogenous
to residential self-selection. Other research has examined the effect policy change by the Indian government in 2013 related to FREI.
of local contextual features such as fiscal pressure23 and local eco- Further, if our estimates are simply picking up an unobserved fea-
nomic forces24. However, the independent variables in these studies ture of localities, then the number of Indian undergraduates should
are endogenously selected domestic policies. The uniqueness of our produce a similar effect since Indian and Chinese undergraduates
study is that we examine the effect of an exogenous shock in capital tend to target similar universities. For example, among the top 100
investments generated from external (push) factors rather than inter- universities Chinese international undergraduates have enroled in
nal (pull) factors generated by domestic politics. Finally, our findings since 2000, 52% overlap with the top 100 universities for Indian
are relevant given demographic patterns in the United States. Over international undergraduates. In contrast, there is only a 25% over-
the past 10 years, immigration from Asia has surpassed Latino immi- lap in top universities between Chinese and Canadian international
gration and Asian-Americans are forecasted to be the largest ethnic undergraduates4. As shown in columns 1 and 3 in Supplementary
minority group by mid-century25. Relevant to the study of the politics Table 6, the point estimates associated with the interaction terms
of immigration, the rise in Asian immigration has meant growth in are smaller and statistically insignificant when focusing on Indian
the population of high-SES immigrants—and the potential influx of undergraduates instead of Chinese undergraduates. We also esti-
foreign capital and associated economic benefits. mate models using Chinese graduate students instead of Chinese
Here, we present results based on two independent studies we undergraduate students. Chinese graduate students, who are mainly
conducted. Demonstrating similar findings across two independent covered by fellowships/grants and whose families are less capable
datasets yielding distinct analytic approaches increases our confi- of investing26, represent a different population who were generally
dence in the findings and reduces the possibility that we have found unaffected by the anticorruption campaign. As shown in columns
a result due to chance alone. In the discussion, we note various limi- 2 and 4 of Supplementary Table 6, the point estimates associated
tations of the study, including our use of proxy measures for xeno- with the interaction terms are small and statistically insignificant.
phobic attitudes. The null effects for Chinese graduate students show that the effects
of Chinese undergraduate students are due to Chinese FREI per se
results and not some untheorized temporal shock that caused attitudes to
Study 1. We first present the results of Study 1, the analysis of panel become more positive in places housing Chinese internationals in
data from the Cooperative Congressional Election Study (CCES). general—as such an unobserved shock would affect attitudes in con-
As shown in Fig. 1a, the DiD estimate of Chinese FREI exposure texts housing Chinese graduate students as well. Instead, the effects
(β from equation (3)) is –0.50 (P = 0.04, two-tailed, 95% confi- are confined to affluent Chinese international undergraduate stu-
3
dence interval (CI) = –0.97 to –0.03; see Supplementary Table 4 dents, who are uniquely linked to FREI and increasing home values.
for details). This suggests that a one-unit increase in Chinese FREI Lastly, we explore the potential mechanisms underlying the main
exposure makes people more pro-immigration by 0.50 percentage result. As an important caveat, firmly establishing mechanisms is
points. Given that the range of the Chinese FREI exposure variable extremely difficult in social science research27. Hence, these findings
is 7.4 units, this suggests an overall effect of 3.7 percentage points. should be viewed as more tentative. We test two competing mecha-
How big is this in substantive terms? The effect of moving from nisms: (1) the FREI shock increased positive views towards foreign-
the bottom to the top category of education—arguably the stron- ers because it improved personal financial positions (pocketbook
gest predictor of immigration attitudes15—is 28.5 percentage points. considerations) and (2) the investment shock increased positive
Nature HuMaN BeHaviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NAtUre HUmAN BeHAviOUr Articles
1.0
0.5
0
−0.5
−1.0
views because it improved the local economy in which people However, we do find evidence consistent with the second mecha-
resided (communotropic considerations). nism described above—increased exposure to Chinese FREI strength-
We find little evidence for the first mechanism—that residents ened CCES respondents’ local economy between 2012 and 2014. We
affected by Chinese FREI exposure became more pro-immigrant use four different ZIP-code level measures of the strength of CCES
simply due to their material interests as property values increased. respondents’ local economy: employment rate, median household
The housing market crash of the late-2000s sent many households income, the number of business establishments and the number of
into negative equity on their homes (the principal value of the mort- new vehicle registrations. We rely on the US Census Bureau for data
gage is greater than the value of the property). Thus, it is possible on the first three measures and acquired data for the fourth measure
that ‘underwater’ homeowners became more pro-immigrant as the from Hedges & Company. The fourth measure follows a well-estab-
surge in Chinese FREI helped them climb out of negative equity. In lished literature in economics that uses new vehicle registrations
column 2 of Supplementary Table 7, we fit a model analysing whether to proxy for levels of local consumer spending6. In Supplementary
the Chinese FREI effect differs between homeowners who owned a Tables 8–11, we fit DiD models similar to our previous analyses but
property throughout the panel and other respondents. We also con- substituting in these four measures as the outcome variable to anal-
trol for demographic characteristics that may be correlated with yse whether Chinese FREI exposure strengthened CCES respon-
homeowner status. We find that the effect of Chinese FREI exposure dents’ local economy. We also control for ZIP-code characteristics
on anti-immigration attitudes is not significantly different between that may be correlated with both Chinese FREI exposure and the
homeowners and non-homeowners. The interaction term between strength of the local economy. Fig. 2b–e presents the main results.
homeowner status and FREI exposure is not statistically significant at Substantively, we find that increasing exposure to Chinese FREI
the P = 0.05 level (β = 1.17, P = 0.08, 95% CI = –0.16 to 2.51) and the from 1 s.d. below the mean to above (increasing the ZIP-code popu-
opposite sign of what would be expected if self-interest was driving lation of Chinese international undergraduate students from around
the result. Fig. 2a presents the size of the substantive effects for each 1 to 13) increases a CCES ZIP code’s (1) employment rate by 0.45
group when increasing Chinese FREI exposure from 1 s.d. below the percentage points (95% CI = 0.34–0.57, 0.05 s.d. of the outcome), (2)
mean to above. Overall, the finding is consistent with research that median household income by US$603 (95% CI = 401–803, 0.03 s.d.
has shown that homeowners and renters often share similar political of the outcome), (3) number of business establishments by 2.02
preferences when it comes to issues involving housing28. (95% CI = 0.70–4.12, 0.004 s.d. of the outcome) and (4) number of
)gol(
stneduts
fo
tceffe
DiD
0.10
0.05
0
−0.05
−0.10
)gol(
stneduts
fo
tceffe
ni
ecnereffid
kcohs-tsoP
a b
2012 Base
Concurrent Chinese undergraduates Extended Full
Chinese undergraduates
Fig. 1 | the effect of Chinese Frei exposure on individual attitudes. a, CCES panel data for 2012−2014 anti-immigration attitudes showing the DiD effect
of Chinese international undergraduate students: CCES estimates using concurrent (n = 17,264) and 2012 (n = 17,264) measures of Chinese FREI exposure.
b, Pew cross-sectional data for 2008−2015 perceived China threat showing post-shock difference in effect of Chinese international undergraduate
students: Pew estimates from baseline (n = 7,526), extended (n = 6,743) and full (n = 6,730) model specifications, respectively. Both a and b show point
estimates and 95% CIs. See Supplementary Tables 4 and 12 for details of model specifications and estimates.
15
10
5
0
−5
−10
−15 Homeowners
Non−homeowners
4102−2102
ni
atleD
)%(
sedutitta
noitargimmi-itna
0.6
0.3
0
−0.3
−0.6
4102−2102
ni
atleD
)%(
etar
tnemyolpme
800
400
0
−400
−800
4102−2102
ni
atleD
)$SU(
emocni
dlohesuoh
naidem
4
2
0
−2
−4
4102−2102
ni
atleD
stnemhsilbatse
ssenisub
fo rebmun
15
10
5
0
−5
−10
−15
4102−2102
ni
atleD
snoitartsiger
elcihev
wen
fo rebmun
a b c d e
Fig. 2 | Potential mechanisms: substantive effects of Chinese Frei exposure. a–e, The graphs show point estimates and 95% CIs for CCES respondents
(a) and CCES ZIP codes (b–e). Effects are based on 1,000 Monte Carlo simulations when increasing Chinese FREI exposure from 1 s.d. below the mean to
1 s.d. above it. The simulations use the empirical distribution of the data (a, n = 15,118; b, n = 11,961; c, n = 11,956; d, n = 11,959; e, n = 11,961) and full model
specifications. See Supplementary Tables 7–11 for details on model specifications and estimates.
Nature HuMaN BeHaviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NAtUre HUmAN BeHAviOUr
new vehicle registrations by 10.3 (95% CI = 7.74–13.24, 0.01 s.d. of Pre-anticorruption Post-anticorruption
the outcome). Overall, our finding that the positive effect of capital
3.0
infusion produces communotropic rather than pocketbook effects is
consistent with many previous studies that have found that sociotro-
pic concerns, as opposed to self-interest, influence immigration atti-
tudes15. It is important to note, however, that our findings regarding
2.5
mechanisms are not dispositive and the evidence could be read in
multiple ways. For example, the positive effect of FREI on local eco-
nomic characteristics could have also provided pocketbook benefits
to individuals, which may then explain people’s attitudes.
2.0
In summary, the findings from Study 1 show that exposure to
Chinese FREI arising from China’s 2013 anticorruption campaign
reduced anti-immigration attitudes among Americans. The results
also suggest that exposure to discernable regional economic ben-
1.5
efits associated with the presence of high-SES immigrants can make
people more positive toward foreigners. By demonstrating a case
where attitudes toward immigrants improve in response to the
materialization of local economic benefits tied to a high-SES immi-
1.0 Mean +1 s.d. Mean +1 s.d.
grant group, the findings support the claim that citizens prefer high-
SES immigrants for economic sociotropic reasons. More broadly, 0 1 2 3 0 1 2 3
the findings lie in sharp contrast to the bulk of research showing Chinese international undergraduate students population (log)
that exposure to primarily low-SES immigrants induces threat and
makes people more anti-immigrant15,20,29.
Study 2. We now turn to Study 2, which analyses pooled cross-sec-
tional survey data collected from 2008–2015 by the Pew Research
Center. Overall, we find that, across various model specifications
and estimators, increased exposure to Chinese FREI reduces
respondents’ perceptions of threat from China. Fig. 1b summa-
rizes the main results (see Supplementary Table 12 for details). For
example, estimates from the full ordinary least squares (OLS) model
specification (equation (5)) show that a one-unit increase in expo-
sure to Chinese FREI reduces respondents’ perceived level of threat as they do not imply higher Chinese FREI exposure. Here, we re-
from China by around 0.04 units (on a linear scale, P = 0.03, two- estimate equation (5) but substitute Chinese undergraduates with
tailed, 95% CI = –0.08 to –0.004) during the post-campaign period the log number of each type of placebo student.
compared to the pre-campaign period. We find that the post-shock effects of Chinese FREI exposure
To help gauge the size of the substantive effect, Fig. 3 plots changes on the three placebo countries were statistically insignificant and
in the predicted level of a perceived threat from China as ZIP codes smaller compared to the main results (see Supplementary Table 13
increase their exposure to Chinese FREI. The left panel of Fig. 3 shows for details). Furthermore, the direction of the effects was mixed—
that, before the anticorruption campaign, ZIP codes with minimum point estimates were negatively signed for Russia and Iran but pos-
exposure (0, which is still greater than 1 s.d. below the mean) see China itively signed for North Korea. Next, we find that the post-shock
as a threat at the level of 2.44 (95% CI = 2.36–2.51). Furthermore, effects of the placebo students on the perception of a China threat
increasing a ZIP code’s exposure from 0 to 1 s.d. above the mean (2.33, were also statistically insignificant and smaller in magnitude (see
or exp(2.33) ≈ 10 Chinese international undergraduate students) has Supplementary Table 14 for details). Lastly, ordered logistic regres-
no statistically significant effect on changes in threat perceptions (0.03, sions yield null findings similar to the results of OLS regressions
95% CI = –0.04 to 0.10). Since the anticorruption campaign, however, (see Supplementary Tables 13 and 14).
the right panel of Fig. 3 shows that a similar increase in exposure Together, the findings from our second study show that exposure
reduces the perceived China threat by around 0.075 (95% CI = –0.13 to Chinese FREI is associated with lower levels of a perceived threat
to –0.02), which represents ~4% of the variation in the outcome vari- from China. These findings suggest that the influx of foreign capi-
able or a 0.11 s.d. change. In comparison, increasing a respondent’s tal tied to the presence of an immigrant group can generate positive
education level from 1 s.d. below the mean to above reduces the level impressions of that group’s origin country. These findings comple-
of perceived China threat by around 0.09. In other words, the effect of ment the general pro-immigration effects of Chinese FREI exposure
Chinese FREI exposure is ~83% of the effect of education. found in our first study. Moreover, these findings provide a validity
We conduct two sets of placebo tests to assess the robustness check on our research design by demonstrating a unique and sys-
of these results. First, the surge in Chinese FREI stemming from tematic connection between exposure to Chinese FREI and attitudes
the anticorruption campaign should only affect respondents’ per- toward China. Lastly, a distinct possibility at the outset of Study 2
ceived threat from China and not from other countries. To test this, was that exposure to Chinese investments might trigger a backlash
we examine the impact of Chinese FREI exposure on the level of by augmenting the perceived threat of China via the nation’s grow-
the perceived threat from placebo countries such as North Korea, ing economic power. For example, recent research finds that Chinese
Russia and Iran. In particular, we re-estimate equation (5) using firm-led foreign direct investment in sensitive industries can trigger
Pew survey questions about the level of a perceived threat from each threat perceptions among citizens in recipient nations30. This possi-
placebo country as the outcome variable. Second, we again examine bility, however, was not borne out in the data, as we uncover sugges-
the two categories of placebo international students—Indian under- tive evidence that exposure to Chinese FREI reduced perceptions of
graduates and Chinese graduate students. Our expectations suggest threat from China. Thus, our findings suggest that attitudes toward
that increases in the population size of either of these placebo stu- the influx of foreign capital can be more nuanced, especially when
dents should not change respondents’ perceived threat from China they generate wide-ranging and substantial communotropic benefits.
taerht
anihC
deviecrep
detciderP
Fig. 3 | Predicted perception of China threat. This figure shows the
predicted level and 95% CIs of perceived China threat in a ZIP code as its
exposure to Chinese FREI increases. Predictions are based on 1,000 Monte
Carlo simulations using the full model specification and the empirical
distribution of the data (n = 6,730). We truncate the x axis to 2 s.d. above
and below the mean. The vertical dashed lines represent the mean (1.15)
and 1 s.d. above the mean (2.33). See Supplementary Table 12 for details on
model specifications and estimates.
Nature HuMaN BeHaviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NAtUre HUmAN BeHAviOUr Articles
0.04
0.02
0
−0.02
Discussion legal immigration are highly correlated with their preferences over
This study has demonstrated that exposure to economic benefits policies concerning illegal immigration35, and that prejudice toward
via an exogenous increase in foreign capital investment associ- immigrant ethnic groups serves as an important predictor of pref-
ated with the presence of a high-SES immigrant group resulted in erences over policies affecting legal and illegal migrants alike35,36.
more pro-immigrant and less xenophobic attitudes. While there are In sum, with respect to Study 1, our focus on immigration policy
clear strengths of our research design, and we replicate our findings preferences captures an important dimension of xenophobic and
across different datasets and outcome variables, there are important antiforeigner sentiment, and one that probably reflects—albeit indi-
limitations of our analyses that should be acknowledged. rectly—attitudes toward immigrants themselves.
First, one assumption we make is that residents were aware that Turning to Study 2, one limitation worth noting is that percep-
rising home values (and consequent improving economic condi- tion of threat from a foreign nation is a less commonly used indica-
tions) were linked to Chinese FREI. Unfortunately, we were unable to tor of xenophobic and antiforeigner sentiment, and similar to the
locate any survey data with questions directly asking about Chinese outcome in Study 1, it does not directly capture attitudes toward
foreign investment or its link to economic conditions in respon- Chinese immigrants. That said, research exploring public opin-
dents’ residential context. In the absence of such data, we are unable ion in international relations finds that ethnocentrism and hostil-
to provide any direct tests of the assumption of resident awareness ity toward ethnic outgroups are highly predictive of opposition to
of the connection between rising home values and Chinese FREI. free trade and foreign investment37. Furthermore, research focusing
At best, we are able to offer evidence that Americans were aware of specifically on US–China relations identifies Americans’ views on
the presence of Chinese international students in their local context, globalization, international trade, and immigration as interrelated
that the inflow of Chinese FREI had demonstrable and wide-reach- attitudes linked to xenophobic and protectionist stands toward
ing positive economic impacts, and that key stakeholders in recipi- China38. Indeed, accounts of the 2016 US Presidential Election sug-
ent communities (for example, local media, real estate professionals gest that support for Donald Trump was rooted in a set of interrelated
and university administrators) were keenly aware of the connec- political attitudes, including anti-immigrant sentiment39 and oppo-
tions between Chinese FREI and local economic conditions. In the sition to free trade agreements like the Trans-Pacific Partnership40.
Methods, we report findings from the 2008 and 2012 Collaborative In short, while not directly measuring attitudes toward immigrants
Multiracial Post-Election Surveys indicating that the local presence or immigration policy, existing research demonstrates that percep-
of Chinese international students increased American residents’ tions of threat from foreign nations are linked to ethnocentrism,
perception of the presence of Asians in their neighbourhood. In the opposition to immigration and trade protectionism.
end, if people were completely unaware of the link between Chinese Beyond serving as a feasible indicator of antiforeigner sentiment,
FREI and local economic conditions, it would be unlikely for us to a key benefit of the usage of a perceived threat from China as the
have found a positive attitudinal effect, and any lack of awareness of outcome measure in Study 2 is that it serves as a validity check. In
such a link should push our estimates toward zero. theory, there should be a correspondence between the sender-nation
A second limitation of our analysis concerns the outcome vari- of our FREI treatment and threat perceptions. This is precisely what
ables we use in each study. Ideally, our analyses would have esti- we find: exposure to the Chinese FREI shock was associated with
mated the effect of exposure to Chinese FREI on attitudes toward reduced threat perception from China but had no statistically dis-
Chinese immigrants. However, we were unable to locate any sur- cernible effects on threat perceptions from other nations (for exam-
vey data containing questions soliciting attitudes specifically about ple, Russia, Iran and North Korea).
Chinese immigrants during the relevant period under analysis. As One direction for future research is to examine the scope condi-
such, our use of immigration policy preferences as the outcome tions of our findings. The results presented here may be specific to
measure in Study 1 provides only an indirect view on the effect of the unique situation studied—wealthy Chinese homebuyers infus-
exposure to Chinese FREI on attitudes toward immigrants them- ing capital into US housing markets in the wake of the global finan-
selves or even Chinese immigrants specifically. That said, prefer- cial crisis. We encourage scholars to explore further how economic
ences over immigration policies are a very common indicator of benefits stemming from immigration influence policy attitudes and
xenophobic sentiment in the social science literature16,29,31–33, and policymaking. At the same time, our findings demonstrate the criti-
there is abundant evidence that views toward immigrants and immi- cal influence that economic benefits associated with immigration
gration policies are highly correlated32,34,35. Finally, while the policies can have on politics. According to surveys conducted by the Pew
we analyse in Study 1 concern ‘irregular’ or illegal migrants, existing Research Center, there is widespread perception that China repre-
research finds that Americans’ preferences over policies concerning sents a competitive threat to the United States41, with roughly a third
emoh
no
tceffe
DiD
detamitsE
)gol(
secirp
0.04
0.02
0
−0.02
emoh
no
tceffe
DiD
detamitsE
)gol(
secirp
250
200
150
100
50
0
2000 2005 2010 2015
)sdnasuoht(
noitalupop
latoT
a b c
2012−2015 Chinese
2012−2014 undergraduates
2012−2013
Chinese
graduates
2011−2012 Indian
undergraduates Indian undergraduates
2012−2013
Chinese graduates
2012−2013
Fig. 4 | the effect of Chinese Frei exposure on home prices in uS ZiP codes. a, Population of Chinese international undergraduates, 2012. b, Population
of placebo international students, 2012. c, Population of international students in the United States, 2000−2016, by year, country of origin and academic
level using administrative data. Data in a and b present DiD point estimates and 95% CIs. The sample sizes underlying estimates in a are (from left to
right): n = 24,831, n = 24,851, n = 24,821 and n = 24,723. The sample size for estimates in b is n = 24,851. Home prices rely on Zillow’s measure of median
value per square feet (log). See Supplementary Table 1 for details on model specifications and estimates.
Nature HuMaN BeHaviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NAtUre HUmAN BeHAviOUr
of Americans thinking that limiting China’s power and influence should not observe greater increases in home prices in ZIP codes with either a
should be a major foreign policy goal42 and most believing that China larger population of placebo Chinese international graduate students or Indian
international undergraduate students. The former group represents students who are
will overtake the United States as the global superpower43. That eco-
from the same national origin but mainly rely on institutional funding and whose
nomic benefits can increase positivity toward foreigners, and China families are less capable of investing26. The latter represents students who are at the
specifically, given this opinion environment is telling of the impor- same academic level but from an origin country not tied to China’s investors and
tance of observing the economic benefits of immigration in counter- the anticorruption campaign. Lastly, the positive effect of a ZIP code’s population of
ing the type of nativist sentiments typically observed among citizens Chinese international undergraduate students on home prices should be substantially
smaller before the anticorruption campaign and the acceleration of Chinese FREI.
in the United States and other immigrant-receiving nations.
Formally, we fit the DiD model below following existing research4:
Methods M zt = λz+P t+β 1(P tC z,2012)+β 2(P tS z,2012)+β 3U zt+β 4P tU zt+ϵzt (1)
Research design. Our research design takes advantage of an exogenous shock in
where the outcome variable M measures the log-transformed median home value
Chinese FREI following the inauguration of an anticorruption campaign in China zt
per square feet (US$) in ZIP code z in year t using data from Zillow. The treatment-
in late 2012. According to data from the National Association of Realtors, Chinese
condition variable C indicates the natural log of the population of Chinese
acquisitions of US residential property has grown substantially in recent years, z,2012
international undergraduate students in 2012 (right before the anticorruption
increasing more than sevenfold from US$4 billion in 2009 to around US$29 billion
in 201544. However, closer scrutiny of the data shows that Chinese acquisitions were campaign). The treatment-period dummy variable P t equals 1 for years starting
mostly stagnant between 2010 and 2012. Furthermore, much of the growth occurred from 2013 and 0 otherwise. The variable λz represents ZIP-code fixed effects, which
accounts for any time-invariant features of ZIP codes that are likely to be correlated
between 2013 and 2015, with increases of around US$8 billion per year. In fact,
with the presence of Chinese international undergraduate students. For example,
China surpassed Canada and became the largest foreign buyer of US homes in 2013
college towns may be more diverse or hold more human capital and thus recover
(see Supplementary Fig. 1). The notable acceleration of Chinese FREI since 2013
faster after the housing market crash. Note that ZIP-code fixed effects subsume
matches the start of Chinese President Xi Jinping’s anticorruption campaign and
increasing political risks. This ongoing campaign began following the end of the 18th the constitutive terms for international students as they do not vary over t. S z,2012
National Congress of the Communist Party of China in November 2012. In 2014 measures the population of placebo international students discussed above. U zt
alone, the Chinese Communist Party disciplined more than 71,000 party members45. indicates time-varying covariates that capture minor imbalances across ZIP codes
As of July 2018, more than 2,400 officials have been arrested or sentenced in criminal that may undermine assumptions about parallel trends. These include several
corruption cases46. The mass crackdown led to the fear of political targeting and asset ZIP-code factors that can affect the demand and supply of local homes but also
expropriation, which helped accelerate Chinese capital flight47. influence home prices, such as employment share, the share of adult population,
The massive spike in Chinese FREI beginning in 2013 represents a shock to population density (log), the share of white population, median household income,
local recipient economies throughout the United States that is exogenous to local the share of population enroled in college or above, the total population enroled in
residents’ political attitudes or US domestic policies. As such, our causal variable of college or above, effective real estate tax rates (%) and the share of vacant houses.
interest is American citizens’ exposure to Chinese FREI. The most direct measure The Census Bureau provides data for these covariates since 2011. To account
of this variable would capture home purchases in the United States by individuals for any trending effects from these controls, we also include P tU zt in the model
residing in China. However, systematic data on specific US home purchases by specification. We cluster standard errors by ZIP codes to allow for within-unit
Chinese nationals are not readily available due to privacy and proprietary concerns. correlation of errors. The coefficient of interest is β 1, which is the DiD estimate
Further, many Chinese nationals form shell companies to purchase real estate for the price effect of exposure to Chinese FREI. We fit the model to four different
assets in the United States48. periods: 2011–2012, 2012–2013, 2012–2014 and 2012–2015.
Given these challenges, we argue that the best available option is to use the Fig. 4 summarizes the main results (see Supplementary Table 1 for formal
local presence of Chinese internationals as a proxy to capture variation throughout estimates of the regression models). A steady growth in the positive effect of
the United States in exposure to Chinese FREI. Specifically, we focus on a ZIP Chinese FREI exposure on home prices since the 2013 anticorruption campaign is
code’s population of Chinese international undergraduate students using new shown in Fig. 4a. Substantively, simulation results based on the 2012–2013 model
administrative data acquired through a Freedom of Information Act request to suggest that increasing Chinese international undergraduates from 1 s.d. below
US Immigration and Customs Enforcement4, which draws on individual-level the mean (0) to above the mean (38) raises a ZIP code’s median home value per
administrative records of every international student in the United States since square feet by US$6.2, which corresponds roughly to a US$15,200 spike in home
2000 to compute annual estimates for all ZIP-code tabulation areas. The idea is prices for a median-sized (2,457 ft2) single-family house completed in 2013. In
that these undergraduate students tend to come from more affluent families, and contrast, the effect was barely existent during the pretreatment period (2011–2012).
FREI follows affluent international students because it serves the dual purpose of Furthermore, Fig. 4b shows null or even negative effects between 2012–2013 by the
supporting child education and portfolio diversification. This idea is supported by placebo international students. Lastly, Fig. 4c illustrates relatively similar growth in
many existing surveys of Chinese FREI motivations18,44. As a result, we expect ZIP Chinese international undergraduate and graduate students between 2011 and 2013
codes with a larger population of Chinese international undergraduate students to based on the administrative data. This pattern suggests that the price effect is not
attract more Chinese FREI after the start of the campaign. simply due to the presence of Chinese international students but rather confined
Although spatial variation in Chinese international undergraduate students in to the presence of Chinese international students who attract FREI. Together, the
the United States is non-random and Americans’ exposure to them is subject to results provide extensive evidence supporting the validity of our research design.
selection bias, the change in Chinese FREI associated with this population before and As an additional validity check, we also examine the extent to which Americans
after November 2012 is exogenous to American citizens’ attitudes toward foreigners. were aware of the presence of Chinese international undergraduate students in
Americans’ attitudes did not play a role in Chinese domestic policy decisions about their local area of residence. Observing a treatment effect for exposure to Chinese
combating corruption. The research design accounts for such selection bias through FREI entails that citizens were aware of the presence of the foreign students drawing
between-ZIP-code differences in pretreatment attitudes. Furthermore, the nature these capital investments, as the awareness of these students underscores citizens’
of our DiD models allows us to carefully distinguish between the effects of people ability to make connections between improving local economic conditions, FREI
versus capital. In particular, the models estimate (1) the effect of exposure to Chinese and immigration. To test for Americans’ awareness of these students, we draw on
international undergraduate students in the pretreatment period, (2) the effect of the 2008 and 2012 Collaborative Multiracial Post-Election Surveys (CMPS, https://
exposure to these students in the post-treatment period and (3) the difference in the cmpsurvey.org/). The survey is unique because, to the best of our knowledge, no
effects of these students, which is attributed to the drastic influx of FREI after the other surveys ask Americans about the presence of Asian persons (native or foreign-
anticorruption campaign in locales housing Chinese international undergraduate born) in their local residential context. In particular, both the 2008 and 2012 CMPS
students. Lastly, since the distribution of Chinese international undergraduate ask the following questions: (1) “Would you describe the neighbourhood where
students among ZIP codes is highly skewed to the right, we take the natural log of the you currently live as mostly Black, mostly White, mostly Hispanic, mostly Asian,
measure to reduce the influence of extreme values in our analyses. or mixed?” and (2) “Is it almost entirely [answer to first question] or is it mostly
Using a series of DiD models that examine the effect of Chinese FREI exposure [answer to first question]?”. Following existing research49, we use respondents’
on local home prices (median value per square feet, Zillow, see http://www.zillow. answers to the two questions to create an ordinal measure of the perceived
com/research/data/), we demonstrate the suitability of the ZIP-code presence of prevalence of Asians in respondents’ neighbourhood: 0 = ‘partially’, 1 = ‘mostly’
Chinese international undergraduate students as a proxy for exposure to Chinese and 2 = ‘entirely’. We then fit the OLS regression model below to data from each
FREI. If the research design is valid, ZIP codes with a larger population of affluent survey to see if the local population of Chinese international undergraduates is
Chinese international undergraduate students right before the anticorruption systematically and positively linked to residents’ perception of the prevalence of
campaign (groups exposed to a high dosage of the treatment) should receive Asians in their neighbourhoods in that year:
more investments after the shock than ZIP codes that have a smaller population
(groups exposed to lower dosages of the treatment). A surge in Chinese FREI, in
N iz=α+β 1C z+β 2I iz+β 3U z+ϵiz (2)
turn, should (other things being equal) lead to greater local demand for housing where i indexes respondents, z indexes ZIP codes, N represents individual’s
iz
and thus larger increases in home prices in treated ZIP codes. In contrast, we perceived neighbourhood prevalence of Asians, C represents the log of Chinese
z
Nature HuMaN BeHaviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NAtUre HUmAN BeHAviOUr Articles
international undergraduate students in a ZIP code in the same year, α is the (https://www.pewresearch.org/) between 2008 and 2015 that each include a China-
intercept, and ϵizt is the stochastic error. I it stands in for respondent-level controls specific survey item: the 2008 September Political/Foreign Policy Survey, 2009
(age, education, white and income) while U indicates ZIP-code level controls June Political Survey, 2009 November ‘America’s Place in the World’ Survey, 2012
z
(median household income, population density, and the share of the population US–China Security Perceptions Project Survey, 2013 November ‘America’s Place in
with a Bachelor’s degree or higher). The coefficient of interest is β, of which a the World’ Survey, 2014 August Political Survey and the 2015 December Political
positive sign represents a positive correlation between the populat1 ion size of Survey. Each survey contains a question soliciting the perception of threat from
Chinese international undergraduates and respondents’ perceived prevalence of China and is a representative sample of adult Americans conducted by telephone
Asians. As robustness checks, we fit models with or without control covariates. using random digit dialling. Thus, this analysis builds on Study 1 by enabling us to
Additionally, we fit an ordered logistic regression model to account for the assess whether exposure to Chinese FREI influences attitudes concerning China
categorical nature of the dependent variable. specifically.
Overall, we find that the coefficient for the population of Chinese international The dependent variable is the perception of a China threat. In these seven
undergraduates is positive and statistically significant at α=0.05 across all model surveys, Pew asked respondents whether they think ‘China’s emergence as a
specifications, years and estimators (see Supplementary Tables 2 and 3 for details). world power’ is a ‘major threat, a minor threat, or not a threat to the well-being of
Together, these findings show supportive evidence that Americans were aware of the United States’. While the question does not directly ask respondents
the presence of Chinese international undergraduate students residing in their ZIP about their attitudes toward Chinese FREI per se, we believe that it reflects a
code of residence. general attitude toward growing Chinese influence via trade, investment and
immigration. To code the response to this question, Pew assigned the value of 1,
Study 1: CCES longitudinal data. Our first study takes advantage of a three- 2 and 3 for ‘major threat’, ‘minor threat’ and ‘not a threat’, respectively. We reverse
wave longitudinal panel collected as part of CCES (https://cces.gov.harvard. Pew’s coding so that 3 represents a ‘major threat’ and 1 represents ‘not a threat’, to
edu/). The CCES seeks to obtain a representative sample of Americans by be consistent with Study 1. Our independent variable is, again, Chinese
matching respondents who take surveys as part of an opt-in internet panel to FREI exposure.
administrative datasets such as the US Census Bureau and voter files. This sample- We pool the cross-sectional surveys and fit the following OLS regression model:
matching procedure has been shown to produce nationally representative data50.
Respondents completed both pre- and post-election surveys in 2010, 2012 and A i′ zt = α+β 1C zt+β 2P t+β 3(C zt×P t)+
(5)
2014. Given that the Chinese anticorruption campaign was rolled out in 2013, the β 4I it+β 5U zt+β 6(U zt×P t)+ϵizt
timing of the surveys provides us with an ideal opportunity to investigate how
immigration attitudes changed between 2012 and 2014. As discussed below, the
where i indexes respondents, z indexes ZIP codes and t indexes year. The outcome
2010 wave allows us to conduct placebo tests.
The dependent variable is anti-immigration attitudes. The CCES asked three variable A i′ zt represents individual perceptions about a China threat. The treatment-
questions related to immigration enforcement to the full sample of respondents condition variable C zt represents the log of Chinese international undergraduate
in all three waves. The questions were asked in a binary (yes/no) fashion where students in a ZIP code in a given year. The treatment-period dummy variable P t
respondents offered their opinions of various policy proposals about what “the takes on the value of 1 for surveys conducted in 2013 and after (the post-treatment
US government should do about immigration”: (1) “Grant legal status to all illegal period) and 0 otherwise. I it stands in for respondent-level controls while U zt
immigrants who have held jobs and paid taxes for at least 3 years and not been indicates ZIP-code level controls. Standard errors are clustered by ZIP code. For
convicted of any felony crime”; (2) “Increase the number of border patrols on the individual-level controls, we include a respondent’s age, education level, ethnicity,
US–Mexican border”; (3) “Allow police to question anyone they think may be income, party identification and ideology. For ZIP-code level controls, we account
in the country illegally”. While these items do not refer to China specifically, the for the median household income, population density and the share of the
three items generally tap an underlying latent construct (Cronbach’s α = 0.76) and population enroled in college or above. The coefficient of interest is β 3, which is the
reflect an anti-immigrant disposition. We average the three items and rescale so post-shock estimate of Chinese FREI exposure.
that the index lies between 0 (pro-immigration) and 100 (anti-immigration). The We fit three different model specifications. The baseline model only includes
independent variable is Chinese FREI exposure as operationalized by the natural log the treatment-condition variable C zt, the treatment-period dummy variable P t
of the number of Chinese international undergraduate students living in a ZIP code. and their interaction term. An extended model adds individual-level controls I it.
We fit the following OLS regression model using the 2012 and 2014 waves: The full model augments above models with ZIP-code level controls U zt and their
interaction with the treatment-period dummy variable P. As robustness checks,
t
A izt=α+β 1C zt+β 2P t+β 3(C zt×P t)+λz+ϵizt (3) we fit a linear mixed-effects model with varying intercepts for ZIP codes. These
intercepts account for time-invariant characteristics of ZIP codes related to both
where i indexes respondents, z indexes ZIP codes, t indexes year, A represents
izt Chinese international undergraduate students and perceptions of a China threat.
individual immigration attitudes, C zt represents the log of Chinese international We also fit an ordered logistic regression model that accounts for the categorical
undergraduate students in a ZIP code in a given year, P t is a dummy variable taking nature of the dependent variable.
on the value of 1 if the survey data is from 2014 (after the anticorruption campaign
started), λz represents ZIP-code fixed effects and ϵizt is stochastic error. Standard Reporting of methodology. We used an α level of 0.05 (two-tailed) for all
errors are clustered by ZIP code. The inclusion of ZIP-code fixed effects accounts statistical tests in this study. All estimated models assume that the errors are
for any time-invariant demographic features of ZIP codes that are likely to be normally distributed (not the variables themselves). Error distributions were
correlated with the presence of Chinese international undergraduate students. assumed to be normal but this was not formally tested as it is impossible to
For instance, these ZIP codes are primarily located in university towns which observe properties of the error term directly. As discussed, in some cases where
tend to be more liberal, diverse and better educated. The coefficient of interest is there was skewness in a key independent variable (for example, the population of
β 3, which is the DiD estimate. Given that the dependent variable is scaled such undergraduate students), the variable was logged.
that higher values indicate anti-immigration attitudes, a positive coefficient on β 3 In this observational study, we did not independently collect survey data,
indicates that the increase in Chinese FREI exposure led people to become more perform any randomization, or directly involve human participants. Further, given
anti-immigrant whereas a negative coefficient on β would mean that people that the data are observational and not experimental, data collection and analysis
3
became more pro-immigrant. Given that we are primarily relying on within-ZIP- were not performed blind to the conditions of the experiments. The sample sizes
code variation in FREI to identify the effect of foreign investments (and ZIP-code were determined based on the availability of relevant survey data (number of
fixed effects account for time-invariant features of ZIP codes), our design does not years × number of respondents) and the number of ZIP codes in the United States.
require the inclusion of individual-level demographic covariates. However, we also No data were excluded from the main analysis.
fitted models that included individual-level controls and obtained similar results
(see column 1 of Supplementary Table 7). Additionally, we estimated models with Reporting Summary. Further information on research design is available in
individual-level fixed effects and obtained virtually identical results to those using the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.
ZIP-code fixed effects (see columns 3 and 4 of Supplementary Table 4).
As a robustness check, we estimate a second version of equation (3) where we Data availability
operationalize Chinese FREI exposure only as a pretreatment characteristic of ZIP
Replication data are available on the Harvard Dataverse at: https://doi.org/10.7910/
codes in 2012 (as opposed to measuring the change from 2012 to 2014):
DVN/GY8PXP.
A izt=α+β 1P t+β 2(C z×P t)+λz+ϵizt (4)
Code availability
Note that in equation (4) the constituent term for the natural log of the number of
Replication code is available on the Harvard Dataverse at: https://doi.org/10.7910/
Chinese immigrants drops out because the value does not change across the panel. β
2 DVN/GY8PXP.
is the coefficient of interest and is interpreted in a similar fashion as in equation (3).
Received: 27 January 2019; Accepted: 23 January 2020;
Study 2: Pew research pooled cross-sectional data. Our second analysis takes
advantage of seven cross-sectional surveys conducted by the Pew Research Center Published: xx xx xxxx
Nature HuMaN BeHaviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NAtUre HUmAN BeHAviOUr
references 31. Enos, R. D. Causal effect of intergroup contact on exclusionary attitudes.
1. Bansak, K., Hainmueller, J. & Hangartner, D. How economic, humanitarian, Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 111, 3699–3704 (2014).
and religious concerns shape European attitudes toward asylum seekers. 32. Malhotra, N., Margalit, Y. & Mo, C. H. Economic explanations for opposition
Science 354, aag2147 (2016). to immigration: distinguishing between prevalence and conditional impact.
2. Hainmueller, J. & Hopkins, D. J. The hidden American immigration Am. J. Polit. Sci. 57, 391–410 (2013).
consensus: a conjoint analysis of attitudes toward immigrants. Am. J. Polit. 33. Pardos-Prado, S. & Xena, C. Skill specificity and attitudes toward
Sci. 59, 529–548 (2015). immigration. Am. J. Polit. Sci. 63, 286–304 (2019).
3. Newman, B. J. & Malhotra, N. Economic reasoning with a racial hue: is the 34. Citrin, J., Green, D. P., Muste, C. & Wong, C. Public opinion toward
immigration consensus purely race neutral? J. Politics 81, 153–166 (2019). immigration reform: the role of economic motivations. J. Politics 59,
4. Liao, S. Chinese Foreign Real Estate Investment and Voting in U.S. Presidential 858–881 (1997).
Elections https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3504861 (SSRN, 2019). 35. Pérez, E. O. Explicit evidence on the import of implicit attitudes: the IAT and
5. Campbell, J. Y. & Cocco, J. F. How do house prices affect consumption? immigration policy judgments. Polit. Behav. 32, 517–545 (2010).
Evidence from micro data. J. Monet. Econ. 54, 591–621 (2007). 36. Wright, M., Levy, M. & Citrin, J. Public attitudes toward immigration policy
6. Mian, A., Rao, K. & Sufi, A. Household balance sheets, consumption, and the across the legal/illegal divide: the role of categorical and attribute-based
economic slump. Q. J. Econ. 128, 1687–1726 (2013). decision-making. Polit. Behav. 38, 229–253 (2016).
7. Berger, D., Guerrieri, V., Lorenzoni, G. & Vavra, J. House prices and 37. Mansfield, E. D. & Mutz, D. C. Support for free trade: self-interest,
consumer spending. Rev. Econ. Stud. 85, 1502–1542 (2018). sociotropic politics, and out-group anxiety. Int. Organ. 63, 425–457 (2009).
8. Chaney, T., Sraer, D. & Thesmar, D. The collateral channel: how real estate 38. Page, B. I. & Xie, T. Living with the Dragon: How the American Public Views
shocks affect corporate investment. Am. Econ. Rev. 102, 2381–2409 (2012). the Rise of China (Columbia Univ. Press, 2010).
9. Charles, K. K., Hurst, E. & Notowidigdo, M. J. The masking of the decline in 39. Newman, B. J., Shah, S. & Collingwood, L. Race, place, and building a base:
manufacturing employment by the housing bubble. J. Econ. Perspect. 30, Latino population growth and the nascent Trump campaign for president.
179–200 (2016). Public Opin. Q. 82, 122–134 (2018).
10. Miller, N., Peng, L. & Sklarz, M. House prices and economic growth. J. Real 40. Stokes, B. Republicans, Especially Trump Supporters, See Free Trade Deals as
Estate Financ. 42, 522–541 (2011). Bad for U.S. https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2016/03/31/republicans-
11. Zonta, M. & Edelman, S. The Uneven Housing Recovery https://cdn. especially-trump-supporters-see-free-trade-deals-as-bad-for-u-s/ (Pew
americanprogress.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/30051742/ Research Center, 2016).
UnevenHousingRecovery-reportB.pdf (Center for American Progress, 2015). 41. Partisans Have Starkly Different Opinions About How the World Views the U.S.
12. Searcey, D. & Bradsher, K. Chinese cash floods U.S. real estate market. The https://www.people-press.org/2017/11/09/partisans-have-starkly-different-
New York Times https://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/29/business/international/ opinions-about-how-the-world-views-the-u-s/ (Pew Research Center, 2017).
chinese-cash-floods-us-real-estate-market.html (29 November 2015). 42. Conflicting Partisan Priorities for U.S. Foreign Policy https://www.people-press.
13. College towns: a roaring trade. The Economist http://www.economist.com/ org/2018/11/29/conflicting-partisan-priorities-for-u-s-foreign-policy/ (Pew
news/united-states/21700660-chinese-tiger-mums-start-college-town-housing- Research Center, 2018).
boom-roaring-trade (18 June 2016). 43. The Pew Research Center for the People & the Press Poll Database https://www.
14. Kaushal, N. & Fix, M. The Contributions of High-Skilled Immigrants https:// people-press.org/question-search/?qid=1926220&pid=51&ccid=50#top (Pew
www.migrationpolicy.org/research/contributions-high-skilled-immigrants Research Center, 2018).
(Migration Policy Institute, 2016). 44. 2016 Profile of International Activity in U.S. Residential Real Estate https://www.
15. Hainmueller, J. & Hopkins, D. J. Public attitudes toward immigration. Annu. nar.realtor/sites/default/files/reports/2016/2016-profile-of-international-home-
Rev. Polit. Sci. 17, 225–249 (2014). buying-activity-06-06-2016.pdf (National Association of Realtors, 2016).
16. Hangartner, D., Dinas, E., Marbach, M., Matakos, K. & Dimitrios, X. Does 45. Leng, S. & Wertime, D. China’s Anti-Corruption Campaign Ensnares Tens of
exposure to the refugee crisis make natives more hostile? Am. Polit. Sci. Rev. Thousands More http://foreignpolicy.com/2015/01/09/chinas-anti-corruption-
113, 442–455 (2019). campaign-ensnares-tens-of-thousands-more/ (Foreign Policy, 2015).
17. Phillips, T. ‘This is just the start’: China’s passion for foreign property. The 46. Visualizing China’s Anti-Corruption Campaign http://www.chinafile.com/
Guardian https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/sep/29/inside-china- infographics/visualizing-chinas-anti-corruption-campaign (ChinaFile, 2017).
passion-foreign-property-investment-uk (29 September 2016). 47. Prasad, E. S. Gaining Currency: The Rise of the Renminbi (Oxford
18. Rosen, K., Margon, A., Sakamoto, R. & Taylor, J. Breaking Ground: Chinese Univ. Press, 2016).
Investment in U.S. Real Estate https://asiasociety.org/files/uploads/66files/Asia 48. U.S. Targets Money Laundering in All-Cash Home Sales in Miami, Manhattan
(Asia Society, 2016). http://reut.rs/1UPpGty (Reuters, 2016).
19. Citrin, J., Reingold, B. & Green, D. P. American identity and the politics of 49. Wilcox-Archuleta, B. The treatment works: revisiting a key link in contextual
ethnic change. J. Politics 52, 1124–1154 (1990). theories of political behavior. Res. Politics 5, https://doi.org/10.1177%
20. Ha, S. E. The consequences of multiracial contexts on public attitudes toward 2F2053168018768672 (2018).
immigration. Polit. Res. Q. 63, 29–42 (2010). 50. Ansolabehere, S. & Schaffner, B. F. Does survey mode still matter? Findings
21. Hood, M. III & Morris, I. L. Brother, can you spare a dime? Racial/ethnic from a 2010 multi-mode comparison. Polit. Anal. 22, 285–303 (2014).
context and the Anglo vote on proposition 187. Social Sci. Q. 81,
194–206 (2000). acknowledgements
22. Hood, M. III & Morris, I. L. ‘Amigo o enemigo’: context, attitudes, and Anglo S.L. received funding from the Hellman Foundation for this work. The funders had no
public opinion toward immigration. Social Sci. Q. 78, 309–323 (1997). role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish or preparation of
23. Hanson, G. H., Scheve, K. & Slaughter, M. J. Public finance and individual the manuscript.
preferences over globalization strategies. Econ. Politics 19, 1–33 (2007).
24. Dancygier, R. M. Immigration and Conflict in Europe (Cambridge Univ.
author contributions
Press, 2010).
25. Lopez, M. H., Passel, J. & Rohal, M. Modern Immigration Wave Brings 59 S.L., N.M. and B.J.N. conceived the research, designed the analyses, conducted the
Million to US, Driving Population Growth and Change Through 2065 http:// analyses and wrote the manuscript.
www.pewhispanic.org/2015/09/28/modern-immigration-wave-brings-59-
million-to-u-s-driving-population-growth-and-change-through-2065/ (Pew Competing interests
Research Center, 2015).
The authors declare no competing interests.
26. Liu, Y.-L. China’s Nouveau Riche Have Landed on America’s Campuses https://
foreignpolicy.com/2015/09/01/chinas-nouveau-riche-have-landed-on-
americas-campuses/ (Foreign Policy, 2015). additional information
27. Green, D. P., Ha, S. E. & Bullock, J. G. Enough already about black box
Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/
experiments: studying mediation is more difficult than most scholars suppose.
s41562-020-0828-7.
Ann. Am. Acad. Pol. Soc. Sci. 628, 200–208 (2010).
28. Hankinson, M. When do renters behave like homeowners? High rent, price Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to N.M.
anxiety, and NIMBYism. Am. Polit. Sci. Rev. 112, 473–493 (2018). Peer review information Primary Handling Editor: Aisha Bradshaw.
29. Newman, B. J. Acculturating contexts and Anglo opposition to immigration
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
in the United States. Am. J. Polit. Sci. 57, 374–390 (2013).
30. Tingley, D., Xu, C., Chilton, A. & Milner, H. V. The political economy of Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
inward FDI: opposition to Chinese mergers and acquisitions. Chin. J. Int. published maps and institutional affiliations.
Polit. 8, 27–57 (2015). © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2020
Nature HuMaN BeHaviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
1
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Corresponding author(s): Neil Malhotra
Last updated by author(s): Dec 18, 2019
Reporting Summary
Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency
in reporting. For further information on Nature Research policies, see Authors & Referees and the Editorial Policy Checklist.
Statistics
For all statistical analyses, confirm that the following items are present in the figure legend, table legend, main text, or Methods section.
n/a Confirmed
The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
A statement on whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided
Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.
A description of all covariates tested
A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
A full description of the statistical parameters including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient)
AND variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)
For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted
Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.
For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated
Our web collection on statistics for biologists contains articles on many of the points above.
Software and code
Policy information about availability of computer code
Data collection All data obtained from publicly available sources.
Data analysis All data analysis conducted in Stata 14.1
For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors/reviewers.
We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Research guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.
Data
Policy information about availability of data
All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable:
- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets
- A list of figures that have associated raw data
- A description of any restrictions on data availability
All data files and code needed to replicate results posted in the Harvard IQSS Dataverse: https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/GY8PXP
Field-specific reporting
Please select the one below that is the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.
Life sciences Behavioural & social sciences Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences
For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/documents/nr-reporting-summary-flat.pdf
2
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Behavioural & social sciences study design
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
Study description Quantitative. Analysis of publicly-available survey data and local contextual data using various regression techniques (difference-in-
difference; cross-sectional data).
Research sample National sample of American adults.
Sampling strategy Study 1: opt-in Internet survey with sample matching procedures to enhance representativeness
Study 2: random digit dialing
Data collection Study 1: survey data collected over the Internet by third party (not the study authors); local contextual data collected by study authors
Study 2: survey data collected by phone by third party (not the study authors); local contextual data collected by study authors
Supporting Survey Analysis: survey data collected over Internet by third party (not the study authors)
Timing Study 1: panel surveys conducted by YouGov/Polimetrix between 2010-2014; Study 2: cross-sectional surveys conducted by Pew
between 2008-2015; Supporting Survey Analysis: cross-sectional surveys conducted by GfK in 2008 and 2012.
Data exclusions N/A
Non-participation Some respondents declined to participate in surveys, but we have no information on non-respondents from third parties.
Randomization N/A
Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods
We require information from authors about some types of materials, experimental systems and methods used in many studies. Here, indicate whether each material,
system or method listed is relevant to your study. If you are not sure if a list item applies to your research, read the appropriate section before selecting a response.
Materials & experimental systems Methods
n/a Involved in the study n/a Involved in the study
Antibodies ChIP-seq
Eukaryotic cell lines Flow cytometry
Palaeontology MRI-based neuroimaging
Animals and other organisms
Human research participants
Clinical data