Articles
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-019-0754-8
Overanxious and underslept
Eti Ben Simon 1*, Aubrey Rossi1, Allison G. Harvey2 and Matthew P. Walker1,3*
Are you feeling anxious? Did you sleep poorly last night? Sleep disruption is a recognized feature of all anxiety disorders. Here,
we investigate the basic brain mechanisms underlying the anxiogenic impact of sleep loss. Additionally, we explore whether
subtle, societally common reductions in sleep trigger elevated next-day anxiety. Finally, we examine what it is about sleep,
physiologically, that provides such an overnight anxiety-reduction benefit. We demonstrate that the anxiogenic impact of sleep
loss is linked to impaired medial prefrontal cortex activity and associated connectivity with extended limbic regions. In con-
trast, non-rapid eye movement (NREM) slow-wave oscillations offer an ameliorating, anxiolytic benefit on these brain networks
following sleep. Of societal relevance, we establish that even modest night-to-night reductions in sleep across the population
predict consequential day-to-day increases in anxiety. These findings help contribute to an emerging framework explaining the
intimate link between sleep and anxiety and further highlight the prospect of non-rapid eye movement sleep as a therapeutic
target for meaningfully reducing anxiety.
A
l ack of sleep amplifies anxiety in a dose–response manner1,2. in non-rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep. This includes reduc-
Both chronic-partial as well acute-total sleep deprivation tions in the amount of NREM slow-wave sleep, reported in gener-
commonly and significantly increase anxiety in otherwise alized anxiety disorder22–24, panic disorders25, patients with PTSD26
healthy individuals2. Further evidence for the anxiogenic impact of and in healthy individuals with high-trait anxiety27, accompanied
insufficient sleep comes from clinical science. Sleep disturbance is a by corresponding changes in electroencephalogram (EEG) slow-
recognized and common symptom of anxiety disorders3. Moreover, wave activity (SWA, 0.5–4.0 Hz)28,29. Relevant to the third question,
sleep disruption has been linked to the development and progression these sleep-stage changes also co-occur with reductions in subjec-
of anxiety disorders4,5—currently, the most common mental illness tive sleep quality3 as well as objective sleep efficiency7,22,23,25, evident
worldwide6. Testament to this link, sleep disturbance is present across in clinical23 and healthy30 cohorts. Such cross-sectional (between
the full axis of major anxiety disorders, including post-traumatic stress subjects) evidence demonstrates that poor sleep quality positively
disorder (PTSD), generalized anxiety disorder, panic disorder and correlates with higher anxiety.
social anxiety disorder3,7, suggesting trans-diagnostic applicability. Building on this evidence, here we seek to test three inter-related
While the association between sleep loss and anxiety is well hypotheses targeting these unanswered questions: (1) that the
documented, here we address three key next-step questions. First, underlying neural mechanism explaining the anxiogenic impact of
we investigate the underlying neural basis of why and how a lack of sleep loss involves hypoactivity and associated reduced functional
sleep amplifies anxiety in humans. Second, we determine whether connectivity of the mPFC, yet increased activity within the limbic
specific features of sleep (stages and physiology) beneficially prevent amygdala and associated insula, the extent of which will linearly
the escalation of anxiety associated with insufficient sleep, therefore scale with the degree of amplified anxiety across individuals; and
acting as an anxiolytic. Third, we examine whether subtle, societally conversely (2) that NREM sleep, and specifically NREM SWA, sup-
common sleep deficits within an individual, from one night to the ports a palliative anxiolytic benefit through regulation of the above
next, trigger consequential day-to-day increases in anxiety. neural networks, thereby preventing the escalation of anxiety that
Concerning the first question, and independent of sleep, a rec- would otherwise occur following continued wakefulness; and
ognized network of brain regions is associated with heightened (3) using a micro-longitudinal study, that changes in sleep quality
anxiety in healthy adults8,9 and shows marked alterations in clini- within an individual, from one night to the next, result in consequen-
cal anxiety disorders10. These regions include the dorsal anterior tial day-to-day changes in anxiety, such that a worsening in nightly
cingulate (dACC)11,12 and the amygdala13–15, associated with greater sleep quality would lead to a relative increase in anxiety the next day.
reactivity to negative emotions8,10,11. Similar hypersensitivity has In short (but see Methods), in the first series of studies, two inde-
been observed in the insula, potentially reflecting increased aversive pendent samples were recruited: (1) 18 healthy participants took
anticipation signalling in anxiety9,16. part in an in-laboratory experimental study and (2) a subsample
In marked contrast, hypoactivity within the medial prefrontal of the general population (n = 194) took part in an online micro-
cortex (mPFC) has been reported in high-trait-anxious individuals longitudinal study. The in-laboratory experimental study required
as well as in patients diagnosed with anxiety disorders11,12,17, typi- participants to take part in two separate sessions: one after a full
cally accompanied by impaired functional coupling of the mPFC night of sleep (a sleep-rested (SR) session) and a second following
with the amygdala at rest18,19. These prefrontal impairments may 24 h of wakefulness (a sleep-deprived (SD) session). In each session,
reflect a deficit in emotional control, manifested in increased anxi- participants rated their level of anxiety in the evening and morning
ety temperament20,21 or, clinically, in generalized anxiety10. at the same circadian times (see Fig. 1a). This was followed by a
Pertaining to the second question of the anxiolytic benefit of functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) scan using an affec-
sleep, patients suffering from anxiety disorders express reductions tive assay paradigm—averse emotional clips—known to provide a
1Center for Human Sleep Science, Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA. 2Department of Psychology, University of
California, Berkeley, CA, USA. 3Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA. *e-mail: etibens@berkeley.edu;
mpwalker@berkeley.edu
NAtuRE HuMAN BEHAvIOuR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NATuRE HuMAN BEHAvIOuR
60
52
Evening SLEEP Morning
anxiety anxiety 44
measure SLEEP DEPRIVATION measure 36
28
8 PM 11 PM 8 AM 9 AM Affective paradigm 0
measure of emotional brain function31.The online micro-longitudi- brain regions of interest: the amygdala, dACC, insula and mPFC; see
nal study tracked the habitual sleep and subjective anxiety levels of Supplementary Table 1). First, and independent of any association
sample participants across two consecutive nights/days. Measures with anxiety, three of the four regions of interest (ROIs) expressed a
of sleep quality and efficiency were assessed for each participant in significant interaction of sleep and emotion—the mPFC, amygdala
each study night. and dACC (Fig. 2).
A second series of confirmation studies were subsequently con- Second, consistent with findings in anxiety disorders33,34, the
ducted to replicate and extend key findings. Here two additional mPFC expressed significant hypoactivity following SD, relative
independent samples were recruited: (1) 32 healthy participants to the SR condition, in response to emotional stimuli (interac-
took part in an in-laboratory overnight sleep study to examine tion of sleep and emotion, F(1,17) = 4.88, η2 = 0.22, P = 0.04; sleep
replication of the association of NREM sleep with anxiety in an means for emotional versus neutral activation, SR = 0.16 ± 0.06,
independent dataset, and (2) a subsample of the general population SD = −0.04 ± 0.03, mean difference −0.2 ± 0.09, 95% CI = [−0.39,
(n = 154) took part in a second online microlongitudinal study, now 0]; Fig. 2a). The opposite was true for the amygdala and dACC,
tracking their habitual sleep and subjective anxiety across a longer both of which demonstrated amplified activity in the SD con-
duration of four consecutive nights/days to replicate and further dition for emotional content (bilateral amygdala interaction of
define the directionality of the sleep–anxiety association. sleep and emotion, F(1,17) = 6.09, η2 = 0.26, P = 0.02; sleep means,
SR = 0.07 ± 0.04, SD = 0.29 ± 0.06, mean difference = 0.21 ± 0.08,
Results 95% CI = [−0.4, −0.03], with stronger left-sided effects for the
In-laboratory study: sleep-loss-induced anxiety. Anxiety scores amygdala. dACC interaction F(1,17) = 6.04, η2 = 0.26, P = 0.02;
were analysed using a repeated measures analysis of variance sleep means, SR = −0.09 ± 0.03, SD = 0.04 ± 0.04; mean differ-
(ANOVA), with the factors sleep (SD, SR) and time (morning/ ence = 0.13 ± 0.05, 95% CI = [0.01, 0.24]; Fig. 2b,c). No interaction
evening). Fitting with the anxiogenic experimental hypothesis, SD of sleep loss and emotion was observed in the insula (sleep means,
was associated with significantly higher anxiety scores (sleep main SR = −0.12 ± 0.04, SD = −0.1 ± 0.04; mean difference −0.01 ± 0.07,
effect, F(1,17) = 6.19, mean difference = 3.69 ± 1.48, η2 = 0.27, 95% 95% CI = [−0.16, −0.13], t(17) = −0.15, P = 0.8; Bayesian analysis
confidence interval (CI) = [0.56, 6.82], P = 0.02, Bonferroni cor- in support of the null hypothesis was substantial: BF = 4.07, 95%
01
rected; Fig. 1). CI = [−0.4, 0.45]); Fig. 2d).
Critically, this effect was evident only in the morning follow- Combined, these results demonstrate increased emotional reac-
ing sleep manipulation (main effect of time, F(1,17) = 12.02, mean tivity following sleep loss within the extended limbic network of the
difference = 3.86 ± 1.11, η2 = 0.41, 95% CI = [1.51, 6.21], P = 0.003, amygdala and dACC, together with a loss of typical emotional regu-
Bonferroni corrected), further reflected by a significant interac- lation involvement of the mPFC—a neural signature matching that
tion between sleep and time (F(1,16) = 8.95, η2 = 0.34, P = 0.008; reported in meta-analyses of anxiety disorders, as well as in high-
Fig. 1c). Specifically, on the evening of each experimental night anxiety individuals10,11,17.
and before either of the experimental manipulations, participants Having established main effects of sleep loss on brain activity in
started each session with statistically equivalent levels of anxiety specific a priori ROIs, we next tested our first core hypothesis: that
(SR = 33.50 ± 1.61, SD = 33.06 ± 1.58, mean difference = 0.44 ± 1.08, across individuals, sleep loss-related changes in brain activity sig-
95% CI = [−1.84, −2.73], t(17) = 0.41, P = 0.67; Fig. 1b). However, nificantly predicted the extent of amplified anxiety caused by sleep
the following morning, there were significant differences. SD deprivation.
resulted in a 30% increase in anxiety relative to the SR condition Supporting the experimental hypothesis, and again fitting
(SR = 33.22 ± 1.86, SD = 41.06 ± 2.27, mean difference = 7.83 ± 2.65, a prototypical neural signature of anxiety, the extent of hypo-
95% CI = [2.22, 13.43], t(17) = 2.95, P = 0.009; Fig. 1b). activity in mPFC following sleep deprivation predicted the
Notably, 78% of all participants in the SD condition reported an increase in anxiety caused by sleep loss (Fig. 3a; R = −0.58, 95%
increase in anxiety, confirming a robust impact of sleep loss on the CI = [−0.15, −0.82], P = 0.01): the greater the impairment in
escalation of anxiety in healthy individuals. Of clinical relevance, mPFC activity following sleep deprivation, the larger the sleep-
50% of all participants exceeded anxiety scores >40 following loss-induced increase in anxiety. Importantly, these sleep loss-
SD—a cut-off typically used to determine the presence of clinical associated changes with anxiety remained significant when
symptoms of anxiety32. controlling for corresponding changes in mood states (P < 0.05;
see Supplementary Note 1a). Therefore, the sleep-loss changes in
In-laboratory study: neural correlates of sleep-loss-induced anx- mPFC activity were accounted for by changes in anxiety, above
iety. Functional MRI analyses focused a priori on anxiety-sensitive and beyond changes in mood.
erocs
yteixnA
erocs
yteixnA
)%
,egnahc
thginrevo(
a b c
P = 0.009 80 P = 0.008
60
40
20
0
–20
Evening Morning
Sleep-rested Sleep-deprived
Fig. 1 | Experimental design and behavioural results. a, In-laboratory experimental design: a repeated-measures counterbalanced protocol across
18 participants. Anxiety levels were measured before and after a sleep manipulation protocol, followed by a functional MRI scan that included an
affective paradigm (viewing of emotional and neutral clips). b, Anxiety levels were similar in the evening of each session, before any sleep manipulation
(left, mean difference = 0.44 ± 1.08, 95% CI = [−1.84, 2.7], t(17) = 0.41, P = 0.6), yet were significantly greater following SD relative to SR (right, mean
difference = 7.83 ± 2.65, 95% CI = [−13.43, −2.22], t(17) = 2.95, P = 0.009). c, Overnight changes in anxiety levels revealed a 30% increase in anxiety
following SD, yet no change following the SR night (sleep × time interaction, F(1,16) = 8.95, η2 = 0.34, P = 0.008). Error bars denote s.e.m. Individual data
points are marked in grey.
NAtuRE HuMAN BEHAvIOuR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NATuRE HuMAN BEHAvIOuR Articles
mPFC No such relationships with anxiety were observed with activity
in the other a priori ROIs showing main effects of sleep loss: the
0.8
amygdala or dACC (all R < 0.2, P > 0.2; Bayesian analysis in sup-
0.6 P = 0.04 port of the null hypothesis was substantial: amygdala, BF = 3.43, 01
0.4 95% CI = [0.43, −0.43]; dACC, BF = 3.07, 95% CI = [−0.33, 0.52]).
01
Such findings suggest a selective associational relationship between
0.2
mPFC hypoactivity and the anxiogenic impact of sleep loss, one
0 that may be due more to the loss of emotional control within the
–0.2 mPFC11,12,17, rather than in more rudimentary emotional-reactivity
regions such as the amygdala13,14.
–0.4
We next sought to test the hypothesis that sleep loss-related
impairments in mPFC connectivity, beyond changes in mPFC
activity, further accounted for the sleep-loss induced increase in
anxiety levels. Here we specifically focused a priori on functional
connectivity between mPFC–amygdala due to its established link
with high-anxiety states and anxiety disorders18,35–37.
Consistent with the profile observed in clinical anxiety cohorts,
SD resulted in a significant impairment in mPFC–amygdala con-
nectivity relative to the SR condition (main effect of sleep in bilateral
amygdala, F(1,17) = 5.04, mean difference = −0.16 ± 0.07, η2 = 0.23,
95% CI = [−0.3, −0.1], P = 0.04, Bonferroni corrected; Fig. 3b).
However, this main effect of sleep deprivation on amygdala con-
nectivity with this specific region of the mPFC was not predictive of
inter-individual differences in anxiety following sleep deprivation
(R = 0.27, P = 0.3; Bayesian analysis in support of the null hypothesis
was weak: BF = 1.91, 95% CI = [0.623, −0.203]). The lack of a sig-
01
nificant association may be due to subtly different regions of mPFC
being more predictive of inter-individual differences in anxiety
levels, beyond main effects of anxiety10,38. We therefore examined,
post hoc, whether our secondary ROIs demonstrated sensitivity.
This was the case, wherein amygdala connectivity with an mPFC
region 4 mm dorsal to our primary prefrontal ROI (x,y,z(12,62,20))
significantly predicted the extent of inter-individual differences in
anxiety following sleep deprivation (R = −0.46, 95% CI = [0, −0.76],
P = 0.05, with stronger effects for left amygdala connectivity).
This result is indicative of impaired top-down regulatory control
proposed in neural models of anxiety18,19,35–37, and it suggests that
greater impairment in mPFC–amygdala connectivity is associated
with a larger increase in anxiety following sleep deprivation.
Together, these findings demonstrate that the main experimen-
tal effect of amplified anxiety following sleep loss is associated
with main-effect increases in emotion-generation regions of the
amygdala and dACC, yet hypoactivity of the mPFC and impaired
mPFC–amygdala connectivity. Moreover, the magnitude of mPFC
impairment specifically and selectively predicted inter-individual
differences in anxiety caused by a lack of sleep, beyond main effects.
In-laboratory study: sleep physiology in relation to anxiety and
emotional brain dynamics. The second experimental hypothesis
investigated a converse question: what is it about the presence of
sleep, rather than its absence, that provides a palliative anxiolytic
function? Specifically, we tested the hypothesis that indices of
NREM slow-wave sleep (SWS) and associated spectral SWA prevent
the escalation of anxiety associated with continued wakefulness, as
observed in the SD condition.
Consistent with the prediction, NREM SWS predicted the degree
of overnight reduction in anxiety from evening to morning (within-
subject measure, R = −0.52, 95% CI = [−0.07,−0.79], P = 0.03) in
the SR condition and predicted the outright next-morning anxi-
ety score (R = −0.59, 95% CI = [−0.15, −0.8], P = 0.01; Fig. 4a).
That is, those individuals with greater SWS expressed a greater
evening-to-morning dissipation of anxiety and thus lower next-day
anxiety levels.
Importantly, the association between NREM SWS and anxiety
was specific to state anxiety, with no significant association with trait
anxiety scores (R = −0.17, P = 0.5; BF = 2.76, 95% CI [0.29,−0.55]). 01
spilc
lartuen
>
lanoitomE
spilc
lartuen
>
lanoitomE
spilc
lartuen
>
lanoitomE
spilc
lartuen
>
lanoitomE
)etamitse
tsartnoc(
)etamitse
tsartnoc(
)etamitse
tsartnoc(
)etamitse
tsartnoc(
a
x = 5 5 t-score–4
b
Amygdala
1.0
0.7 P = 0.02
0.4
0.1
x = –30 –0.2
c
dACC
0.4
P = 0.02
0.2
0
–0.2
–0.4
x = 5
d
Insula
0.4
0.2 P = 0.8
0
–0.2
–0.4
y = –14
–0.6
Sleep-rested Sleep-deprived
Fig. 2 | fMRI results of the In-laboratory study. a–d, Significant clusters of
activation (left) from an exploratory whole-brain analysis during the viewing
of emotional relative to neutral clips, showing decreases in the emotion-
regulation regions of the mPFC (a) following SD (blue). In contrast, sleep-loss-
related increases in activity were observed in the extended limbic network
including the amygdala (b), dACC (c) and insula (d) (orange; presented
for illustration purposes only at P < 0.005; Montreal Neurological Institute
(MNI) coordinates are denoted for each slice; see Supplementary Table 3).
Right: ROI analysis within a priori regions in the extended limbic network
demonstrating that SD triggered a decrease in mPFC activity in response to
emotional relative to neutral content (F(1,17) = 4.88, η2 = 0.22, P = 0.04) while
elevating emotional-related activity in both limbic-associated regions of the
dACC (F(1,17) = 6.04, η2 = 0.26, P = 0.02) and the amygdala (averaged for
bilateral amygdala, F(1,17) = 6.09, η2 = 0.26, P = 0.02), without a significant
difference in insula activity (averaged for bilateral insula, t(17) = −0.15, P = 0.8,
BF 01 = 4.07). Error bars denote s.e.m. Individual data points are marked in grey.
NAtuRE HuMAN BEHAvIOuR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NATuRE HuMAN BEHAvIOuR
Furthermore, time spent in both NREM SWS and NREM SWA
spectral activity (in posterior channel derivations) predicted greater
mPFC re-engagement the next day (NREM SWS, R = 0.5, 95%
CI = [0.03, 0.79], P = 0.04; NREM SWA, R = 0.55, 95% CI = [0.09,
0.81], P = 0.02; Fig. 4c). These results support an anxiolytic role for
NREM sleep by restoring prefrontal mechanisms known to be criti-
1.2 cal for the regulation of anxiety10,20,21.
A second independent polysomnography (PSG) study (n = 32)
was conducted to replicate these findings, but with the difference
0.8
that sleep was recorded in the laboratory, rather than at home as
in the first study. These data replicated the original findings (see
0.4
Extended Data Fig. 1 and Supplementary Note 2) and establish that
sleep-recording context (home/in-lab) did not change the above
0 anxiety associations.
Online micro-longitudinal studies 1 and 2: night-to-night per-
–0.4
–1.2 –0.2 0.8 turbations in sleep quality negatively impact next-day anxiety.
The in-laboratory experiment established that acute total sleep
deprivation triggers an anxiogenic impact, one that is associated
with an underlying change in the affective network of prefrontal-
and limbic-associated regions. Our final experimental hypothesis,
however, sought to determine whether ecologically modest night-
to-night variations in sleep, within an individual, were associated
with consequential day-to-day changes in subjective anxiety. In
online study 1, habitual sleep and next-day subjective anxiety were
tracked for two consecutive days within the same individuals, and
in online study 2 the longitudinal window was extended to four con-
secutive days.
Supporting the experimental prediction, and the directional
predictions from the in-laboratory study, there was a significant
association between night-to-night changes in sleep efficiency and
Thus the relationship between NREM SWS and anxiety appears to subsequent day-to-day changes in experienced anxiety: individuals
be preferentially linked to the regulation of daily fluctuations in who experienced a reduction in sleep efficiency from one night to
anxiety state, separate from a more stable anxiety trait. the next reported a corresponding and significant increase in next-
In addition to NREM SWS quantity, NREM spectral EEG qual- day anxiety, and vice versa (F (1,93) = 4.14, mean change = 0.3 ± 0.46
ity, specifically SWA (0.5–4.0 Hz), demonstrated a similar relation- and −0.98 ± 0.39, respectively, η2 = 0.043, P = 0.04). In addition to
ship. Here, greater amounts of NREM SWA, especially in posterior this categorical approach, we further tested the hypothesis using
topographical regions, predicted a greater overnight reduction in a correlational (continuous variable) approach between sleep
anxiety from evening to morning across individuals (R = −0.62, efficiency and anxiety (see Methods). Here again, the greater the
95% CI = [−0.2, −0.84], P = 0.007) and lower absolute anxiety night-to-night change in sleep efficiency (increase versus decrease),
scores the next day (Fig. 4b; R = −0.53, 95% CI = [−0.06, −0.8], the greater the consequential change in anxiety state the following
P = 0.03; both calculated for posterior channel derivations). Similar day (decrease versus increase, respectively, R = −0.15, P = 0.036,
to SWS duration, the association of NREM SWA with anxiety was n = 194). Similar findings were observed in online study 2, where
specific to changes in state anxiety, and not significantly related to sleep and subjective anxiety were tracked for an extended duration
trait anxiety (R = 0.005, P = 0.9; Bayesian analysis in support of the of 4 d. Individuals in this study reported significantly greater subjec-
null hypothesis was substantial: BF = 3.33, 95% CI = [0.44,−0.44]). tive anxiety the following day if they slept worse than they usually
01
Moreover, the association of NREM SWA with next-day anxiety did, relative to days when they slept better than usual (β = −14.77,
remained significant when controlling for co-occurring changes in 95% CI = [−20.4, −9.08], t(42.06) = −5.27, P < 0.0001, R2 = 0.053).
mood (P < 0.05; see Supplementary Note 1a), confirming a selec- Notably, these effects were not evident when examining changes
tive anxiolytic benefit of SWA beyond co-morbid mood fluctua- in sleep duration (all P > 0.5; see Supplementary Note 3), indicat-
tions. Together, these findings support the hypothesized palliative ing that measures of sleep continuity serve as better predictors of
potential of NREM SWS—both quantity and electrophysiological subsequent anxiety than sleep duration alone. As with sleep effi-
quality—in preventing the escalation of state anxiety that otherwise ciency, night-to-night changes in subjective sleep quality similarly
develops in the absence of sleep. predicted changes in next-day anxiety in a bidirectional manner (all
Last, we tested the hypothesis that the overnight regulation of P ≤ 0.001 see Supplementary Note 3).
anxiety by NREM sleep across the SR condition was further asso- Although these findings describe a clear association between
ciated with neural changes in affective brain activity observed the sleep and next-day anxiety, they leave open the question of the
next morning. Specifically, analyses focused on the brain region directional influence of this association. The link between anxiety
showing sleep-dependent sensitivity to anxiety in the rested relative and poor sleep is often bidirectional, such that levels of bedtime
to deprived condition—the mPFC. anxiety can lead to worse sleep and, in turn, worse sleep can lead
Following the SR night, greater next-day mPFC (re)engagement to greater level of anxiety the next day39,40. To estimate the unique
across individuals was associated with significantly lower next-day contribution of sleep to next-day anxiety, we conducted two com-
anxiety (R = −0.59, 95% CI = [−0.16, −0.84], P = 0.01; Fig. 4c). Once plementary analyses in each online study (see Supplementary Note
again, this sleep-dependent association was unique to state levels of 4 for more details). In online study 1, we examined the association
anxiety, with no significant associations observed for stable anxi- between sleep and anxiety on the second day of the study while
ety traits (R = −0.009, P = 0.9; BF = 3.21, 95% CI = [0.35,−0.5]). controlling for anxiety levels present on the first day (that is, before
01
yteixna
gninrom
ni
egnahC
)RS
susrev
DS(
mPFC–anxiety mPFC–amygdala
association connectivity
0.6
R = –0.58, P = 0.01 P = 0.04
0.4
0.2
0
–0.2
etamitse
tsartnoC
a b
mPFC activity
(SD versus SR) Sleep-rested Sleep-deprived
Fig. 3 | mPFC activity in relation to anxiety. a, Significant decreases
in mPFC activity were associated with higher anxiety levels in the SD
state relative to SR (R = −0.58, 95% CI = [−0.15, −0.82], P = 0.01).
b, mPFC–amygdala connectivity (calculated within a priori ROIs) was
reduced following sleep deprivation relative to the rested condition
(main effect of sleep across left and right amygdala, F(1,17) = 5.04, mean
difference = −0.16 ± 0.07, η2 = 0.23, 95% CI = [−0.3,−0.1], P = 0.04). Error
bars denote s.e.m. Dashed grey line denotes zero crossing. Individual data
points are marked in grey.
NAtuRE HuMAN BEHAvIOuR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NATuRE HuMAN BEHAvIOuR Articles
NREM1
NREM2
NREM3
REM
sleep took place). In online study 2, we conducted a lag analysis data revealed that worse sleep efficiency was associated with greater
where the association between sleep efficiency and subjective anxi- subjective anxiety the following day (β = −13.49, 95% CI = [−21.32,
ety was controlled for by the level of anxiety the previous day (see −5.65], t(61.27) = −3.44, P = 0.001; see Supplementary Note 1b).
Methods). These analyses revealed that the association between In sum, ecologically relevant night-to-night variability in sleep
sleep efficiency and anxiety is evident even when controlling for within individuals predicted consequential day-to-day changes in
previous anxiety states (online study 1, R = −0.2, P = 0.005; online subjective anxiety state—an effect that was independent of altera-
study 2, β = −16.94, t(48.37) = −4.83, P < 0.0001). tions in mood as well as in trait anxiety. These micro-longitudinal
Anxiety is often co-morbid with alterations in mood41, and both experiments not only corroborate the results of the in-laboratory
have been associated with poor sleep42,43. We therefore examined the experiment manipulation of acute total sleep deprivation, but dem-
impact of mood states on the association of habitual sleep and anxi- onstrate that subtle alterations in nightly sleep quality are sufficient
ety in our online studies. These control analyses reveal that sleep to result in consequential next-day changes in anxiety.
efficiency still significantly predicted anxiety levels across partici-
pants in both online studies, when controlling for co-variations in Discussion
mood (P = 0.002–0.004; see Supplementary Note 1b). In addition Taken together, these findings set forth a mechanistic neural frame-
to these control analyses, we added a secondary anxiety assess- work explaining how and why insufficient sleep may contribute to
ment to online study 2—the Beck Anxiety Inventory (BAI44; see anxiety and, conversely, establish a palliative function of NREM
Methods), as this takes into account somatic measures of anxiety SWS capable of ameliorating anxiety. Moreover, these effects were
and is less collinear with mood states45. Similar to the findings using demonstrable across both acute experimental sleep deprivation and
the state-trait anxiety inventory (STAI) measure, analyses of BAI following modest night-to-night changes in sleep quality.
50.0
<
P
51
34
17
r = –0.59, P = 0.01
0
–0.6 –0.4 –0.2 0 0.2 0.4 0 50 100 150
Association with anxiety (Pearson’s r) NREM3 sleep (min)
r = –0.53, P = 0.03
r = –0.59, P = 0.01
yteixna
gninroM
)RS(
51
34
17
0
0 0.65 0.75 0.85
yteixna
gninroM
)RS(
51
34
17
0
–0.4 0 0.4 0.8
mPFC activity
(emotional > neutral, SR)
yteixna
gninroM
)RS(
NREM delta
(Percentage power, posterior derivative)
50.0
<
P
0.72
0.66
Frontal
Central
NREM delta Posterior
power
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6
Association with mPFC activity
(Pearson’s r)
(0.8–4.6
Hz)
Percentage
power
a
b
c
Fig. 4 | Sleep-rested physiology in relation to next-day anxiety. a, Anxiety association in relation to REM and NREM sleep stages (left). Only time spent in
deep NREM sleep (NREM3) was associated with a significant reduction in next-day anxiety (right). b, Power in the delta band (SWA, 0.8–4.6 Hz) during
NREM sleep (left) was associated with lower morning anxiety (right), most pronounced for posterior derivations (dashed circle). c, Greater mPFC activity
in the SR session was associated with higher SWA during NREM sleep (left, R = 0.55, P = 0.02 calculated for posterior derivations) and a significant
decrease in next-day morning anxiety across participants (right).
NAtuRE HuMAN BEHAvIOuR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NATuRE HuMAN BEHAvIOuR
Prior meta-analyses have described a robust anxiogenic impact reduction in anxiety the next day. Moreover, the same measure of
of sleep loss2. Importantly, these effects are evident across a mul- NREM SWA and SWS additionally predicted the degree of next-day
titude of study contexts46,47, and when sleep is restricted to only re-engagement of mPFC activity, post-sleep.
3 h per night relative to a whole night of sleep48. Consistent with Functionally, NREM SWA has previously been associated with
these data, we establish that one night of sleep deprivation trig- hippocampal memory processing56. Our findings suggest a func-
gered a significant increase in anxiety in otherwise healthy partici- tional role for NREM SWA—an anxiolytic brain benefit prevent-
pants. Indeed, following sleep deprivation, 50% of our experimental ing the overnight escalation of anxiety. This role of NREM sleep
participants expressed levels of anxiety that exceeded the clinical can be considered separable from the functional role of REM sleep
threshold described in typical anxiety disorders32. Such findings in the regulation of emotions42 based on the temporal mechanisms
affirm the strong co-morbidity of sleep disruption and anxiety, underlying each. Specifically, anxiety (NREM associated) is in the
wherein chronic sleep disruption more than doubles the risk of domain of mood states that operate across a time frame of hours57,
developing an anxiety disorder4,5. Our experimental studies dem- while emotional reactivity (REM associated) is considered to be a
onstrate that, within this interaction, sleep loss can causally and short-term, acute process that begins and ends within a time frame
directionally instigate high levels of anxiety in individuals who were of milliseconds to minutes57.
otherwise non-clinically anxious when sleep-rested. This finding Further support for the proposed anxiolytic role of NREM
defines a causal influence of disrupted sleep on the development of sleep comes from clinical studies that have described impairments
anxiety, beyond simply a co-occurring symptom of anxiety disor- of NREM SWS in patients suffering from anxiety disorders7,25.
ders49 (though the inverse is similarly true, indicating a bidirectional Disrupted NREM SWS has been reported in generalized anxiety
model of causal interaction39,40). disorder22–24, panic disorders25 and PTSD26, intimating that the
That anxiety and sleep disruption are co-morbid and causally relationship of, and signature impairment in, NREM SWS is trans-
interactive suggests that they may converge by way of a common diagnostic and common across these anxiety categories. At the
underlying neural mechanism50. The current study addressed this subclinical level, individuals with high-trait anxiety express lower
question, focusing on a well-characterized network associated with NREM SWS relative to low-trait anxiety individuals27. Even mild
the condition of anxiety—the amygdala, dACC, insula and mPFC. anticipatory anxiety and apprehension regarding next-day events
Though sleep deprivation effects were observed in the amygdala, reduces NREM SWS58. Combined with our current results, this col-
dACC (both hyperactivity) and mPFC (hypoactivity), the inter- lection of evidence indicates a sensitivity of NREM SWS and associ-
action between sleep deprivation and the magnitude of anxiety ated SWA to numerous forms of anxiety, an issue discussed further
increase was specifically accounted for by changes in mPFC activity in the findings of the micro-longitudinal online study, below.
and associated mPFC connectivity. Focusing on this sleep-dependent anxiolytic mechanism, reduc-
Impaired mPFC activity is a recognized neural phenotype of tions in NREM SWA have been observed in primary insomnia59
highly anxious individuals, both in clinical and non-clinical popu- and further associated with aberrantly high sympathetic autonomic
lations11,12,17,18. Similarly, mPFC hypoactivity predicts worse symp- activity60. Conversely, NREM SWS reflects a homoeostatic state of
tom severity in the anxiety disorder of PTSD51. In addition to mPFC marked parasympathetic dominance61, coupled with a reduction in
hypoactivity, reduced mPFC–amygdala coupling—an index of central autonomic network activity within the brain. In this context,
impaired prefrontal control of limbic activity—correlates with anxi- posterior cingulate regions and the precuneus regulate parasym-
ety levels across healthy individuals18 and in those with generalized pathetic activity associated with lowered anxiety62,63 while anterior
anxiety disorder52, social anxiety19 and PTSD51. midline regions, including both the ACC and the amygdala, have
Our findings establish that one night of sleep loss in otherwise been shown to regulate sympathetic activity64 linked to high anxiety.
healthy individuals triggers an anxiogenic neural profile that is pro- Building on this evidence, we propose a restorative, autonomic-
totypical of anxiety disorder—decreases in mPFC activity and lim- related function of SWS on high-order affective brain networks,
bic connectivity alongside hyperactivity in amygdala and dACC10,38. especially those associated with autonomic control62. Herein, ade-
Most relevant, we show that the degree of mPFC disengagement, quate NREM SWA proffers an anxiolytic benefit through next-day
rather than changes in other affect-related regions, expressly pre- restoration of cingulate regions relevant to parasympathetic regula-
dicted the magnitude of anxiety increase across individuals caused tion. This, in turn, downregulates mPFC-related limbic function-
by sleep loss. ing, thereby optimizing both affective regulation within the brain
Regions of the anterior mPFC play a critical role in adaptive emo- and associated peripheral sympathovagal responses within the body
tional processing, including the discernment of emotional stimulus that lower anxiety states11,17,18,38. Notably, the strength of NREM SWA
significance as well as top-down regulation of corresponding affec- association with reduced next-day anxiety was most pronounced
tive responses that, if impaired, can lead to biased threat percep- over posterior derivations. Such a gradient asserts the importance of
tion33,34. This is especially true for the ventral subregions of the posterior midline brain regions involved in parasympathetic regula-
mPFC that are anatomically connected to core emotion-processing tion, aiding in the overnight restoration of autonomic balance that
regions such as the amygdala18, further linked to excess peripheral occurs during SWS65. Moreover, NREM SWS suppresses activity
endocrine and autonomic responses to stress53. Notably, insufficient of the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis66, when cortisol levels
sleep robustly impairs mPFC activity and associated limbic func- consequently decline67, complementing a state of parasympathetic
tional connectivity42,54,55. dominance. Conversely, this framework would suggest that reduc-
Our data help define an emerging neuropathological model tions in NREM SWS, and/or impairment of NREM SWA within an
in which sleep disruption contributes to the maintenance and/or individual may serve as a biomarker of amplified autonomic noc-
exacerbation of anxiety through impaired mPFC engagement. The turnal arousal and thus anxiety, especially considering the central
manifold consequences may include loss of adequate emotion regu- role of sympathetic hyperactivity in neurobiological explanations of
lation and excess emotional responsivity, together with maladaptive anxiety disorders68,69.
states of autonomic hyperarousal, including sympathoadrenal and Our final experimental question addressed whether mod-
hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal overactivity. est nightly reductions in sleep quality from one night to the next,
Our second core experimental question examined what it is within individuals, would result in a corresponding increase in anx-
about sleep, physiologically, that provides an overnight, anxiolytic iety from one day to the next.
benefit. Across the SR night in both in-laboratory studies, greater Consistent with the anxiogenic impact of sleep deprivation, we
NREM SWA (and associated SWS) predicted a greater overnight establish that even subtle perturbations in sleep quality from one
NAtuRE HuMAN BEHAvIOuR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NATuRE HuMAN BEHAvIOuR Articles
night to the next negatively impact anxiety—worse night-to-night SR session, participants arrived at the laboratory at 19.00 and were wired up for
sleep quality (efficiency) predicted consequential elevation in anxi- an ambulatory PSG recording (detailed below) after which they were sent home,
allowing for more naturalistic sleep. The next morning, participants returned to
ety the following day. These findings build on clinical and cross-sec-
the laboratory and had the electrodes removed. Participants then performed the
tional data that reported associations between lower sleep efficiency same activities as those described above in the SD condition, starting at the same
in patients with anxiety disorders relative to controls23 and, in a circadian time. The SD and SR sessions were separated by at least 7 d, with their
more general population sample, that self-reported poor sleep qual- order counterbalanced across participants.
ity positively correlates with higher anxiety30.
fMRI affective paradigm. During fMRI scanning, participants viewed
Of note, co-variate analyses demonstrated that the relationship
16 experimentally controlled video clips depicting aversive scenarios (featuring
between sleep loss and anxiety (both at the neural and behavioural humans, animals and/or the environment in a counterbalanced manner) that
level) remained significant, even when taking into account co- induce robust affective brain activity in our a priori networks of interest31,72. Each
occurring changes in mood (see Supplementary Note 1). Moreover, video lasted 32.3 s on average (±2.5 s). Twelve additional videos of equivalent
duration were created that depicted neutral scenarios related to common
this was true when using an alternative assessment of anxiety known
objects (for example, the history of typewriters or differences in envelope
to be less collinear with mood (BAI44; see Methods).
design). As with previous such fMRI paradigms, these neutral videos provided
Though the online micro-longitudinal study was not designed to an on-task comparison to the emotional videos, specifically allowing for the
explore the direction in which disturbed sleep and anxiety interact, discrimination of brain activity that is unique to the processing of emotional
our findings point towards impaired sleep as a strong modulator stimuli (emotional > neutral condition). The fMRI affective paradigm included
eight emotional and six neutral videos in each experimental session. This choice
of next-day anxiety even when statistically controlling for previous
was driven by the need for increased sampling of the emotional condition,
anxiety states (see Supplementary Note 4). This does not invalidate
accommodating for known higher variability in affective brain regions relative to
the bidirectional nature of the interaction between sleep and anxi- neutral73, thus improving signal sampling.
ety, with several reports demonstrating that daytime anxiety can be The paradigm had two versions, each including a different set of emotional and
associated with subsequent impairments in sleep quality39,40. Indeed, neutral videos. Participants were counterbalanced in the version of the paradigm
they viewed such that each version was viewed in a SR session for half of the
such bidirectionality has the potential for creating a negative feed-
participants and in a SD session for others. Thus, video-clip themes were also
back cycle wherein sleep disruption and escalating anxiety become
counterbalanced across participants. In each session the videos were presented
self-reinforcing39, offering mechanisms contributing to the initial in two runs, with each run containing seven videos. The different video trials
instigation of anxiety disorders as well as their ongoing mainte- (emotional, neutral) appeared in randomized order within each run.
nance and/or worsening4,5. To verify attention to each video, participants were asked a brief memory
question about the content, at the end of each clip (for example, ‘How many
That even modest reductions in sleep quality impact next-day
children were featured in the video?’ or ‘What material was used to seal the first
anxiety is relevant given the continued erosion of sleep time in envelopes?’), followed by an inter-trial fixation period (jittered, 4–8 s). The start of
developed nations (National Sleep Foundation Sleep in America each run contained a 10-s fixation block, allowing for steady-state equilibrium of
Poll, 2013), and the high prevalence and economic health burden the blood-oxygenation-level dependent (BOLD) fMRI signal.
of anxiety disorders in these same countries6. Considering that
70–80% of patients suffering from anxiety disorders report restless Anxiety assessment—in-laboratory study. State anxiety was measured twice in
each in-laboratory session using the validated 20-item state verson of STAI71. This
and unsatisfying sleep50, disturbed sleep might be an underappreci-
inventory measures transient feelings of anxiety and ranges in score from 20 to
ated factor in the escalating rates of anxiety disorders. 80, with higher scores indicating greater anxiety71. Response options used a four-
Shifting to prevention, our findings suggest that even modest point scale ranging from ‘Not at all’ to ‘Very much so’. Sample items include ‘I feel
improvements in sleep quality may have the potential to reduce sub- strained’, ‘I am worried’ and ‘I am jittery’ as well as ‘I feel steady’ and ‘I am relaxed’,
jective anxiety, serving as a non-pharmacological prophylactic. That which are coded using an inverted scale (see Extended Data Fig. 2 for means and
s.d. of all individual items). Cronbach’s alpha for all 20 items was 0.88 on the SR
is, sleep may be seen as a modifiable risk factor and intervention
session and 0.92 on the SD session.
target for those suffering from anxiety, both clinical and subclinical.
In-laboratory PSG replication study. A second PSG study was conducted to validate,
Methods and to attempt to replicate, the original PSG findings using a similar cohort
In-laboratory experiment. Participants. Eighteen healthy adults, aged 18–24 years composition and, furthermore, was performed using in-laboratory sleep recordings
(mean, 20.2 ± 1.5 years, nine women) completed a repeated-measures cross-over to examine whether the original at-home recording environment was a factor.
design (described below). Participants abstained from caffeine and alcohol for Here, 32 healthy adults, aged 18–24 years (mean, 20.47 ± 1.8 years, 18 women)
72 h before each study session. Participants’ habitual sleep–wake rhythm was took part in the overnight sleep study. Participants arrived in the laboratory at
monitored for the three nights before study participation, verified by sleep logs approximately 20.00 and were prepared for an overnight PSG sleep-recording
and actigraphy (a wristwatch movement sensor, sensitive to wake and sleep states; session. Similar to the original cohort, participants were asked to report their
average sleep duration, 8.24 h ± 38 min). Data from these participants were also current subjective anxiety using the state version of STAI71 at two different times—
published in our recent work70. Exclusion criteria, assessed using a prescreening in the evening before overnight sleep (20.00–22.00) and in the morning following
questionnaire, included: a history of sleep disorders, neurological disorders, closed sleep (08.00–09.00). Mirroring our original study, analysis focused a priori on the
head injury, Axis 1 psychiatric disorders, history of drug abuse and current use of association between NREM SWS and SWA and the next-day reduction in anxiety.
antidepressant or hypnotic medication. Participants who reported sleeping <7 h
per night or consuming three or more daily caffeine-containing drinks were also Online micro-longitudinal studies 1 and 2. Habitual variations in sleep associated
excluded from entering the study. The study was approved by the local human with changes in anxiety. In addition to the in-laboratory total sleep deprivation, we
studies committee of the University of California Berkeley, with all participants tested whether more modest night-to-night variability in sleep quality, focusing
providing written informed consent. a priori on sleep efficiency, would predict day-to-day changes in subjective feelings
of anxiety.
Experimental design. Following successful completion of screening, participants In online study 1, a total of 293 participants (mean age 36.84 years, 161 women)
entered a repeated-measures study design (Fig. 1a), including two sessions signed up for this study using Amazon Mechanical Turk (MTurk)—a platform
conducted in a counterbalanced order—one after a normal night of sleep and one where individuals can perform online tasks for a specified reimbursement (here,
after 24 h of total sleep deprivation. Participants were randomly assigned to start US$1.80). Enrolment was restricted to those with Internet Protocol addresses
with either a SD (n = 8) or a SR session (n = 10). Anxiety states were measured in the United States, and a previous online MTurk approval rating of 95% or
twice in each session using the state version of the STAI71 (see Anxiety assessment– higher. Following recruitment, participants were asked to complete sleep surveys
in-laboratory study)—in the evening before any sleep manipulation (between 20.00 quantifying their sleep across two consecutive nights (see Supplementary Table
and 22.00) and in the morning following both sleep sessions (08.00–09.00). 2), followed by next-day assessment of anxiety using a short form of the STAI74
In the SD session, participants arrived at the laboratory at 21.30 and were questionnaire (see Anxiety assessment—online studies, below, for more details).
continuously monitored throughout the enforced waking period by trained In addition to the detailed information obtained from daily sleep logs, participants
personnel. During the SD period, participants engaged in a limited set of activities were also asked, ‘how well did you sleep last night?’ on a scale from 1 (extremely
such as Internet, email, short walks, reading, watching movies or playing board poor) to 5 (extremely good) as a subjective measure of sleep quality.
games. The following morning at approximately 10.30 (±45 min), participants All questions were presented in random order. To measure anxiety in relation
performed the affective fMRI paradigm inside the scanner (details below). In the to previous sleep efficiency, the survey was available online only during a specific
NAtuRE HuMAN BEHAvIOuR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NATuRE HuMAN BEHAvIOuR
time window in the morning (until 13.00), and participants were requested to was calculated using SPSS (IBM Corp.), taking into account time (evening and
complete the survey as close as possible to their wake-up time. Based on these morning anxiety scores) across the different sleep conditions (SR, SD). In case of
quality control factors, and the repeated nature of the survey, not all recruited significance, post hoc tests were computed using two-sided t-tests corrected for
participants completed both daily measures or were eligible for the final analysis multiple comparisons using Bonferroni correction. For each post hoc comparison,
(n = 75). Additionally, 24 participants either had incomplete data, completed the we also report the partial eta-squared as a measure of effect size. Sample size of the
survey at the wrong time or had duplicate entries of their survey data (for example, in-laboratory study was not predetermined statistically as it followed sample sizes
completed the same survey multiple times). The final sample therefore included matched to effects sizes reported in previous experimental sleep studies
194 participants (mean age, 37.03 ± 11.3 years, 105 women). examining anxiety46,55,80.
In the second online study, a total of 187 participants (mean To assess the hypothesis that this anxiogenic impact of sleep loss involved
age, 36.56 ± 11.5 years, 85 women) signed up for the study using MTurk, with altered activity in four a priori ROIs (mPFC, insula, amygdala and dACC),
criteria similar to those detailed above. However, two key changes were made for condition-specific ROI activity was extracted using recommended neuro-imaging
this online study: (1) participants were asked to complete sleep surveys quantifying standards81, comparing mean activity across the entire ROI sphere between sleep
their sleep across four, instead of two, consecutive nights; and (2) next-day and task conditions. For each region, a repeated-measure ANOVA with the factors
assessment of anxiety used both the short form of the STAI questionnaire (as sleep (SR/SD) and task condition (emotional/neutral clips) was applied. Only in
in online study 1) and the BAI44 (see Anxiety assessment—online sudies, below, cases of a significant interaction between task condition and sleep was ROI activity
for more details). Participants that failed to complete at least three daily surveys considered for further analysis. For all ANOVA testing, sphericity was examined
(n = 33) were excluded from further analysis to allow for sufficient variability in using Mauchly’s test and, in cases of violation, F-values were adjusted using the
assessing directionality effects. The final sample included n = 154 participants Greenhouse–Geisser correction.
(mean age, 36.78 ± 11.7 years, 68 women). In the case of null results, we conducted a Bayes factor analysis to determine
Analysis focused a priori on sleep efficiency, given previous studies linking the relative strength of the null hypothesis using JASP (JASP Team, 2017).
anxiety with impairments in sleep quality and continuity relative to sleep The Bayes factor overcomes some of the issues associated with null hypothesis
duration alone7,22,24. Sleep efficiency was calculated using participants’ daily sleep significance testing, by quantifying the relative likelihood of the data under the null
surveys, based on the percentage of time asleep out of total sleep duration (that versus the alternative hypothesis. Specifically, for Bayesian alternatives to the t-test
is, total sleep time minus sleep latency and time spent awake after sleep onset75). or regression we calculated the Jeffrey–Zellner–Siow82 Bayes factor with an effect
Thereafter, we tested whether night-to-night variability in sleep efficiency, within size of 1 to determine the strength of evidence against a group-level difference
participants, predicted day-to day changes in their subjective anxiety status. in brain activity or behaviour. All Bayesian analysis of variance used the default
In online study 1, examining our specific categorical hypothesis and providing settings in JASP. A Jeffrey–Zellner–Siow Bayes factor can be interpreted such
a homologue to the in-laboratory study of a binary sleep condition separation, we that a value of 3 favours the null hypothesis three times more than the alternative
categorically parsed the sleep data of the online participants based on whether they hypothesis, while a value of one-third favours the alternative three times more than
experienced a minimal threshold of an increase (n = 47) or decrease (n = 33) in the null hypothesis.
sleep efficiency from one night to the next (above or below 3% change, respectively, Associations between ROI activity and behavioural measures of anxiety or
negating statistical bias of zero-change influence on the outcome75,76). Thereafter, sleep were tested using Pearson’s correlation, with mean activity from the entire
a comparison of the corresponding change in anxiety within individuals, from literature-defined spheres (that is, limited not only to the activated cluster) to
one day to the next, was performed. In online study 2, multilevel mixed models avoid spurious fMRI–behaviour correlations81. All brain and behaviour measures
were used to examine the impact of night-to-night variability in sleep efficiency (including sleep-related measures) were tested for normality using the Shapiro–
to subjective feelings of anxiety across multiple days. Briefly (but see Data Wilk test before parametric statistic testing.
analysis, below) two key models were tested: (1) the impact of a relative change in
sleep efficiency within an individual to anxiety the next day (anxiety (day n) ~ sleep Statistical analyses—online micro-longitudinal study. The hypothesis of the micro-
efficiency (night n) and (2) the impact of a relative change in sleep efficiency to anxiety longitudinal study stated that changes in sleep quality within an individual, from
the next day while controlling for the impact of previous anxiety (anxiety (day n) one night to the next, predicted day-to-day changes in anxiety. In online study 1,
~ sleep efficiency (night n) + anxiety (day n–1). Of note, both online studies focused two independent analysis approaches were taken to test this hypothesis: (1) mixed
on assessment during weekdays to avoid known effects of weekend on sleep ANOVA applied to morning anxiety scores as a factor of sleep efficiency (worse/
duration77. Moreover, we found no evidence for a change in either sleep efficiency improved sleep efficiency subgroups, see above) and time (day 1/day 2), with main
(F(1, 419.78) = 2.36, P = 0.12) or anxiety (F(1, 446.51) = 0.24, P = 0.6) over the four and interaction effects tested at a significance of P < 0.05; and (2) across all study
different surveyed weekdays in online study 2, suggesting that day of week was not participants, the association between sleep efficiency and anxiety was tested using
a significant modulating factor influencing our key variables of interest. Pearson’s correlation, similarly assessed at a significance of P < 0.05. Sample sizes of
both online studies were not predetermined statistically, as they followed
Anxiety assessment—online studies. Two anxiety assessments were used in each
sample sizes matched to effects sizes reported in previous habitual sleep studies
daily survey of the online micro-longitudinal studies. The first, a short form of
examining anxiety40,83.
the STAI questionnaire74, was used in online studies 1 and 2. This questionnaire
In online study 2, data consisted of up to four data points nested within each
includes six statements similar to those described above for the in-laboratory
individual. Because these nested data violate assumptions of independence, we
STAI questionnaire (see Anxiety Assessment—in-laboratory study and Extended
analysed our data using multilevel mixed modelling with participants as random
Data Fig. 3 for means and s.d. of all individual items). Cronbach’s alpha for all six
effects and day as a repeated measure (Mixed Models, SPSS v.25). In all key models,
items was 0.82 on the first day of online study 1 and 0.86 on the first day of online
predictors were person-centred so that results would reflect changes for each
study 2. The second anxiety assessment, BAI44, was added to online study 2. The
participant from their own average (that is, having worse or better sleep relative
BAI is a 21-item self-report measure of anxiety that focuses on somatic content and
to an individual’s average sleep). Additionally, to explore the directional impact
includes symptoms such as ‘Heart pounding/racing’, ‘Fear of worst happening’ and
of changes in sleep efficiency on anxiety, lagged day analyses were conducted
‘Terrified or afraid’. Participants were asked to state how much they were bothered
by regressing anxiety on day n onto both sleep efficiency the previous night and
by each symptom since waking up that day, using a four-point scale ranging from
anxiety on day n–1. For all models, degrees of freedom were calculated using the
‘Not at all’ to ‘Severely, it bothered me a lot’ (see Extended Data Fig. 4 for means
Satterthwaite approximation, which yields degrees of freedom that are somewhere
and s.d. of all individual items). Cronbach’s alpha for all 21 items was 0.94 on the
between the number of repeated measures and the number of individuals. Total
first day of online study 2.
variance explained (R2) for online study 2 was calculated using the recommended
Mood assessment (in-laboratory and online studies). Negative mood and anxiety proportional reduction in variance approach84,85. In this method R2 = 1 – σ2/σ02,
are often co-morbid41, and both affective states have been linked to lack of sleep43. where σ2 is the full model residual variance and σ02 is the null model
We therefore controlled for co-occurring changes in mood in both the online and residual variance.
in-laboratory studies. In the latter, changes in mood were measured at the same
circadian time as the anxiety assessment using the positive and negative affective fMRI acquisition and analysis. BOLD contrast functional images were acquired
scale (PANAS78). The PANAS is a 20-item self-report measure of current subjective with echo-planar T2*-weighted imaging using a Siemens 3 Tesla MRI scanner with
mood that comprises two scales: Positive (for example, ‘Excited’, ‘Strong’) and a 12-channel head coil. Each image volume consisted of 37 descending 3.5-mm
Negative (for example, ‘Ashamed’, ‘Distressed’). Participants are asked to rate the slices (matrix = 96 × 96, TR = 2,000 ms, TE = 22 ms, voxel size = 3.5 × 3.5 × 3.2 mm3,
extent to which they were experiencing each item, using a five-point scale (1, ‘very flip angle = 50°, interslice gap = 0.3 mm). One high-resolution, T1-weighted
slightly or not at all’; 5,‘extremely’). In online studies 1 and 2, changes in mood were structural scan was acquired at the end of each session (matrix =256 × 256,
tracked in each daily measure using the short form of the PANAS questionnaire79. TR = 1,900, TE = 2.52, flip angle = 9°, field-of-view = 256 mm, voxel
This form of the PANAS includes a subsample of ten items (five negative, five size = 1 × 1 × 1 mm3).
positive) from the 20-item PANAS mentioned above, rated using the same Preprocessing and data analysis were performed using Statistical Parametric
five-point scale. Mapping software implemented in Matlab (SPM12; Wellcome Department of
Cognitive Neurology, London, UK). Images were motion corrected and slice time
Data analysis. Statistical analyses—in-laboratory study. To test the hypothesis corrected, and then spatially normalized to the Montreal Neurological Institute
of greater levels of anxiety following sleep loss, a repeated-measure ANOVA template and smoothed using a 6-mm, full-width-at-half-maximum Gaussian
NAtuRE HuMAN BEHAvIOuR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NATuRE HuMAN BEHAvIOuR Articles
kernel using default parameters in SPM12. For each subject, trial-related activity values were averaged across three channel derivations: Frontal (F3, F4, Fz), Central
was assessed by convolving a vector of trial onsets with a canonical haemodynamic (C3, C4, Cz) and Posterior (P3, P4, Oz).
response function.
The six movement-related covariates (three rigid-body translations and Reporting Summary. Further information on research design is available in the
three rotations determined from the realignment preprocessing step) were used Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.
as regressors in the design matrix for modelling movement-related artefact
in the time series. To further address the influence of motion on BOLD data, Data availability
we calculated frame-wise displacement of head motion based on the motion
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the
parameters estimated during preprocessing using the ArtRepair toolbox86. TRs
corresponding authors upon request.
including frame-wise displacement values >1 were interpolated with the nearest
artefact-free TRs surrounding the motion. To control for physiological noise, five
Received: 21 May 2019; Accepted: 13 September 2019;
principal components of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and white matter signal were
added as regressors to the design matrix, implemented through the CompCor Published: xx xx xxxx
pipeline87. Extraction of white matter/CSF signal was derived using probabilistic
maps segmented from the T1-weighted anatomical image of each participant using References
the segment function implanted in SPM12. Masks were then thresholded at a
1. Babson, K. A., Trainor, C. D., Feldner, M. T. & Blumenthal, H. A test of the
probability value of 0.99 for white matter and 0.95 for CSF, converted to functional
effects of acute sleep deprivation on general and specific self-reported anxiety
resolution and eroded to eliminate isolated voxels.
and depressive symptoms: an experimental extension. J. Behav. Ther. Exp.
Following preprocessing, a general linear model (GLM)88 was specified for
Psychiatry 41, 297–303 (2010).
each participant to investigate the effects of interest. Contrasts were created at
2. Pires, G. N., Bezerra, A. G., Tufik, S. & Andersen, M. L. Effects of acute sleep
the first level focusing on emotional versus neutral contrast to target regions
deprivation on state anxiety levels: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
sensitive to affective processing. The resulting contrasts were then taken through
Sleep. Med. 24, 109–118 (2016).
to a second-level, random-effects analysis, to assess group-level effects, examined
3. Papadimitriou, G. N. & Linkowski, P. Sleep disturbance in anxiety disorders.
using a paired t-test (SR < > SD). Analyses focused a priori on activity in a set
Int. Rev. Psychiatry 17, 229–236 (2005).
of brain regions comprising the extended limbic network, which have been
4. Breslau, N., Roth, T., Rosenthal, L. & Andreski, P. Sleep disturbance and
implicated in studies of both anxiety disorders10,69 and affective processing in
psychiatric disorders: a longitudinal epidemiological study of young adults.
highly anxious individuals8,12,38. These regions include: bilateral amygdala13–15,
Biol. Psychiatry 39, 411–418 (1996).
bilateral insula10,16,89, dACC9,15,89 and medial prefrontal regions18,90–92. ROIs were
5. Neckelmann, D., Mykletun, A. & Dahl, A. A. Chronic insomnia as a risk
an independent set of literature-defined regions, constructed as 5-mm spheres
factor for developing anxiety and depression. Sleep 30, 873–880 (2007).
around reported coordinates for each region, selected to approximate the average
6. Kessler, R. C. et al. The global burden of mental disorders: an update from
cluster sizes reported in the original studies from which coordinates were taken
the WHO World Mental Health (WMH) surveys. Epidemiol. Psychiatr. Sci.
(see Supplementary Table 1 for a complete list of ROIs). Beyond these a priori
18, 23–33 (2009).
ROIs, non-a priori whole-brain results are provided in Supplementary Table 3 for
7. Mellman, T. A. Sleep and anxiety disorders. Sleep. Med. Clin. 3,
completeness, but are not discussed further.
261–268 (2008).
To identify changes in functional connectivity of the mPFC–amygdala circuit
8. Stein, M. B., Simmons, A. N., Feinstein, J. S. & Paulus, M. P. Increased
as a function of sleep, a psycho-physiological interaction (PPI) analysis was
amygdala and insula activation during emotion processing in anxiety-prone
conducted separately for each session (SD/SR) using SPM12 (ref. 93). PPI analysis
subjects. Am. J. Psychiatry 164, 318–327 (2007).
examined connectivity between the mPFC ROI seed and the amygdala, using the
9. Simmons, A. N. et al. Anxiety positive subjects show altered processing in the
same a priori ROIs chosen for the GLM analysis above. Consistent with standard
anterior insula during anticipation of negative stimuli. Hum. Brain Mapp. 32,
PPI practices93, an individual design matrix for each participant included three
1836–1846 (2011).
regressors: (1) the BOLD signal time course from the mPFC seed region, (2)
10. Etkin, A. & Wager, T. D. Functional neuroimaging of anxiety: a meta-analysis
regressors coding the temporal ordering of task conditions (emotional and neutral
of emotional processing in PTSD, social anxiety disorder, and specific phobia.
videos) and (3) the PPI term, reflecting the product of the deconvolved time
Am. J. Psychiatry 164, 1476–1488 (2007).
course in the mPFC with a vector representing the order of the psychological
11. Simmons, A. et al. Anxiety vulnerability is associated with altered
variables of interest.
anterior cingulate response to an affective appraisal task. Neuroreport 19,
These matrices were defined separately for each sleep condition, and further
1033–1037 (2008).
included all nuisance regressors used in the GLM analysis (for example, movement
12. Straube, T., Schmidt, S., Weiss, T., Mentzel, H.-J. & Miltner, W. H. Dynamic
and physiological noise as detailed above87). A second-level paired t-test comparing
activation of the anterior cingulate cortex during anticipatory anxiety.
the two conditions (SD, SR) was then applied to PPI results.
Neuroimage 44, 975–981 (2009).
13. Carlson, J. M., Greenberg, T., Rubin, D. & Mujica-Parodi, L. R. Feeling
Sleep recordings and spectral analysis. Sleep was recorded using standard PSG anxious: anticipatory amygdalo-insular response predicts the feeling of
including EEG, electromyography and electrooculography recordings. EEG was anxious anticipation. Soc. Cogn. Affect. Neurosci. 6, 74–81 (2010).
recorded from 13 scalp electrodes (Fp1, Fp2, F3, F4, F7, F8, Fz, C3, C4, Cz, P3, P4 14. Ewbank, M. P. et al. Anxiety predicts a differential neural response to
and Oz; International 10–20 System), referenced to left and right mastoid (A1, attended and unattended facial signals of anger and fear. Neuroimage 44,
A2). For the in-laboratory replication PSG study, scalp electrodes also included 1144–1151 (2009).
temporal electrodes (T3, T4, T5 and T6) as well as O1, O2 and Pz. EEG signals 15. Xu, P. et al. Neural basis of emotional decision making in trait anxiety.
were sampled at 200 Hz in the original study and 400 Hz in the in-laboratory PSG J. Neurosci. 33, 18641–18653 (2013).
study. PSG recordings were scored according to standard criteria94. Sleep statistics 16. Simmons, A., Strigo, I., Matthews, S. C., Paulus, M. P. & Stein, M. B.
are provided in Extended Data Fig. 5, and conform to population norms for this Anticipation of aversive visual stimuli is associated with increased
age range75. insula activation in anxiety-prone subjects. Biol. Psychiatry 60,
All EEG analyses were performed in MATLAB 8.6 (The MathWorks), including 402–409 (2006).
the add-in toolbox EEGLAB (http://sccn.ucsd.edu/eeglab/). Power spectral 17. Bishop, S., Duncan, J., Brett, M. & Lawrence, A. D. Prefrontal cortical
analysis of sleep EEG was performed according to previously published methods27. function and anxiety: controlling attention to threat-related stimuli.
Specifically, raw EEG channels were filtered with high- and low-pass finite impulse Nat. Neurosci. 7, 184 (2004).
response at 0.5 and 50 Hz, respectively. Artefacts were then visually rejected in 5-s 18. Kim, M. J., Gee, D. G., Loucks, R. A., Davis, F. C. & Whalen, P. J. Anxiety
epochs and removed from subsequent analyses. One subject was excluded from dissociates dorsal and ventral medial prefrontal cortex functional connectivity
spectral analysis due to a limited number of artefact-free NREM epochs (<40%). with the amygdala at rest. Cereb. Cortex 21, 1667–1673 (2010).
Power spectral density was calculated with a fast Fourier transform (FFT) on each 19. Prater, K. E., Hosanagar, A., Klumpp, H., Angstadt, M. & Luan Phan, K.
hamming-windowed 5-s epoch. FFT results were then sorted according to sleep Aberrant amygdala–frontal cortex connectivity during perception of fearful
stage and averaged for each respective stage. faces and at rest in generalized social anxiety disorder. Depress. Anxiety 30,
Band power was calculated by averaging across standard EEG frequency 234–241 (2013).
band ranges: δ (0.8–4.6 Hz), θ (4.8–8.0 Hz), α (8.2–12 Hz), σ (12.2–15 Hz), β1 20. Campbell-Sills, L. et al. Functioning of neural systems supporting emotion
(15.2–20 Hz), β2 (20.2–35 Hz) and γ (35.2–45 Hz). Values were further divided regulation in anxiety-prone individuals. Neuroimage 54, 689–696 (2011).
by total power across all bands to yield relative spectral measures per sleep stage. 21. Pezawas, L. et al. 5-HTTLPR polymorphism impacts human cingulate-
We focused a priori on NREM sleep due to evidence linking changes in this sleep amygdala interactions: a genetic susceptibility mechanism for depression.
stage to both clinical and non-clinical states of anxiety22–24,26,27, and on NREM SWA Nat. Neurosci. 8, 828 (2005).
power (δ, 0.5–4 Hz), based on previous clinical studies reporting alterations in 22. Forbes, E. E. et al. Objective sleep in pediatric anxiety disorders and
slow-wave frequencies in anxious patient cohorts29 and in highly anxious healthy major depressive disorder. J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 47,
individuals28. To examine NREM SWA power in relation to anxiety, relative power 148–155 (2008).
NAtuRE HuMAN BEHAvIOuR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NATuRE HuMAN BEHAvIOuR
23. Fuller, K. H., Waters, W. F., Binks, P. G. & Anderson, T. Generalized anxiety 53. Lane, R. D., Reiman, E., Ahern, G. L. & Thayer, J. 21. Activity in medial
and sleep architecture: a polysomnographic investigation. Sleep 20, prefrontal cortex correlates with vagal component of heart rate variability
370–376 (1997). during emotion. Brain Cogn. 47, 97–100 (2001).
24. Arriaga, F. & Paiva, T. Clinical and EEG sleep changes in primary dysthymia 54. Yoo, S.-S., Gujar, N., Hu, P., Jolesz, F. A. & Walker, M. P. The human
and generalized anxiety: a comparison with normal controls. emotional brain without sleep—a prefrontal amygdala disconnect. Curr. Biol.
Neuropsychobiology 24, 109–114 (1990). 17, R877–R878 (2007).
25. Stein, M. B., Enns, M. W. & Kryger, M. H. Sleep in nondepressed patients 55. Simon, E. B. et al. Losing neutrality: the neural basis of impaired emotional
with panic disorder: II. Polysomnographic assessment of sleep architecture control without sleep. J. Neurosci. 35, 13194–13205 (2015).
and sleep continuity. J. Affect. Disord. 28, 1–6 (1993). 56. Diekelmann, S. & Born, J. The memory function of sleep. Nat. Rev. Neurosci.
26. Yetkin, S., Aydin, H. & Özgen, F. Polysomnography in patients with 11, 114 (2010).
post‐traumatic stress disorder. Psychiatry Clin. Neurosci. 64, 57. Ekman, P. E. & Davidson, R. J. The Nature of Emotion: Fundamental
309–317 (2010). Questions (Oxford Univ. Press, 1994).
27. Horváth, A. et al. Effects of state and trait anxiety on sleep structure: 58. Kecklund, G. & Åkerstedt, T. Apprehension of the subsequent working
a polysomnographic study in 1083 subjects. Psychiatry Res. 244, day is associated with a low amount of slow wave sleep. Biol. Psychol. 66,
279–283 (2016). 169–176 (2004).
28. Sysoeva, Y. Y. & Verbitsky, E. Influence of the level of trait anxiety on sleep 59. Krystal, A. D., Edinger, J. D., Wohlgemuth, W. K. & Marsh, G. R. NREM
EEG of men and women. Hum. Physiol. 39, 655–662 (2013). sleep EEG frequency spectral correlates of sleep complaints in primary
29. Woodward, S. H., Murburg, M. M. & Bliwise, D. L. PTSD-related insomnia subtypes. Sleep 25, 626–636 (2002).
hyperarousal assessed during sleep. Physiol. Behav. 70, 197–203 (2000). 60. Hall, M. et al. Psychological stress is associated with heightened physiological
30. Norbury, R. & Evans, S. Time to think: subjective sleep quality, trait anxiety arousal during NREM sleep in primary insomnia. Behav. Sleep Med. 5,
and university start time. Psychiatry Res. 271, 214–219 (2018). 178–193 (2007).
31. Gross, J. J. & Levenson, R. W. Emotion elicitation using films. Cogn. Emot. 9, 61. Dijk, D.-J. Slow-wave sleep, diabetes, and the sympathetic nervous system.
87–108 (1995). Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 105, 1107–1108 (2008).
32. Knight, R. G., Waal‐Manning, H. J. & Spears, G. F. Some norms and 62. Beissner, F., Meissner, K., Bär, K.-J. & Napadow, V. The autonomic brain: an
reliability data for the State‐Trait Anxiety Inventory and the Zung Self‐Rating activation likelihood estimation meta-analysis for central processing of
Depression scale. Br. J. Clin. Psychol. 22, 245–249 (1983). autonomic function. J. Neurosci. 33, 10503–10511 (2013).
33. Etkin, A., Egner, T. & Kalisch, R. Emotional processing in anterior cingulate 63. Fan, J. et al. Spontaneous brain activity relates to autonomic arousal.
and medial prefrontal cortex. Trends Cogn. Sci. 15, 85–93 (2011). J. Neurosci. 32, 11176–11186 (2012).
34. Phillips, M. L., Drevets, W. C., Rauch, S. L. & Lane, R. Neurobiology of 64. Chouchou, F. & Desseilles, M. Heart rate variability: a tool to explore the
emotion perception I: the neural basis of normal emotion perception. sleeping brain? Front. Neurosci. 8, https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2014.00402
Biol. Psychiatry 54, 504–514 (2003). (2014).
35. Hahn, A. et al. Reduced resting-state functional connectivity between 65. Hall, M. et al. Acute stress affects heart rate variability during sleep.
amygdala and orbitofrontal cortex in social anxiety disorder. Neuroimage 56, Psychosom. Med. 66, 56–62 (2004).
881–889 (2011). 66. Bierwolf, C., Struve, K., Marshall, L., Born, J. & Fehm, H. L. Slow wave sleep
36. Goldin, P. R., Manber, T., Hakimi, S., Canli, T. & Gross, J. J. Neural bases of drives inhibition of pituitary‐adrenal secretion in humans. J. Neuroendocrinol.
social anxiety disorder: emotional reactivity and cognitive regulation during 9, 479–484 (1997).
social and physical threat. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 66, 170–180 (2009). 67. Buckley, T. M. & Schatzberg, A. F. On the interactions of the hypothalamic-
37. Etkin, A., Prater, K. E., Hoeft, F., Menon, V. & Schatzberg, A. F. Failure of pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis and sleep: normal HPA axis activity and
anterior cingulate activation and connectivity with the amygdala during circadian rhythm, exemplary sleep disorders. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 90,
implicit regulation of emotional processing in generalized anxiety disorder. 3106–3114 (2005).
Am. J. Psychiatry 167, 545–554 (2010). 68. Lang, P. J. & McTeague, L. M. The anxiety disorder spectrum: fear imagery,
38. Bishop, S. J. Neurocognitive mechanisms of anxiety: an integrative account. physiological reactivity, and differential diagnosis. Anxiety Stress Coping 22,
Trends Cogn. Sci. 11, 307–316 (2007). 5–25 (2009).
39. Åkerstedt, T., Kecklund, G. & Axelsson, J. Impaired sleep after bedtime stress 69. Craske, M. et al. Anxiety disorders. Nat. Rev. Dis. Prim. 3, 17024 (2017).
and worries. Biol. Psychol. 76, 170–173 (2007). 70. Simon, E. B. & Walker, M. P. Sleep loss causes social withdrawal and
40. Cropley, M., Dijk, D.-J. & Stanley, N. Job strain, work rumination, and sleep loneliness. Nat. Commun. 9, 3146 (2018).
in school teachers. Eur. J. Work Organ. Psychol. 15, 181–196 (2006). 71. Spielberger, C. D. Manual for the State–Trait Anxiety Inventory STAI (Form Y)
41. Hirschfeld, R. M. The comorbidity of major depression and anxiety disorders: (“Self-evaluation Questionnaire”) (Consulting Psychologists Press, 1983).
recognition and management in primary care. Prim. Care Companion J. Clin. 72. Hutcherson, C. et al. Attention and emotion: does rating emotion
Psychiatry 3, 244 (2001). alter neural responses to amusing and sad films? Neuroimage 27,
42. Goldstein, A. N. & Walker, M. P. The role of sleep in emotional brain 656–668 (2005).
function. Annu. Rev. Clin. Psychol. 10, 679–708 (2014). 73. Kragel, P. A., Reddan, M. C., LaBar, K. S. & Wager, T. D. Emotion schemas
43. Krause, A. J. et al. The sleep-deprived human brain. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 18, are embedded in the human visual system. Sci. Adv. 5, eaaw4358 (2019).
404 (2017). 74. Marteau, T. M. & Bekker, H. The development of a six-item short-form of the
44. Beck, A. T., Epstein, N., Brown, G. & Steer, R. A. An inventory for state scale of the Spielberger State–Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI). Br. J. Clin.
measuring clinical anxiety: psychometric properties. J. Consult. Clin. Psychol. Psychol. 31, 301–306 (1992).
56, 893 (1988). 75. Ohayon, M. M., Carskadon, M. A., Guilleminault, C. & Vitiello, M. V.
45. Creamer, M., Foran, J. & Bell, R. The Beck Anxiety Inventory in a non- Meta-analysis of quantitative sleep parameters from childhood to old age in
clinical sample. Behav. Res. Ther. 33, 477–485 (1995). healthy individuals: developing normative sleep values across the human
46. Motomura, Y. et al. Sleep debt elicits negative emotional reaction through lifespan. Sleep 27, 1255–1273 (2004).
diminished amygdala-anterior cingulate functional connectivity. PLoS One 8, 76. Lehnkering, H. & Siegmund, R. Influence of chronotype, season, and
e56578 (2013). sex of subject on sleep behavior of young adults. Chronobiol. Int. 24,
47. Minkel, J. D. et al. Sleep deprivation and stressors: evidence for elevated 875–888 (2007).
negative affect in response to mild stressors when sleep deprived. Emotion 12, 77. Åkerstedt, T. et al. Sleep duration and mortality – does weekend sleep matter?
1015–1020 (2012). J. Sleep. Res. 28, e12712 (2019).
48. Wu, H. et al. Effects of sleep restriction periods on serum cortisol levels in 78. Watson, D., Clark, L. A. & Tellegen, A. Development and validation of brief
healthy men. Brain Res. Bull. 77, 241–245 (2008). measures of positive and negative affect: the PANAS scales. J. Personal. Soc.
49. Walker, M. P. & van Der Helm, E. Overnight therapy? The role of sleep in Psychol. 54, 1063 (1988).
emotional brain processing. Psychol. Bull. 135, 731 (2009). 79. Thompson, E. R. Development and validation of an internationally reliable
50. Uhde, T. W., Cortese, B. M. & Vedeniapin, A. Anxiety and sleep problems: short-form of the positive and negative affect schedule (PANAS). J. Cross Cult
emerging concepts and theoretical treatment implications. Curr. Psychiatry Psychol. 38, 227–242 (2007).
Rep. 11, 269–276 (2009). 80. Goldstein, A. N. et al. Tired and apprehensive: anxiety amplifies the
51. Shin, L. M. et al. A functional magnetic resonance imaging study of impact of sleep loss on aversive brain anticipation. J. Neurosci. 33,
amygdala and medial prefrontal cortex responses to overtly presented 10607–10615 (2013).
fearful faces in posttraumatic stress disorder. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 62, 81. Poldrack, R. A. & Mumford, J. A. Independence in ROI analysis: where is the
273–281 (2005). voodoo? Soc. Cogn. Affect. Neurosci. 4, 208–213 (2009).
52. Blair, K. et al. Response to emotional expressions in generalized social phobia 82. Rouder, J. N., Speckman, P. L., Sun, D., Morey, R. D. & Iverson, G. Bayesian
and generalized anxiety disorder: evidence for separate disorders. Am. J. t tests for accepting and rejecting the null hypothesis. Psychon. Bull. Rev. 16,
Psychiatry 165, 1193–1202 (2008). 225–237 (2009).
NAtuRE HuMAN BEHAvIOuR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NATuRE HuMAN BEHAvIOuR Articles
83. Berset, M., Elfering, A., Lüthy, S., Lüthi, S. & Semmer, N. K. Work stressors Acknowledgements
and impaired sleep: rumination as a mediator. Stress Health 27, e71–e82 (2011). The authors thank R. Mak-McCully for valuable assistance with data analysis, and the
84. Xu, R. Measuring explained variation in linear mixed effects models. ISEF foundation for their continuous support. This work was supported by NIH (nos.
Stat. Med. 22, 3527–3541 (2003). R01AG031164, R01AG054019, RF1AG054019 and R01MH093537 to M.P.W). The
85. Peugh, J. L. A practical guide to multilevel modeling. J. Sch. Psychol. 48, funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish or
85–112 (2010). preparation of the manuscript.
86. Mazaika, P. K., Hoeft, F., Glover, G. H. & Reiss, A. L. Methods and software
for fMRI analysis of clinical subjects. Neuroimage 47, S58 (2009).
87. Behzadi, Y., Restom, K., Liau, J. & Liu, T. T. A component based noise Author contributions
correction method (CompCor) for BOLD and perfusion based fMRI. E.B.S and M.P.W. conceived and designed the study. E.B.S and A.R. collected
Neuroimage 37, 90–101 (2007). the data. E.B.S, A.R. and M.P.W. analysed the data. E.B.S, A.G.H and M.P.W wrote
88. Friston, K. J. et al. Statistical parametric maps in functional imaging: a the paper.
general linear approach. Hum. Brain Mapp. 2, 189–210 (1994).
89. Patel, R., Spreng, R. N., Shin, L. M. & Girard, T. A. Neurocircuitry models of
Competing interests
posttraumatic stress disorder and beyond: a meta-analysis of functional
neuroimaging studies. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 36, 2130–2142 (2012). The authors declare no competing interests.
90. Cha, J. et al. Hyper-reactive human ventral tegmental area and aberrant
mesocorticolimbic connectivity in overgeneralization of fear in generalized
anxiety disorder. J. Neurosci. 34, 5855–5860 (2014). Additional information
91. Blair, K. S. et al. Atypical modulation of medial prefrontal cortex to Extended data is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-019-0754-8.
self-referential comments in generalized social phobia. Psychiatry Res. Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/
Neuroimaging 193, 38–45 (2011). s41562-019-0754-8.
92. Burklund, L. J., Torre, J. B., Lieberman, M. D., Taylor, S. E. & Craske, M. G.
Neural responses to social threat and predictors of cognitive behavioral Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to E.B.
therapy and acceptance and commitment therapy in social anxiety disorder. or M.P.W.
Psychiatry Res. Neuroimaging 261, 52–64 (2017). Peer review information Primary handling editor: Mary Elizabeth Sutherland.
93. Friston, K. et al. Psychophysiological and modulatory interactions in Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
neuroimaging. Neuroimage 6, 218–229 (1997).
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
94. Rechtschaffen, A. & Kales, A. A Manual of Standardized Terminology,
published maps and institutional affiliations.
Techniques, and Scoring Systems for Sleep Stages of Human Subjects (Public
Health Service, US Government Printing Office, 1968). © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2019
NAtuRE HuMAN BEHAvIOuR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NATuRE HuMAN BEHAvIOuR
Extended Data Fig. 1 | Sleep rested physiology in relation to next-day anxiety (PSG replication study). (a), Anxiety association in relation to REM and
non-REM sleep stages (left panel). Time spent in deep NREM sleep (NREM3) was associated with a significant reduction in next-day anxiety (right scatter
plot). (b), Power in the Delta band (SWA, 0.8-4.6 Hz) during NREM sleep (left panel) was associated with lower morning anxiety (right scatter plot), most
pronounced for posterior derivations (circled by a dashed line). Dashed grey lines denote zero crossing.
NAtuRE HuMAN BEHAvIOuR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NATuRE HuMAN BEHAvIOuR Articles
Extended Data Fig. 2 | StAI item values (In-lab Study). Item values for in-lab STAI-state questionnaire (mean ± SD, higher values indicate greater
anxiety).
NAtuRE HuMAN BEHAvIOuR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NATuRE HuMAN BEHAvIOuR
Extended Data Fig. 3 | StAI item values (Online Studies). Item values for the online short STAI-state questionnaire (day 1; mean ± SD, higher values
indicate greater anxiety).
NAtuRE HuMAN BEHAvIOuR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NATuRE HuMAN BEHAvIOuR Articles
Extended Data Fig. 4 | BAI item values (Online Study 2). Item values for Beck Anxiety Inventory (day1; mean ± SD, higher values indicate greater
anxiety).
NAtuRE HuMAN BEHAvIOuR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NATuRE HuMAN BEHAvIOuR
Extended Data Fig. 5 | Sleep Characteristics (In-lab Study). Polysomnography sleep characteristics for the sleep-rested night (Mean ± SD). WASO, wake
after sleep onset; NREM, non rapid-eye-movement sleep; SWS, slow-wave sleep (SWS, NREM stages 3 and 4); REM, rapid-eye-movement sleep.
NAtuRE HuMAN BEHAvIOuR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
1
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Corresponding author(s): Eti Ben Simon and Matthew Walker
Last updated by author(s): 2019 August 10
Reporting Summary
Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency
in reporting. For further information on Nature Research policies, see Authors & Referees and the Editorial Policy Checklist.
Statistics
For all statistical analyses, confirm that the following items are present in the figure legend, table legend, main text, or Methods section.
n/a Confirmed
The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
A statement on whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided
Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.
A description of all covariates tested
A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
A full description of the statistical parameters including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient)
AND variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)
For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted
Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.
For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated
Our web collection on statistics for biologists contains articles on many of the points above.
Software and code
Policy information about availability of computer code
Data collection A Siemens 3 Tesla MRI scanner with a 12-channel head coil was used to collect functional and structural MRI data.
PSG data was recorded using a TREA EEG Amplifier (Grass Technologies) with a total of 23 electrodes (17 cortical, 2 EOG ,3 EMG and 1
EKG channel). In the second in-lab PSG study COMET EEG amplifier was used (Grass Technologies) with a total of 27 electrodes (21
cortical, 2 EOG ,3 EMG and 1 EKG channel)
Behavioral data was collected using PsychoPy v 1.83.
Data analysis fMRI preprocessing and data analysis were performed using Statistical Parametric Mapping software implemented in Matlab (SPM12;
Wellcome Department of Cognitive Neurology, London, UK).
All EEG analyses were performed in MATLAB 8.6 (The MathWorks), including the add-in toolbox EEGLAB (http://sccn.ucsd.edu/eeglab/)
Behavioral data was analyzed using SPSS (v25, IBM corp.) and JASP (v. 0.8.3 for bayesian analysis).
For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors/reviewers.
We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Research guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.
Data
Policy information about availability of data
All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable:
- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets
- A list of figures that have associated raw data
- A description of any restrictions on data availability
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding authors upon request.
2
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Field-specific reporting
Please select the one below that is the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.
Life sciences Behavioural & social sciences Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences
For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/documents/nr-reporting-summary-flat.pdf
Life sciences study design
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
Sample size Sample size was determined in line with our previous work on the effects of sleep loss in healthy adults( N of ~40 experimental sessions, two
per participant).
Data exclusions no participant was excluded from fMRI analysis. One participant was excluded from spectral EEG analysis due to a limited number of artifact-
free NREM epochs (less than 40%). Micro-longitudinal participants (Online Study 1, N=293) were excluded if 1) they had not completed both
nightly sleep surveys, 2) seep efficiency data exceeded 2.5 standard deviations from the mean or 3)they completed the same online survey
more than once. Based on these quality control factors N=194 were eligible for further analysis. In Online Study 2 (N=187) ,participants were
excluded if they failed to complete at least 3 daily surveys to allow for enough variability in assessing directionality effects. Final sample
therefore included N=154 participants.
Replication Experimental findings were confirmed using two additional two additional independent samples: a) 32 healthy participants took part in an in-
lab overnight sleep study intended to confirm the association of NREM sleep to anxiety in an independent dataset and b) a subsample of the
general population (N=154) took part in a second online micro-longitudinal study, now tracking their habitual sleep and subjective anxiety
across a longer duration of four consecutive nights/days in order to replicate the original findings and confirm the directionality of the sleep-
anxiety association.
Randomization All Participants took part in both experimental sessions (sleep rested and sleep deprived), in a randomized order (10 subjects started with a
sleep rested session and 8 with a sleep deprived session). Task versions were also randomized across sessions so both versions were
presented equally in both experimental sessions. Within each version task stimuli were presented in randomized order.
Survey questions in both Online Micro-longitudinal Studies were presented in random order.
Blinding Experiments did not involve blinding because no neuroimaging or behavioral performance was predefined. Participants were kept blind to
overall study objectives.
Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods
We require information from authors about some types of materials, experimental systems and methods used in many studies. Here, indicate whether each material,
system or method listed is relevant to your study. If you are not sure if a list item applies to your research, read the appropriate section before selecting a response.
Materials & experimental systems Methods
n/a Involved in the study n/a Involved in the study
Antibodies ChIP-seq
Eukaryotic cell lines Flow cytometry
Palaeontology MRI-based neuroimaging
Animals and other organisms
Human research participants
Clinical data
Human research participants
Policy information about studies involving human research participants
Population characteristics In lab experimental fMRI study included Eighteen healthy adults, ages 18-24 years (mean: 20.2yrs, SD 1.5, 9 women) .
Participants were well rested (average sleep duration>7 hr/night, validated using actigraphy prior to study participation ).
Participants were also free of sleep disorders, neurologic disorders, closed head injury, psychiatric disorders, history of drug
abuse and current use of anti-depressant or hypnotic medication validated using a pre-screening questionnaire.
In lab replication PSG study included 32 healthy adults, ages 18-24 years (mean: 20.47yr, SD1.8, 18 women)
Online micro-longitudinal study 1 included 194 participants (mean age=37.03±11.3y, 54% women); Online micro-longitudinal
study 2 included N=154 participants (mean age 36.78 yr, 45% women).
Recruitment In-lab participants were recruited using local ads distributed across the campus in Berkeley as well as using social media groups
relevant to Berkeley students. Online micro-longitudinal study participants (1 and 2) were recruited using Amazon Mechanical
3
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Turk.
Ethics oversight The study was approved by the local human studies committee of the university of California Berkeley, with all participants (in-
lab and online) providing written informed consent.
Note that full information on the approval of the study protocol must also be provided in the manuscript.
Magnetic resonance imaging
Experimental design
Design type task based block design
Design specifications 28 videos were presented overall (14 in each experimental session, 2 runs per session). Each vidoe lasted lasted 32.3 s
on average (SD 2.5 s). The different video trials (emotional, neutral) appeared in randomized order within each run with
an inter-trial fixation jittered between 4-8s.
Behavioral performance measures behavioral data (RT, button preses) was collected in order to verify attention to each video (a brief memory question
about the content of the video at the end of each clip).
Acquisition
Imaging type(s) Functional and structural
Field strength 3T
Sequence & imaging parameters Blood oxygenation level-dependent contrast functional images were acquired with echo-planar T2*-weighted (EPI)
imaging using a Siemens 3 Tesla MRI scanner with a 12-channel head coil. Each image volume consisted of 37
descending 3.5mm slices (96 x 96 matrix; TR = 2000 ms; TE = 22 ms; voxel size 3.5 x 3.5 x 3.2 mm, flip angle = 50, 0.3
mm interslice gap). One high-resolution, T1 weighted structural scan was acquired at the end of each session (256 x 256
matrix; TR=1900; TE = 2.52; flip angle = 9 ; FOV 256 mm; 1 x 1 x 1 mm voxels).
Area of acquisition whole-brain
Diffusion MRI Used Not used
Preprocessing
Preprocessing software Preprocessing was carried out using SPM12 (Wellcome Department of Cognitive Neurology, London, UK).
Normalization Data was normalized to MNI space using affine and non linear transformations as implemented in SPM12. In this
process,deformation is estimated by deforming template data to match an individual's T1 scan (segmented to gray and
white matter maps), a deformation which is then applied to the co-registered functional data.
Normalization template SPM12's MNI normalized templates
Noise and artifact removal To control for movement artifacts, six movement-related covariates (three rigid-body translations and three rotations
determined from the realignment preprocessing step) were used as regressors in the design matrix. To further address
the influence of motion on BOLD data, we calculated frame-wise displacement (FD) of head motion based on the
motion parameters estimated during preprocessing using the ArtRepair toolbox. TRs including FD values larger than 1
were interpolated with the nearest artifact free TRs surrounding the motion.
To control for physiological noise 5 principal components of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and white matter signal were
added as regressors to the design matrix, implemented through the CompCor pipeline. Extraction of white matter/CSF
signal was derived using probabilistic maps segmented from the T1 weighted anatomical image of each participant
using the segment function implanted in SPM12. Masks were then thresholded at a probability value of 0.99 for white
matter and 0.95 for CSF, converted to functional resolution and eroded to eliminate isolated voxels.
Volume censoring Subjects were excluded from further analysis if both movement regressors and FD values were larger than 2mm.
Statistical modeling & inference
Model type and settings A general linear model (GLM) was specified for each participant to investigate the effects of interest. The resulting
contrasts were then taken to a second level, random effects analysis to assess group-level effects, examined using a
paired ttest (Sleep Rested < > Sleep Deprived).
Effect(s) tested Contrasts were created at the first level focusing on Emotional vs. Neutral clips to target affective brain regions known
to be sensitive to anxiety.
Specify type of analysis: Whole brain ROI-based Both
Regions of interest (ROIs) were independent, literature-defined, 5mm spheres centered around reported
Anatomical location(s) coordinates of a-priori brain regions known to be sensitive to anxiety (coordinates are listed in Table S2
of supplementary information)
4
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Statistic type for inference Condition differences in ROI activity were examined using a repeated measure ANOVA with the factors of sleep (SR\SD)
(See Eklund et al. 2016) and task condition (emotional\neutral clips) .
Correction In the repeated measure ANOVA, post-hoc tests were computed using two-sided T-tests corrected for multiple
comparisons using the Bonferroni correction.
Models & analysis
n/a Involved in the study
Functional and/or effective connectivity
Graph analysis
Multivariate modeling or predictive analysis
Functional and/or effective connectivity To identify changes in mPFC-amygdala circuit functional connectivity as a function of sleep, a
psychophysiological interaction (PPI) analysis was conducted separately for each session (sleep-deprived/
sleep-rested) using SPM12. Consistent with standard PPI practices, an individual design matrix for each
participant included three regressors: 1) the BOLD signal time course from the mPFC seed region, 2)
regressors coding the temporal ordering of task conditions (emotional and neutral videos), and 3) the PPI
term, reflecting the product of the deconvolved time course in the mPFC with a vector representing the
order of the psychological variables of interest