Articles
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-019-0592-8
Extensive childhood experience with Pokémon
suggests eccentricity drives organization
of visual cortex
Jesse Gomez 1,2*, Michael Barnett 3 and Kalanit Grill-Spector 1,4,5
The functional organization of human high-level visual cortex, such as the face- and place-selective regions, is strikingly con-
sistent across individuals. An unanswered question in neuroscience concerns which dimensions of visual information constrain
the development and topography of this shared brain organization. To answer this question, we used functional magnetic reso-
nance imaging to scan a unique group of adults who, as children, had extensive visual experience with Pokémon. These animal-
like, pixelated characters are dissimilar from other ecological categories, such as faces and places, along critical dimensions
(foveal bias, rectilinearity, size, animacy). We show not only that adults who have Pokémon experience demonstrate distinct
distributed cortical responses to Pokémon, but also that the experienced retinal eccentricity during childhood can predict the
locus of Pokémon responses in adulthood. These data demonstrate that inherent functional representations in the visual cor-
tex—retinal eccentricity—combined with consistent viewing behaviour of particular stimuli during childhood result in a shared
functional topography in adulthood.
Humans possess the remarkable ability to rapidly recognize a but man-made places tend to be rectilinear; (3) the perceived ani-
wide array of visual stimuli. This ability is thought to occur as macy of stimuli5,34–37, for example, faces are perceived to be animate
a result of cortical computations in the ventral visual stream1: whereas places are not; and (4) the real-world size of stimuli38, for
a processing hierarchy that extends from the primary visual cortex example, faces are physically smaller than places and buildings.
to the ventral temporal cortex (VTC). Previous research has shown Each of these theories proposes an underlying principle to
that VTC responses are key for visual recognition because (1) dis- describe the coarse functional topography of the VTC relative to its
tributed VTC responses contain information about objects2–4 and cortical macroanatomy. That is, inherent in all these theories is the
categories5, and (2) responses in category-selective regions in the idea that a physical or perceived dimension of a stimulus maps onto
VTC, such as the face-, body-, word- and place-selective regions6–12, a physical dimension along the cortical surface. For example, in the
are linked to the perception of these categories13–15. Distributed VTC human VTC, small, curvy, animate and foveal stimuli elicit stronger
response patterns to different visual categories are distinct from one responses lateral to the mid-fusiform sulcus (MFS), whereas large,
another and are arranged with remarkable spatial consistency along linear, inanimate and peripherally extending stimuli elicit stronger
the cortical sheet across individuals16–23. For example, peaks in dis- responses in the cortex medial to the MFS. However, which of these
tributed VTC response patterns to faces are consistently found on dimensions drives the development of the functional organization
the lateral fusiform gyrus (FG). Although several theories have been of the VTC is unknown.
suggested to explain the consistent spatial topography of the VTC24–26, Research on cortical plasticity in animals has made two key dis-
developmental studies suggest that experience may be key for the coveries related to this question. First, eccentricity representations
normal development of the VTC and recognition abilities. For in the early and intermediate visual cortex are probably established
example, behavioural studies suggest that the typical development in infancy39,40, as they may be constrained by both wiring41 and neu-
of recognition abilities is reliant on viewing experience during child- ral activity that starts in utero42. For example, research on ferret and
hood27–32. However, the nature of childhood experience that leads to mouse development suggests that retinal waves during gestation
consistent spatial functional topography of the VTC—whether it is and before eye-opening are sufficient to establish eccentricity repre-
the way stimuli such as faces or places are viewed, or the image-level sentations in the visual cortex40. An eccentricity proto-architecture
statistics of the stimuli themselves—remains unknown. is also detectable early in infant macaque development39. Second,
Several theories have proposed attributes that may under- visual development has a critical period during which the brain is
lie the functional topography of human high-level visual cortex. particularly malleable and sensitive to visual experience32,43–48. For
These include: (1) the eccentricity bias of retinal images associ- example, previous research suggests that new category represen-
ated with the typical viewing of specific categories19,24, for example, tations in high-level visual cortex emerge with experience only in
face discrimination is thought to require high visual acuity sup- juvenile macaques, but not if the same experience happens to adult
ported by foveal vision, but peripheral vision is believed to be more macaques43. Furthermore, visual deprivation of a category (for
important for processing places, as in the real world they occupy example, faces) in infancy results in a lack of development of a cor-
the entire the visual field; (2) the average rectilinearity of stimuli tical representation for that category32. Together, these findings sup-
from particular categories25,33, for example, faces are curvilinear, port the following predictions regarding human development: first,
1Neurosciences Program, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA. 2Psychology Department, University of California Berkeley, Berkeley,
CA, USA. 3Psychology Department, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. 4Psychology Department, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
5Wu Tsai Neurosciences Institute, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA. *e-mail: jessegomez@berkeley.edu
NaturE HuMaN BEHaviour | VOL 3 | JUNE 2019 | 611–624 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav 611
Articles NATure HumAN BeHAviour
a b
Pokémon Cartoon Animal Face
Chance
0 20 40 60 80 100
Identification accuracy (percentage correct) Body Word Car Corridor
if eccentricity representations in high-level visual cortex are present VTC representations form a consistent spatial topography across
early in development, then eccentricity stands to be a strong devel- the VTC in experienced versus novice participants. If experienced
opmental constraint for the later emergence of object representa- individuals demonstrate an informative and spatially consistent
tions; second, testing theories of VTC development requires the representation for Pokémon compared to other categories, it would
measurement of the effects of childhood experience on the forma- allow us to ask whether the topography of this representation across
tion of new brain representations. the VTC is predicted by one of the four visual dimensions (eccen-
To investigate the developmental origins of the functional orga- tricity bias, rectilinearity, animacy and perceived size), which we
nization of the VTC, the effects of exhaustive childhood experi- quantified for Pokémon, faces and places.
ence with a novel visual category (distinct from natural categories
along the four aforementioned visual dimensions) must be tested. results
Performing such an experimental manipulation in a laboratory Childhood experience with Pokémon results in distinct and
setting with children would require an unfeasible length of time. reproducible information across the VTC. Experienced par-
However, there are adults who, in their childhood, had prolonged, ticipants were adults (n = 11, mean age 24.3 ± 2.8 yr, 3 female) ini-
rewarded, and crucially similar visual experiences with a shared tially chosen through self-reporting, who began playing Pokémon
novel stimulus category. In 1996, Nintendo released a popular between the ages of 5 and 8 yr. Experienced participants were
videogame, Pokémon, alongside a hand-held playing device, the included in the study if they continued to play the game through-
GameBoy. Children as young as 5 yr old played this game, in which out childhood and revisited the game as adults. Novice participants
individuating the animal-like creatures of Pokémon was integral were chosen as similarly aged and educated adults who never played
to optimal game performance. Furthermore, game playing condi- Pokémon (n = 11, mean age 29.5 ± 5.4 yr, 7 female). We validated
tions were nearly identical across individuals: children held the their self-reported experience with Pokémon with data from a
device at a similar (arm’s length) viewing distance, repeatedly for behavioural experiment, in which participants viewed 40 Pokémon
hours a day, over a period of years. Importantly, Pokémon were images from the original Nintendo game and identified each image
rendered with large pixels in a small 2.5 cm × 2.5 cm region of the by name (from 5 choices). Experienced participants (n = 11) sig-
GameBoy screen, making Pokémon, compared to faces or places, nificantly outperformed novices (n = 9) in their naming ability of
a unique visual category that is of a constant size and viewed with Pokémon (Student’s t-test, t(18) = 18.2, P < 0.001, Cohen’s d = 8.18;
foveal vision, but possesses strong linear features. Although many Fig. 1a). Despite not being able to name Pokémon, novices are capa-
Pokémon characters resemble animals, and children saw Pokémon ble of visually distinguishing and individuating Pokémon characters
animations, they were never encountered in the real world. Thus, (Supplementary Fig. 1).
the animacy and real-world sizes of Pokémon are inferred attributes All participants underwent fMRI while viewing faces, bodies, car-
rather than physical ones. As Pokémon are different from both toons, pseudowords, Pokémon, animals, cars and corridors (Fig. 1b).
faces and places along these visual dimensions, we can use them Cartoons and animals were chosen to create a strict comparison to
to answer fundamental questions: first, does prolonged experience the Pokémon stimuli and the other categories were included as they
individuating Pokémon result in a novel information representa- have well-established and reproducible spatial topography across
tion in the VTC? Second, is the location of this response predicted the VTC49. Stimuli were randomly presented at a rate of 2 Hz in
by a specific visual dimension? 4 s blocks, each containing 8 images from a category. Participants
To answer these questions, we used functional magnetic reso- performed an oddball detection task to ensure continuous attention
nance imaging (fMRI) to scan 11 adult participants who began throughout the scan. Participants completed six runs with different
playing Pokémon between the ages of 5 and 8 yr old and 11 age- stimuli from these categories.
matched adult novices who had no childhood experience of play- We first examined whether childhood experience affects the
ing Pokémon. During fMRI, participants viewed stimuli from eight representation of category information in the VTC, which was
categories: faces, animals, cartoons, bodies, words, cars, corridors anatomically defined in each participant’s native brain (see the
and Pokémon (Fig. 1b). We performed multi-voxel pattern analy- MVPA section in the Methods). Therefore, at the individual level,
sis (MVPA) of VTC responses to these stimuli in each participant, we measured the representational similarity among distributed
combined with decoding analyses, to assess (1) whether prolonged VTC responses to the eight categories across runs. Each cell in the
experience results in an informative representation for Pokémon in representational similarity matrix (RSM) is the voxelwise correla-
experienced versus novice participants, and (2) whether distributed tion between the distributed VTC responses to different images of
stcejbus
fo
rebmuN
6
4
2
Fig. 1 | Localizer stimuli and behavioural naming performance. a, Distributions of participant accuracies from a five-alternative-choice Pokémon naming
task outside the scanner. Experienced participants (blue; n = 11) significantly outperformed novices (grey; n = 9). b, Example stimuli from each of the
categories used in the fMRI experiment. In each 4 s trial, participants viewed 8 different stimuli from each category at a rate of 2 Hz while performing
an oddball task to detect a phase-scrambled stimulus with no intact object overlaid. Participants completed 6 runs, of 3 min 38 s each, using different
stimuli. See https://www.pokemon.com/us/pokedex/ for more general examples of Pokémon and Supplementary Fig. 9 for more examples of the pixelated
GameBoy Pokémon stimuli.
612 NaturE HuMaN BEHaviour | VOL 3 | JUNE 2019 | 611–624 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NATure HumAN BeHAviour Articles
a
Pokémon Pokémon Pokémon Pokémon
Cartoon Cartoon Cartoon Cartoon
Animals Animals Animals Animals
Faces Faces Faces Faces
Bodies Bodies Bodies Bodies
Words Words Words Words
Cars Cars Cars Cars
Corridors Corridors Corridors Corridors
Pokém Co arn t Ao no in mal Fs ac Be os die Ws ords CC oa rr ris dors Pokém Co arn t Ao no in mal Fs ac Be os die Ws ords CC oa rr ris dors Pokém Co arn t Ao no in mal Fs ac Be os die Ws ords CC oa rr ris dors Pokém Co arn t Ao no in mal Fs ac Be os die Ws ords CC oa rr ris dors
Pokémon Cartoon Animals Faces Bodies Words Cars Corridors
the same category (diagonal) or different categories (off-diagonal) Fig. 2a). Unlike novices, who demonstrate little to no reproducible
across split halves of the data. Then, we averaged the RSMs across pattern for Pokémon in the VTC, consistent with the null hypoth-
the participants of each group and compared across groups to exam- esis (mean Pearson correlation ± s.d., r = 0.1 ± 0.06, n = 11), experi-
ine the representational structure of distributed VTC responses in enced participants demonstrate a significantly more reproducible
experienced and novice participants. Averaging across participants response pattern for Pokémon (r = 0.27 ± 0.11; significant between-
of each group allowed us to visualize consistency within a given group difference: t(20) = 4, P < 0.001, d = 1.8). Furthermore, dis-
group. We then used decoding approaches to quantify these repre- tributed responses to Pokémon were distinct from those of other
sentational structures in individual participants, described below. categories in experienced participants. We quantify this effect
We hypothesized that the representation similarity of distributed by calculating the mean dissimilarity (D = 1−r) of distributed
VTC responses will have one of four outcomes. The first is the null responses to Pokémon from other categories. Distributed responses
hypothesis: Pokémon will not elicit a consistent response pattern in to Pokémon are significantly more different from distributed
the VTC in any group and will have near-zero correlation with other responses to the other categories in experienced participants than
items of this and other categories. Second, the animate hypothesis: controls (t(20) = 4.4, P < 0.001, d = 1.8). Interestingly, in experi-
Pokémon, which have faces, limbs and resemble animals to some enced participants, Pokémon response patterns are significantly dis-
extent, will have positive correlations with animate categories, similar (all t(20) < 4.2, all P < 0.001, all d > 0.89) from those of faces
such as faces, bodies and animals. Third, the expertise hypothesis: (D ± s.d. = 0.97 ± 0.08), bodies (1.1 ± 0.08) and animals (0.9 ± 0.07)
if Pokémon are processed as a category of expertise, then distrib- despite Pokémon having faces, bodies and animal-like features
uted responses to Pokémon will be most correlated with distributed themselves. In contrast, when excluding Pokémon, groups do not
responses to faces, as the expertise hypothesis predicts that expert have a significantly different D between distributed responses to
stimuli are processed in face-selective regions50,51. Fourth, the dis- other pairs of categories (t(20) = 0.52, P = 0.6, d = 0.19).
tinctiveness hypothesis: as Pokémon constitute a category of their To quantify the information content in the VTC and test whether it
own, they will elicit a unique response pattern. Thus, correlations varies with experience, we constructed a winner-takes-all classifier52
among distributed responses to different Pokémon will be positive trained and tested on independent halves of the data to determine
and substantially higher than the correlation between Pokémon and whether the category of the stimulus the participant is viewing can
items from other categories. be classified from distributed VTC response patterns and whether
Experienced participants differ markedly from novices in their this performance depends on childhood experience. Although
distributed VTC response patterns to Pokémon (see the RSM in classification in both groups was above chance for all categories,
Correlation
(r)
0.5
0
–0.5
Correlation
(r)
0.5
0
–0.5
Correlation
(r)
0.5
0
–0.5
Correlation
(r)
1 1 1
0.8 0.8 0.8
0.6 0.6 0.6
0.4 0.4 0.4
0.2 0.2 0.2
0 0 0
Pokémon Animals Pokémon Animals
ecnamrofrep
gnidoceD
ecnamrofrep
gnidoceD
ecnamrofrep
gnidoceD
Experienced (left VTC) Experienced (right VTC) Novice (left VTC) Novice (right VTC)
0.5
0
–0.5
b c d
Experienced
Novice
Fig. 2 | Experienced participants demonstrate a consistent and distinct representation for Pokémon compared to novices. a, RSMs calculated by
correlating distributed responses (z-scored voxel betas) from an anatomical VTC ROI across split halves of the fMRI experiment. Positive values are
presented in orange, negative values in green and near-zero values in white (see the colour scale, which applies to all four RSMs). b, The decoding
performance from the winner-takes-all classifier trained and tested on split halves of the fMRI data from the bilateral VTC. The shaded region shows s.e.m.
across participants within a group (experienced participants, n = 11; novices, n = 11). The dashed line indicates the chance level performance; decoding
performance is represented as a fraction of 1, with 1 corresponding to 100% decoding accuracy. c,d, The decoding performance from distributed bilateral
VTC responses for experienced (n = 4) and novice (n = 5) participants in the original oddball task (c) and when brought back to undergo an additional
fMRI experiment with an attention-demanding two-back task (d). The same participants are shown in c and d.
NaturE HuMaN BEHaviour | VOL 3 | JUNE 2019 | 611–624 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav 613
Articles NATure HumAN BeHAviour
higher in experienced (77 ± 14%) than novice participants (25 ± 23%;
between-group difference: t(7) = 5.6, P < 0.001, d = 3.9; Fig. 2d). In
contrast, controlling attention generated a similar classification of
animals across groups (Fig. 2d). These data suggest that differential
attention to Pokémon across groups is not the driving factor leading
to the distinct and reproducible representation of Pokémon stimuli
in the VTC of experienced participants.
Visual features make different predictions for the emergent
location of cortical responses. Results of the previous MVPA
suggest that intense childhood experience with a novel visual
category results in a reproducible distributed response across
the human VTC that is distinct from other categories. An open
question is whether Pokémon generate distributed response pat-
terns with similar topographies across experienced participants.
Therefore, we generated statistical parametric maps that contrast
the response to each category versus all others (units: T values) and
compared across groups. In typical adults, stimulus dimensions
such as eccentricity19,55, animacy37,56, size26 and curvilinearity25 are
mapped to a physical, lateral−medial axis across the VTC49. As the
responses to faces on the lateral VTC and places on the medial
VTC generate the most differentiated topographies, we analysed
the properties of Pokémon stimuli for these attributes relative to
faces and places. Thus, we used these metrics to generate predic-
tions for the emergent topography of a Pokémon representation in
experienced participants.
As expected, in both groups, unthresholded contrast maps
demonstrating preferences for faces and places showed the typi-
cal topography in relation to major anatomical landmarks. That is,
performance varied by category and group (Fig. 2b). An ANOVA despite both anatomical and functional variability between partic-
with the factors stimulus category and participant group (experi- ipants, preference for faces was found in the lateral FG and prefer-
enced/novices) on classification performance revealed significant ence for places in the collateral sulcus (CoS), as illustrated in Fig. 3.
effects of stimulus category (F-test, F(1,7) = 36.5, P < 0.001, η2 = 0.61) However, striking differences can be observed when examining
and group (F(1,7) = 6, P = 0.05, η2 = 0.036) and a significant interac- VTC responses to Pokémon. In novices, Pokémon do not elicit
tion between group and category (F(1,7) = 3.1, P = 0.004, η2 = 0.12). preferential responses in the VTC, as with faces or corridors (Fig.
Importantly, this interaction was driven by the differential classifi- 3a). In contrast, an example experienced participant demonstrated
cation of brain responses to Pokémon across groups: in experienced a robust preference for Pokémon in the lateral FG and occipito-
participants, performance was 81.3 ± 9% (mean ± s.e.m.), which temporal sulcus (OTS; Fig. 3b). This pattern was readily observ-
was significantly higher (post hoc t-test, P = 0.001, d = 1.5) than the able in all the other experienced participants (Supplementary
45 ± 8% in novices (almost double; Fig. 2b). Classification perfor- Fig. 3). Given that these data suggest childhood experience with
mance was also numerically higher for bodies and animals in expe- Pokémon results in a spatially consistent topography for Pokémon
rienced compared to novice participants, but this difference—along across individuals, we next asked: what attributes of Pokémon
with classification performance for other stimuli—was not signifi- drive this topography?
cantly different between groups (Fig. 2c). Lastly, although there The stimuli of faces, corridors and Pokémon used in the localizer
were more male (n = 8 male, n = 3 female) experienced participants experiments were submitted to a variety of analyses with the goal
and more female novices (n = 4 male, n = 7 female), behavioural of ordering these categories linearly along different feature spaces
naming of Pokémon as well as decoding accuracy were not higher (see the Image statistics analyses section in the Methods). Stimuli
in experienced males than in experienced females (Supplementary were analysed for physical attributes of foveal bias, that is, the retinal
Fig. 2b,c). These analyses suggest that childhood experience with size of images when fixated on across a range of typical viewing dis-
Pokémon generates a reliable and informative distributed represen- tances, and rectilinearity, using the Rectilinearity Toolbox25, which
tation of Pokémon in the VTC. evaluates the presence of linear and curved features at a range of
Can differences in attention account for this pattern of results? spatial scales. Stimuli were also rated for attributes of size and ani-
Although it has been argued that attention can boost signals to macy, by independent raters, described below.
the category of expertise53, others have argued that attention to We first evaluated image-based attributes. To estimate retinal
the expert category does not explain the enhanced cortical activity size, we assumed that people foveate on the centre of an item, and
to viewing it54. Furthermore, it is unclear whether attention alone evaluated retinal image sizes as one would interact with these stim-
could induce a distinct distributed response that could be reliably uli on a daily basis. On a GameBoy, Pokémon tend to span the cen-
decoded. Nonetheless, to test the possibility that selective attention tral 2° when foveated on; the distribution of Pokémon retinal sizes
to Pokémon in experienced participants is driving the improved partially overlapped with, but was significantly smaller and thus
classification performance, we invited a subset of experienced and more foveally biased than that of faces (t(286) = 15.7, P < 0.001,
novice participants to perform an additional fMRI experiment with d = 1.85; Fig. 4a). Both Pokémon and faces generate significantly
the same stimuli, using a different task that was equally attention- smaller retinal images than corridors (ts > 20, Ps < 0.001, ds > 2.5),
demanding across all categories. Here, participants performed a which often occupy the entire visual field and thus generate large
two-back task, indicating whether an image repeated after an inter- retinal images that extend to the peripheral visual field even when
vening image. In this second fMRI experiment, the classification of foveated on. This metric predicts that, if retinal image size rank-
Pokémon from distributed VTC responses was again significantly ing (from foveally biased to peripherally biased: Pokémon, faces,
eulav
T
a
Right Left
8 OTS FG CoS
0
b
–8
OTS FG CoS
Fig. 3 | Distinct cortical representation for Pokémon in experienced
participants. a,b, Unthresholded parameter maps displayed on the inflated
ventral cortical surface zoomed on VTC (see inset for the location on a
whole-brain map) in an example novice participant (26-year-old female;
a) and an example experienced participant (26-year-old male; b) for the
contrasts of Pokémon, faces and corridors, each versus all other stimuli.
Dashed lines delineate cortical folds; OTS, occipitotemporal sulcus; FG,
fusiform gyrus; CoS, collateral sulcus.
614 NaturE HuMaN BEHaviour | VOL 3 | JUNE 2019 | 611–624 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NATure HumAN BeHAviour Articles
a c
corridors (the most linear), Pokémon are still perceived to be sig-
nificantly more linear than faces (t(49) = 6.9, P < 0.001, d = 1.44). 100
Thus, both image-based and perceived rectilinearity predict that
Pokémon selectivity will be medial to face selectivity.
Next, we generated predictions on the basis of perceived visual
Faces features (see the Image statistics analyses section in the Methods),
Faces
Corridors Corridors using independent raters. To obtain an estimate of how perceived
features may affect an untrained visual system, which would mimic
the state of experienced participants when they first began playing
the game, we chose raters who were not heavily experienced with
Pokémon. The first was an estimation of real-world size, which is
different from retinal size. For example, a corridor viewed from far
b d away is perceived as large despite subtending a small retinal image.
Although the real-world size of faces and corridors are readily
Faces Corridors
estimable, Pokémon do not exist in the real world. For Pokémon,
Faces Corridors size was evaluated in two ways. First, the game provides informa-
tion on the physical size of each Pokémon. Second, we evaluated
the participants’ perception of the sizes of Pokémon. Twenty-
eight participants, who did not take part in the main experiment,
were asked to rate the size of various Pokémon using a 1−7 scale,
with each number corresponding to reference animals of increas-
ing size. Possible sizes ranged from much smaller than faces (for
example, 1 cm; ant) to larger than a corridor (for example, 7 m;
dinosaur). The raters’ perceptions of Pokémon size were largely
consistent with the game’s provided physical sizes (average game
size: 1.2 ± 0.95 m; average rater size: 0.82 ± 0.28 m). Raters perceive
Pokémon to be larger than faces (t(176) = 26.3, P < 0.001, d = 5.4)
but smaller than corridors (t(176) = 16.9, P < 0.001, d = 3.48);
see Fig. 4c. As real-world size also shows a lateral (small) versus
medial (large) topography, perceived size predicts that voxels pre-
ferring Pokémon in the VTC should lie between face-selective
regions on the FG and the place-selective cortex in the CoS, that
is, on the medial FG.
Lastly, we evaluated the perceived animacy of our stimuli. A
separate group of 42 independent participants rated the perceived
animacy of stimuli using a scale of 0−5 (0 most inanimate; 5 most
animate). Pokémon are perceived as intermediately animate (Fig.
4d), less animate than faces (t(82) = 13.2, P < 0.001, d = 2.88), but
more animate than corridors (t(82) = 14.5, P < 0.001, d = 3.18). As
animate stimuli are localized to the lateral VTC and inanimate stim-
uli to the medial VTC, this metric predicts that the locus of prefer-
ential responses for Pokémon lies, as for perceived size, between the
face-selective cortex and place-selective cortex on the medial FG.
corridors) drives the generation of distributed responses, Pokémon Location of novel cortical responses in experienced participants
representations should be the most foveal representations and cor- supports eccentricity bias theory. To test these predictions, we
ridors the most peripheral ones. As the representation of retinal produced contrast maps for Pokémon versus all other stimuli in
eccentricity in the VTC moves from lateral (most foveal) to medial each participant. Using cortex-based alignment (CBA), we trans-
(most peripheral), this attribute predicts that emergent activa- formed each participant’s map to the FreeSurfer57 average corti-
tions to Pokémon in experienced participants’ VTCs should lie on cal space, where we generated a group average Pokémon-contrast
the OTS, largely lateral to, but partially overlapping face-selective map. For visualization, we projected the map onto an individual
regions on the FG (Fig. 4a). experienced participant’s cortical surface. These results revealed
Analyses of the rectilinearity of Pokémon, faces and corridors four main findings. First, in experienced, but not novice partici-
(see the Image statistics analyses section in the Methods) show pants, we observed that preference for Pokémon reliably localized
that faces are the least linear of these 3 categories and the origi- in the OTS. As illustrated in the average experienced participants’
nal Pokémon stimuli, which were constructed from large square Pokémon contrast map (Fig. 5a), higher responses to Pokémon ver-
pixels, are the most rectilinear when compared to both faces sus other stimuli were observed in the OTS and demonstrated two
(t(383) = 37.5, P < 0.001, d = 3.9) and corridors (t(298) = 10.7, peaks on the posterior and middle portions of the sulcus. Second,
P < 0.001, d = 1.23). As the rectilinearity cortical axis is also we compared Pokémon activations to those of faces by delineat-
arranged from curvy (lateral VTC) to rectilinear (medial VTC), ing the peaks of face selectivity in the average contrast maps for
rectilinearity predicts that preference for Pokémon in the VTC faces in each group (Fig. 5a, white outlines). This comparison
should lie medial to both the face-selective cortex and place-selec- reveals that for experienced participants, Pokémon-preferring
tive cortex, potentially in the CoS or the parahippocampal gyrus voxels partially overlapped face-selective voxels on the lateral
(Fig. 4b). We also evaluated perceived rectilinearity in a separate FG and extended laterally to the OTS, but never extended medi-
group of novices (Supplementary Fig. 4). While perceived recti- ally to the CoS, where place-selective activations occur (Fig. 3).
linearity situates Pokémon between faces (the most curvy) and Third, we compared the volume of category selectivity for Pokémon
)%(
ytilibaborp
noitavresbO
1
0.5
100 101 102
Retinal image size (DVA) Size (m)
)%(
ytilibaborp
noitavresbO
)%(
ytilibaborp
noitavresbO
)%(
ytilibaborp
noitavresbO
Image-based features Perceptual features
Pokemon
15
10
Pokémon
5
0.88 2.64 4.4
Pokémon
4
1.5
Pokémon
3
1
2
1 0.5
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1 2 3 4 5
Rectilinearity (least to most linear) Animacy (animate to inanimate)
Fig. 4 | Different visual feature statistics predict different cortical
locations for Pokémon. a, Distributions of retinal image sizes produced by
Pokémon (blue), faces (orange) and corridors (grey) in a simulation that
varied viewing distance across a range of sample stimuli. DVA, degrees of
visual angle. X axis shows log-scale DVA. b, Distributions of the relative
rectilinearity scores of faces, corridors and Pokémon, as measured using
the Rectilinearity Toolbox25 (0, least linear; 1, most linear). c, Distributions
of the perceived physical size of Pokémon (from 28 raters) and of the
physical sizes of faces and corridor stimuli. The distributions of face and
corridor size were produced using Gaussian distributions with standard
deviations derived from either anatomical or physical variability within the
stimulus category (see Methods). The face distribution extends to a value
near 100% (the natural variation of face size is very narrow compared
to other stimuli). d, Distributions of the scores of perceived animacy
collected from a group of 42 independent raters who rated the stimuli of
faces, Pokémon and corridors for how ‘living or animate’ these stimuli were
perceived to be (1, animate; 5, inanimate).
NaturE HuMaN BEHaviour | VOL 3 | JUNE 2019 | 611–624 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav 615
Articles NATure HumAN BeHAviour
a b
in each group. Pokémon-selective voxels were any voxels within
the VTC that were above the threshold (T > 3) for the contrast of
Pokémon versus all other stimuli. Pokémon-selective voxels were
observed in the lateral FG and OTS of all 11 individual experi-
enced participants. In contrast, although some scattered selectiv-
ity could be observed for Pokémon in four novice participants, 1.5
it was not anatomically consistent. Thus, it did not yield any dis-
cernible selectivity for Pokémon in the average novice selectivity
map (Fig. 5a). An ANOVA run with the factors group and hemi-
sphere on the volume of Pokémon-selectivity in the VTC revealed
a main effect of group (F(1,1) = 32.75, P < 0.001, η2 = 0.45), but 0
no effects of hemisphere, nor any interaction (Fs(1,1) < 0.67,
Ps > 0.41, η2s < 0.016). The median volume in experienced par-
ticipants was sixfold larger than novices (Fig. 5a), with most
(7 of 11) novice participants having close to zero voxels selective
for Pokémon. This difference in volume between groups was not –1
driven by gender differences (Supplementary Fig. 2a). Fourth, we
compared the lateral−medial location of Pokémon selectivity rela-
tive to face and place selectivity to directly assess theoretical pre-
dictions. Therefore, we partitioned the VTC in each experienced
participant into four anatomical bins from lateral (OTS) to medial
m( rC ideo oaS
n
r)
s
;
.T
s
C
e
v
ue
a
r
t
l
vuh eee
s
i
f
fn
o
its
r
t
e ett
dh
i
e
tn
o
c
F aoi vng e.
t
rr5 aab gs.
t
e
W
o Tf
i vt eh
ait
li un
h ee
e
sr
a aPc ch
o
r
k
ob
é
si
m
sn bow
in
ne
,
s
e
f
dax ectr mea sc
o
ot ne
r
sd
tc
rt
o
ah tre
e- ExpN eo
rivi ec ne ced
that (1) peaks in these curves are the most lateral for Pokémon,
intermediately lateral for faces and medial for corridors (Fig. 5b)
and (2) Pokémon-selectivity peaks are located significantly more
laterally in the VTC than those of faces (t(20) = 2.88, P = 0.009,
d = 1.23). Together, this pattern of results is consistent with only
the predictions of the eccentricity bias theory for the development
of VTC topography (Fig. 4a).
Another prediction of the eccentricity bias hypothesis is that
the region displaying Pokémon selectivity in experienced partici-
pants should have a foveal bias. A foveal bias predicts that popula-
tion receptive field (pRF) centres will cluster closer to, and result in
greater coverage of, the centre of the visual field compared to the
periphery. This coverage is in contrast to the tiling of the visual field
observed in the primary visual cortex31,58, where pRF centres spread
across the visual field. To test this hypothesis, six experienced par-
ticipants participated in a retinotopic mapping experiment (see the
pRF mapping section in the Methods). Using pRF modelling59, we
identified the region of the visual field that drives the responses of
each voxel. We then generated visual field coverage maps showing
how the set of pRFs in the Pokémon-selective cortex in each partici-
pant tiles the visual field. Experienced participants demonstrate the
typical lateral−medial gradient of foveal to peripheral bias in the
VTC (Supplementary Fig. 5). In all experienced participants, we find
that the Pokémon-selective cortex shows a more prominent cover-
age of central portions of the visual field compared to the periphery.
For example, in the right hemisphere of experienced participants,
the Pokémon-selective cortex shows a contralateral coverage of
the visual field, whereby the peak density of visual field coverage is
within 4° of the centre of the visual field. With the exception of one
participant, the region with the highest pRF density includes the
fovea (Fig. 6a). Compared to the eccentricity bias of other catego-
ries, such as faces and corridors, overall Pokémon-selective voxels How does experience affect the amplitude of responses to
tend to be the most foveally biased, followed by face-selective voxels Pokémon?. To further understand how novel childhood experience
and lastly corridor-selective voxels, which are the most peripherally has impacted cortical representations in the VTC, we asked two ques-
biased (Fig. 6b). Examining individual participants, two show mean tions. First, are the emergent responses to Pokémon in experienced
pRF eccentricities in Pokémon-selective voxels that are more fove- participants specific to the Pokémon characters that participants
ally biased than the face-selective cortex, whereas the remaining have learned to individuate, or will similar patterns emerge for any
four participants show no meaningful difference (Supplementary Pokémon-related stimulus from the game? Second, how does visual
Fig. 6). Overall, the foveal bias of Pokémon-selective pRFs provides experience change the responsiveness of the OTS to visual stimuli?
evidence consistent with the idea that the eccentricity of retinal To address the first question, a subset of experienced participants
images produced by Pokémon biases their cortical responses to (n = 5) participated in an additional fMRI experiment in which they
emerge in the lateral VTC where foveal pRFs exist. viewed other images from the Pokémon game (see the Pokémon
)3mc(
emuloV
OTS latFG medFG
CoS
5
0
–5
12
6
0
ytivitceles
ecaF
)eulav
t
naem(
5
0
–5
ytivitceles
rodirroC
)eulav
t
naem(
5
0
–5
OTS latFG medFG CoS
OTS latFG medFG CoS
OTS latFG medFG CoS
Average
T
value
ytivitceles
nomékoP
)eulav
t naem(
Novices
Experienced
Fig. 5 | average contrast maps for Pokémon; and anatomical localization
reveals lateral vtC responses in experienced subjects. a, Average
contrast maps for Pokémon in novice and experienced participants. For
each participant, T-value maps were produced for the contrast of Pokémon
versus all other stimuli. These maps were aligned to the FreeSurfer
average brain using cortex-based alignment (CBA). On this common
brain surface we generated a group-average contrast map by averaging
maps across all novice participants and all experienced participants.
Group-average maps are shown on an inflated right hemisphere of one
of our participants, zoomed in on the VTC. White outlines show group-
average face-preferring voxels (average T > 1) from each respective
group. Grey arrows show two peaks in the Pokémon-selectivity maps of
experienced participants; the same arrows are shown next to the novice
map for comparison. Inset: box plots show the mean (white line), 25%
and 75% quartiles (boxes) and range (black dotted line) of the selectivity
volume in novices and experienced participants. b, Curves fitted to the
mean selectivity for Pokémon, faces or corridors, averaged in one of four
anatomically defined regions extending from the lateral to medial VTC
(illustrated in the inset for an example participant). Each line represents a
participant and the triangles show the peak selectivity values. The peaks
for the Pokémon-selectivity curves are significantly more lateral than
the peaks for face selectivity. The most lateral ROI is the OTS extending
from the inferior temporal gyrus (ITG) to the medial aspect of the OTS.
The lateral FG (latFG) ROI includes the lateral FG and ends medially at
the MFS; the medial FG (medFG) bin extends from the MFS to the lateral
edge of the CoS; the CoS bin includes the CoS up to the lateral edge of the
parahippocampal gyrus.
616 NaturE HuMaN BEHaviour | VOL 3 | JUNE 2019 | 611–624 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NATure HumAN BeHAviour Articles
a
1
E1 7° E2
4.7° 0.8
2.3°
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
E3 E4
To answer the second question, namely, how experience shapes
responses in the OTS, we quantified the response amplitude of
E5 E6
Pokémon-selective voxels in both experienced and novice partici-
pants. To ensure that the region of interest (ROI) was defined inde-
pendently from the individual’s data, we employed a leave-one-out
approach60 in which we produced a group-defined Pokémon ROI
from ten experienced participants by transforming ROIs from
individuals to the FreeSurfer cortical average using CBA and then
using CBA to project the group ROI to the left-out individual’s brain
and examining its responses. This procedure was repeated for each
experienced participant. For novice participants, we transformed
the group ROI produced from all the experienced participants into
b
each individual novice’s brain. To ensure that we did not extract a
P F C
signal from cortex that was already selective for another category, we
3 Eccentricity (DVA) 4 removed any voxels that were selective for other categories from the
group Pokémon ROI for each participant. From this independently
defined Pokémon ROI, we extracted the percent signal change from
Fovea Periphery
the eight-category fMRI experiment.
As expected, experienced participants have higher responses to
Pokémon compared to other categories (Fig. 8a, Supplementary
Fig. 7), with lower responses to cartoons and animals and even
lower responses to faces, bodies and other stimuli. However, in
this putative Pokémon-selective region, novice participants show
the highest amplitude of response to animals, then to cartoons
and words and lower responses to the other stimuli (Fig. 8a).
Although it may be tempting to conclude that Pokémon-selective
voxels emerge from voxels with a pre-existing preference for ani-
mals, average cortical maps of animal selectivity (Supplementary
Fig. 8) reveal similar animal selectivity both lateral and medial to
the face-selective cortex in both novice and experienced partici-
pants. Furthermore, perceived animacy ratings (Fig. 4d) suggest
that Pokémon should have emerged between the face-selective
cortex and place-selective cortex, which would correspond to the
scenes and pixelated faces fMRI control experiment section in the portion of animal selectivity that is medial to the face-selective
Methods). In this experiment, participants completed a blocked cortex. However, contrary to these predictions, Pokémon selectiv-
experiment with two categories of images: images of places (for ity is observed overlapping and lateral to the face-selective cortex
example, navigable locations) from the Pokémon game as well as (Fig. 5). These results suggest that animacy alone is not driving the
downsampled face stimuli (to resemble 8 bit game imagery). Images emergent locus of Pokémon selectivity.
were presented in 4 s blocks at a rate of 2 Hz while participants per- To test the expertise hypothesis50,51,54, and because we found
formed an oddball task. Results show that places from the Pokémon that preference for Pokémon stimuli in experienced partici-
game drive responses in the CoS, not the OTS or the lateral FG. In pants partially overlapped the face-selective cortex, we also mea-
other words, they produce the typical pattern of place-selective acti- sured responses to our stimuli in the face-selective regions in
vations (Fig. 7). In contrast, Pokémon-selective voxels in each par- the posterior fusiform gyrus (pFus-faces) and medial fusiform
ticipant (Fig. 7, black contours) have minimal to no selectivity for gyrus (mFus-faces)61. We used a split-halves analysis, defining
places from the Pokémon game, further demonstrating the specific- face-selective voxels on the lateral FG from the even runs and
ity of Pokémon-selective voxels to Pokémon characters. extracting the percent signal change from the odd runs, to ensure
pRF
density
CoS
3 T value 20
Pokémon-selective ROI
from 8-category localizer
Fig. 7 | Places from the Pokémon game elicit typical place-selective
activations in experienced participants. The maps show higher responses
to Pokémon scenes than pixelated faces in 5 experienced participants from
a follow-up fMRI experiment in which participants viewed downsampled
face stimuli (resembling 8 bit game imagery) and scenes from the Pokémon
games. The colour bar indicates the T value at each voxel from the threshold
(T > 3) over the range denoted in the colour scale. Pokémon-selective voxels
(outlined in black) do not preferentially respond to Pokémon scenes versus
faces; instead, voxels preferring Pokémon scenes versus faces are in the
typical location for place selectivity18, namely, the CoS (outlined in white).
Fig. 6 | prF modelling reveals that the Pokémon-selective cortex is
foveally biased. a, Density plots (see colour scale) representing the
visual field coverage by pRFs of Pokémon-selective voxels from the right
hemisphere in 6 experienced participants. Each plot shows data from
a single participant (E1−E6). Density is normalized to the maximum in
each participant. Grey dots show pRF centres and black dashed circles
represent 4.7° of eccentricity. Only voxels that had more than 10% variance
explained by the pRF model were included. b, The mean (circles) and s.e.m.
(coloured bars) of pRF eccentricity averaged within the Pokémon- (blue),
face- (brown) and corridor-selective (grey) cortex across participants.
Positions towards the left of the line are closer to the centre of the visual
field (fovea), measured in DVA.
NaturE HuMaN BEHaviour | VOL 3 | JUNE 2019 | 611–624 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav 617
Articles NATure HumAN BeHAviour
a
Individual ROI emergence of Pokémon selectivity in and around the OTS and
largely outside other regions of category selectivity.
Avg. Exp. ROI
CBA Discussion
By examining cortical representations in adults who have had
Independent ROI visual experience with a specific, artificial visual category since
CBA c eh ni cl ed h wo ito hd P, ow ke
é
mfou onn d
c
hth ara at
c
p tea rr st ,i c bi ep ga in nt ns iw ngh o
as
h ea av re
ly
e ax st e 5n ys ri v oe
l
de ,x dp ee mri-
-
onstrate distinct response patterns in high-level visual cortex that
are consistent across participants. Category-selective responses
to Pokémon in all experienced participants occupied the poste-
rior and middle extent of the OTS, largely lateral to face-selective
cortex, and responded selectively to learned Pokémon characters
rather than general imagery from the Pokémon game. Note that
we do not assert that our results should be interpreted as a new
Pokémon functional module in the OTS of experienced par-
ticipants on par with the face-selective cortex7. Instead, our data
Experienced underscore that prolonged experience starting in childhood can
Novice lead to the emergence of a new representation in the VTC for a
novel category with a surprisingly consistent functional topogra-
phy across individuals. We demonstrated that this topography is
consistent with the predictions of the eccentricity bias theory for
two reasons: the small stimuli that required foveal vision during
learning biased the emergent representations towards the lateral
VTC; and Pokémon-selective voxels in experienced participants
show a foveal bias. Together, our data show that shared, patterned
visual experience during childhood, combined with the inherent
retinotopic representation of the visual system, results in the shared
brain organization observed in the adult high-level visual cortex.
The nature of Pokémon as a stimulus category is an interesting
one, because it could be seen as similar to other ecological stimuli
such as faces or words: the game entails repeated, prolonged and
rewarded experience individuating visually similar, but semanti-
cally distinct exemplars. This is similar to other stimulus catego-
ries for which there is ecological pressure, or interest, to individuate
among a visually homogeneous category such as faces, birds or
cars50. Our data suggest that individuals who have had life-long
Faces Faces experience individuating Pokémon characters develop a novel rep-
resentation for this learned category, demonstrating the plasticity
of high-level visual cortex outside of the face-selective regions. This
was supported by robust decoding results and a consistent spatial
topography of selectivity for Pokémon in experienced but not nov-
ice participants.
Our findings suggest that early childhood visual experience
shapes the functional architecture of high-level visual cortex, result-
ing in a unique representation whose spatial topography is predict-
able. One should exercise caution when comparing the current
findings with the effects of visual expertise that was acquired in
adulthood62–64, as the current study focuses on participants whose
visual experience began at a young age. There are several differences
that distinguish our current results from such previous research on
expertise. First, childhood experience led to the development of a
new representation for Pokémon that was anatomically consistent
independence of data. Experienced and novice participants did across participants and was coupled with increased responses and
not exhibit differences in their response to faces in either pFus- selectivity for Pokémon in the OTS. As the same piece of cortex did
or mFus-faces, bilaterally (Fig. 8b). An ANOVA with the fac- not show selectivity in novices, this suggests that extensive experi-
tors group and stimulus type revealed no significant interaction ence individuating a novel stimulus beginning in childhood is nec-
(F(1,1) = 1.4, P = 0.31, η2 = 0.03) for functional responses in pFus- essary and sufficient for the development of a new representation
faces. Likewise, a similar ANOVA run for responses in mFus-faces in the VTC. Although previous investigations of category training
also revealed a non-significant interaction (F(1,1) = 1.36, P = 0.25, in adults also demonstrated increases in voxel selectivity for the
η2 = 0.02). Response amplitudes to Pokémon in pFus- and mFus- learned category63,65, different from our data, these activations were
faces were numerically higher in experienced compared to nov- not anatomically consistent across individuals and occurred either
ice participants, but not significantly so (Fig. 8b). Together, in the object-selective cortex or outside the visual cortex entirely
analyses of response amplitude illustrate that extensive experi- (in the prefrontal cortex). Second, Pokémon elicited numerically,
ence of Pokémon during childhood results in higher responses but not significantly, higher responses in the face-selective cortex
to Pokémon in adulthood relative to other stimuli leading to the of our experienced participants than in our novices. Although these
egnahc
langis
tnecreP
1.5
1
0.5
2.5
n.s.
1.5
n.s.
0.5
egnahc
langis
tnecreP
Pokémon Cartoons Animals Faces Bodies Words Cars Corridors
b 2.5
pFus mFus
1.5
0.5
Pokémon Pokémon
Fig. 8 | response properties of the vtC vary with childhood experience
with Pokémon. a, fMRI responses (percent signal change) measured from
an independent definition of Pokémon-selective cortex in both experienced
and novice participants. ROI, region of interest. b, Responses from bilateral
pFus- and mFus-faces to faces and Pokémon in experienced and novice
participants. Face-selective voxels were defined using odd runs of the
fMRI experiment, and percent signal change was calculated from the even
runs. Experienced and novice participant responses to both faces and
Pokémon in pFus-faces are not significantly different. Responses to faces
and Pokémon between groups in mFus are also non-significant. The black
dotted y axis denotes that the axis does not begin at zero. Shaded regions
are s.e.m. Avg. exp. ROI, average experienced ROI; n.s., non-significant.
618 NaturE HuMaN BEHaviour | VOL 3 | JUNE 2019 | 611–624 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NATure HumAN BeHAviour Articles
data are consistent with previous reports of increased responses underscores why development and training effects may vary across
in face-selective areas on the FG to stimuli of expertise gained in species. Third, the features of visual stimuli and how they interact
adulthood54,62,64, it is unclear from our data whether these increased with cognitive strategies that sculpt the brain during childhood may
responses are due to experience or due to the fact that Pokémon differ across species. That is, developmental predictions about the
have faces (Supplementary Fig. 9). Third, previous research has perceived animacy or size of a visual stimuli is readily queried only
shown that learning contextual and semantic features of novel in humans.
objects in adulthood (for example, this object is found in gardens) The unique opportunity presented by Pokémon as a stimulus is
can influence VTC representations66. Thus, part of the emergent the manner in which they vary from other visual stimuli in their
representation for Pokémon in experienced participants may have physical (retinal image size, rectilinearity) and perceived (animacy,
stemmed not only from visual features, but also contextual and size) properties. Furthermore, the topography of the responses in
semantic information learned about Pokémon. In other words, the experienced cortices was consistent across individuals, allowing us
representation of Pokémon may include additional semantic and to ask which potential dimension of Pokémon visual features, either
contextual information, such as its habitat and characteristics, that perceived or physical, may determine the anatomical localization of
can be investigated in future studies. Lastly, developmental work Pokémon responses in the VTC. The lateral location of this emer-
in humans with parametrically morphed stimuli has shown that gent representation, and its foveally biased pRFs, suggests that the
improved perceptual discrimination among face identities in adult- act of foveating on images that subtend a small retinal image during
hood is linked with increased neural sensitivity (lesser adaptation) childhood biases input towards regions in the lateral VTC that have
to face identity in the face-selective cortex from childhood to adult- pRFs that overlap the fovea. We posit that individuals experienced
hood67. Higher neural sensitivity is thought to be due to narrower with Pokémon had enough patterned visual experience for this
neural tuning. Future research can test whether childhood experi- biased input to result in category selectivity.
ence with Pokémon also affects neural tuning by measuring adap- Several aspects of our data indicate that retinal eccentricity is
tation to parametrically morphed Pokémon in experienced versus the dominant factor in determining the functional topography of
novice participants68. the VTC. Although this by no means invalidates observations
Our findings also have interesting parallels with research on the of other large-scale patterns describing the functional topography of
development of reading abilities in children. First, visual experience high-level vision5,25,26,35, our data suggest that retinal eccentricity is a
with Pokémon began between the ages of 5 and 8 yr old, similar to key developmental factor in determining the consistent functional
the ages during which reading ability rapidly improves69. Second, it topography of the VTC across individuals, for several reasons. First,
is interesting that, like looking at Pokémon, reading words requires analyses of the physical and perceived properties of Pokémon char-
foveation and words typically subtend small retinal images. Third, acters suggest that the attribute of Pokémon stimuli that best pre-
similar to our findings, research on the development of reading has dicts the location of peak selectivity for responses to Pokémon in
shown that the word-selective cortex emerges during childhood in the VTC was the experienced retinal eccentricity of Pokémon dur-
the lateral OTS and distributed representations in the OTS and the ing childhood. Second, pRFs of VTC voxels selective for Pokémon
lateral FG become more informative from childhood to adulthood in experienced participants showed a foveal bias. Future research
with increasing reading experience52,70. Thus, our data together with examining how these representations emerge during childhood
the research on the development of reading, suggest that the critical as participants learn these stimuli will be important for verifying
window for sculpting unique response patterns in the human VTC that the foveal bias in the OTS precedes the emerging selectivity to
extends to at least school age. Pokémon. Indeed, although Pokémon have almost linear statistics
Our results converge with previous research in macaques that at the image level, individuals are capable of integrating holistically
offers compelling evidence for three important developmental over a large number of pixels to perceive a curve. The extent to which
aspects of high-level visual cortex. First, its organization is sensi- this may be modulated by experience and potentially impact pRFs
tive to the timing of visual experience43. In macaques, learning during learning is an interesting focus for future research. Third,
new visual categories in juveniles but not adults resulted in new although the representation of animacy also exhibits a lateral−
category-selective regions for the trained stimuli. This suggests that medial organization in the human VTC, Pokémon are perceived as
there may be a critical developmental period for cortical plasticity less animate than faces, but their representation appeared lateral to
in high-level visual cortex. Second, in macaques, early visual experi- face-selective regions. In other words, if the animacy axis is con-
ence led to the formation of category selectivity in consistent ana- tinuous across the VTC, with animate representations in the OTS
tomical locations33 and deprivation of visual experience with stimuli and inanimate on the CoS, one would expect Pokémon-selective
such as faces results in no face-selective cortex32. Third, eccentric- voxels to be located medial to the face-selective cortex. Although
ity may be a strong prior that constrains development in high-level we observe that such a medial region is capable of responding to
visual cortex19,31. For example, in the macaque visual cortex, a proto- animate stimuli (Supplementary Fig. 8), it does not become selec-
eccentricity map is evident early in infant development39,40. tive for Pokémon across development. Instead, Pokémon-selective
However, our data also highlight key developmental differ- voxels were found in the OTS, lateral to the face-selective cortex.
ences across species. First, the critical window of cortical plasticity Although high-level visual cortex is capable of distinguishing ani-
in high-level visual cortex may be more extended in humans than mate from inanimate stimuli23, it might not be a continuous graded
macaques. In humans, extensive discrimination training in adults representation across the cortical sheet per se. Thus, the framework
results in changes in amplitudes62,71 and distributed representa- that human high-level visual cortex has a representation of retinal
tions63 in high-level visual cortex, but in adult macaques, responses43 eccentricity24,80, probably inherited from retinotopic input in earlier
and distributed representations72 do not change, even as the mon- visual field maps, offers a parsimonious explanation of the devel-
keys become behaviourally proficient at the task (but see ref. 73, opment of Pokémon representations in the VTC. Future research
which shows increases in the number of inferotemporal neurons can examine how becoming a Pokémon expert in childhood, which
responsive to trained stimuli in adult macaques). Second, the ana- probably entails learning optimal fixation patterns on Pokémon
tomical locus of the effects of childhood experience differs across stimuli, may further sculpt pRFs throughout development as
species. In humans, the most prominent functional developments observed in face- and word-selective cortex31.
have been reported in the FG20,74–78 and OTS52,77, but in macaques In conclusion, these findings shed light on the plasticity of the
they are largely around the superior temporal sulcus and adjacent human brain and how experience at a young age can alter corti-
gyri32,33. Notably, the FG is a hominoid-specific structure79, which cal representations. An intriguing implication of our study is that a
NaturE HuMaN BEHaviour | VOL 3 | JUNE 2019 | 611–624 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav 619
Articles NATure HumAN BeHAviour
common extensive visual experience in childhood leads to a com- an animate stimulus category that closely resembles Pokémon, as most Pokémon
mon representation with a consistent functional topography in the characters were designed to resemble an animal or insect. Cartoons were chosen
because they are another animated category that we hypothesize was experienced
brains of adults. This suggests that how we look at an item and the
by both groups predominantly in childhood and was somewhat recognizable by
quality with which we see it during childhood affects the way that both groups. Experience with cartoons was not quantified.
visual representations are shaped in the brain. Our data raise the
possibility that if people do not share common visual experiences Pokémon scenes and pixelated faces fMRI control experiment. To evaluate
of a stimulus during childhood, either from disease, as is the case whether the information we observed in the OTS in experienced participants
for Pokémon was selective for the learned game characters and not just any
in cataracts28,81, or cultural differences in viewing patterns82, then
stimulus from the game, a subset of experienced participants (n = 5, 3 of whom
an atypical or unique representation of that stimulus may result in also completed the pRF mapping detailed in the following section) was invited
adulthood, which has important implications for learning disabili- back to the laboratory to complete a follow-up fMRI experiment containing
ties83,84 and social disabilities85. two categories of images. The first consisted of scene stimuli from the Pokémon
game. These scenes were map-like images extracted from the game through
Overall, our study underscores the utility of developmental
which the player has to navigate their character, including towns, natural
research, showing that visual experience beginning in childhood
landscapes and indoor spaces. These scenes were free of any images of people
results in functional brain changes that are qualitatively differ- or Pokémon. The second category of stimuli was human faces (from the main
ent from plasticity in adulthood. Future research to examine the experiment) downsampled to visually resemble the 8 bit pixelated images from
amount of visual experience necessary to induce distinct cortical the Pokémon game to match for low-level visual features. This was accomplished
specialization and determine the extent of the critical window dur- by resizing face stimuli to 70 × 70 pixels (approximately the original pixel size
of Pokémon characters) and then resizing again using bicubic sampling to their
ing which such childhood plasticity is possible will further deepen
original size of 768 × 768 pixels. Images were presented in 4 s blocks at a rate of
our understanding of the development of the human visual system 2 Hz and were interleaved with a blank baseline condition. There were 12 blocks
and its behavioural ramifications. of each condition in a run; each run was 162 s in duration and participants
completed 3 runs. Data were analysed similarly to the main category localizer.
Methods Participants were instructed to press a button when a blank image appeared
within a block of images (oddball detection task).
Participant details. Human participants were between the ages of 18 and 44 yr,
with a mean and s.d. of 26.8 ± 4.8 yr. Participants were split into two groups:
pRF mapping. To evaluate the visual field coverage of receptive fields within
experienced (n = 11; age 24.3 ± 2.8 yr, 3 females) and novice participants (n = 11;
Pokémon-selective cortex, five experienced participants from the main experiment
age 29.6 ± 5.4 yr, 7 females). No statistical methods were used to predetermine
were invited to complete a pRF mapping experiment. Each participant completed
sample sizes but group sizes are similar to those reported in previous
4 runs of a sweeping bar stimulus that traversed the 7 × 7 degrees of visual angle
publications50,63,65. The former group was selected initially through self-reporting,
(DVA) screen in 8 different directions, as implemented in previous work31.
with the inclusion criteria that participants (1) began playing the original Nintendo
For each voxel, the pRF model59 was fitted using a circular Gaussian with a
Pokémon games between the ages of 5 and 8 yr on the hand-held GameBoy device,
position (x, y), size (sigma) and a compressive spatial summation88 to account
(2) continued to play the game and its series heavily throughout their childhood
for neural nonlinearities beyond the primary visual cortex. For each participant,
and (3) either continued to play the game into adulthood or revisited playing the
the Pokémon-selective cortex was defined as any voxel in the lateral VTC
game at least once in adulthood. Novice participants were chosen as individuals
demonstrating a T value of three or greater for the contrast of Pokémon versus all
who had never played the Pokémon game and had little to no interaction with
other stimuli from the localizer data. To derive pRF density maps to understand
Pokémon otherwise. All participants completed a five-choice naming task designed
how the visual field is covered by the pRFs of each participant’s Pokémon-selective
to test the naming ability of the participants; experienced participants scored
ROI (Fig. 6), pRFs were plotted as circles using the fit size (standard deviation of
significantly better than novices (Fig. 1a). All participants provided informed,
the fit pRF Gaussian) and the visual field was coloured pointwise according to pRF
written consent to participate in the experiment per Stanford University’s Internal
density, where 1 corresponds to the maximum pRF overlap in that participant.
Review Board.
Participants who completed behavioural rating experiments (separate from
Behavioural two-back task. To ensure that novice participants are capable of
the 11 experienced and 11 novice participants) were undergraduates of Stanford
visually detecting differences between Pokémon characters, and thus demonstrate
University. All participants provided informed consent (per Stanford University’s
that they do not perceive all Pokémon as an indistinguishable homogeneous object,
Internal Review Board) before completing the experiments (described below) and
were compensated with extra class credits. we invited a separate group of novice participants (n = 36) to the laboratory to
complete a two-back repetition detection task. Participants saw blocked images
from one of three categories (faces, Pokémon, corridors) and were instructed to
Behavioural naming task. Participants completed a 5-choice naming task with 40
press a button when they detected an image repeat with an intervening image.
randomly selected Pokémon. The experiment was self-paced and participants were
Stimuli were presented at 2 Hz and 8 images were presented within a block, as was
told to choose the correct name of each Pokémon. Performance was evaluated
done during functional MRI. There could be 0 or 1 repeats within a given block
as the percent correct accuracy, with experienced participants significantly
and 50% of blocks contained a repeat; there were 40 blocks per category. Blocks
outperforming novices (two-tailed t-test t(18) = 17.3, P < 0.001). The behavioural
with repeats were randomly assigned and counterbalanced across categories;
identification task was run after scanning had been completed to minimize the
category and stimulus order were randomized.
exposure of novice participants to Pokémon stimuli. Two novices were unable to
complete the behavioural testing and were therefore excluded from the behavioural
analyses in Fig. 1. Anatomical MRI. T1-weighted anatomical volumes of the entire brain were
collected for each participant at a resolution of 1 mm isotropic at the end of each
fMRI eight-category experiment. All participants underwent fMRI, completing six functional scanning session. Anatomical scans were acquired with a T1-weighted
runs of the experiment with different images across runs. Each run was 218 s in BRAVO pulse sequence with the following parameters: inversion time, 450 ms;
duration and, across the 6 runs, and stimuli were presented in counterbalanced flip angle, 12o; field of view, 240 mm. Anatomical volumes were processed using
4 s blocks, each containing 8 stimuli from a category shown at a rate of 2 Hz. FreeSurfer89 (https://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu), version 6.0. Volumes were
Categories included faces, headless bodies, 8 bit Pokémon sprites from the segmented to grey and white matter to produce a reconstruction of the cortical
original Nintendo game, animals, popular cartoon characters from the television surface as well as a definition of the cortical ribbon (grey matter). Functional data
of the late 1990s and early 2000s, pseudowords, cars and corridors. Stimuli, as were restricted to the cortical ribbon.
illustrated in Fig. 1b, were presented on a textured background produced by
phase scrambling a stimulus from another category86. Stimuli and backgrounds fMRI acquisition. T2*-weighted data were collected on a 3 T GE Discovery scanner
were counterbalanced so that all stimuli appeared with all other phase-scrambled using a gradient echo simultaneous multi-slice acquisition protocol for three
categories as a background. This was done such that the Fourier amplitude simultaneous slice readouts with CAIPI-z phase shifting to improve the signal-
spectra of all images across categories was matched as closely as possible, as in to-noise ratio of the reconstructed image90. Slices (16 prescribed, 48 in total after
previous publications31,67,86. For the present stimulus set (144 images per category, simultaneous multi-slice) were aligned parallel to the parieto-occipital sulcus in
8 categories), we observe no significant difference in the summed Fourier each participant to guarantee coverage of the occipital and ventral temporal lobes.
amplitude between stimulus categories in an ANOVA with the grouping variable Parameters were as follows: field of view (FOV), 192 mm; repeat time (TR), 2; echo
of stimulus category (F(1,7) < 0.001, P = 1). Stimuli were presented approximately time (TE), 0.03 s; voxel size, 2.4 mm isotropic, no inter-slice gap.
in the centre of the background square but were jittered in size and position
to minimize differences in the average image between categories. Stimuli were fMRI data processing. Functional data were motion-corrected within and
run through the SHINE toolbox87 to remove luminance differences between between scans and aligned to an anatomical reference volume per the standard
categories or potential outlier stimuli. Animals (including insects) were chosen as Vistasoft pipeline78; see https://github.com/vistalab/vistasoft. Localizer data were
620 NaturE HuMaN BEHaviour | VOL 3 | JUNE 2019 | 611–624 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NATure HumAN BeHAviour Articles
unsmoothed and always analysed in native participant space (unless producing anterior tip of the MFS, respectively. The lateral and medial edges of each bin
average cortical maps as described below). Functional data were corrected are as follows: the lateral-most bin extended from the ITG through the OTS and
for within- and between-scan motion; all participants were well trained and ended at the FG; the next bin included the lateral FG and ended at the pit of the
moved less than a voxel through their scans. For each voxel, the time course was MFS; the next bin extended from the MFS and included the medial FG, ending at
transformed from arbitrary scanner units to percent signal change by dividing the CoS; the most medial bin included the CoS and ended at the parahippocampal
every time point by the mean response across an experiment. Localizer data were gyrus. Example bins are shown in the inset of Fig. 5b. From each bin, and within
fitted with a standard general linear model by convolving stimulus presentation each individual participant, we extracted the mean selectivity (T- values) for a
times with a difference-of-Gaussians haemodynamic response function given contrast (faces, Pokémon or corridors). For each category we then fitted
implemented in SPM (www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm), version 8. The GLM (general spline curves across these four values to produce the curves shown in Fig. 5b.
linear model) was also used to perform contrast mapping between different Spline curves were fitted to allow for smoother spatial information and also aided
stimulus conditions. in more accurately identifying peak locations. From these curves, we identified the
maxima for each participant and compared the lateral−medial coordinate values
MVPA. We performed multivoxel pattern analyses (MVPA) on VTC voxel data. across categories.
The VTC was defined in each participant’s cortical surface using the following
cortical folds: laterally, it was bounded by the OTS up to the beginning of the ITG; Image statistics analyses. To generate predictions for the locus of Pokémon-selective
medially, by the CoS; anteriorly, by the anterior tip of the MFS; and posteriorly, by voxels in the VTC compared to face- and place-selective voxels, we ran a number
the posterior transverse CoS. The multi-voxel patterns (MVPs) in response to each of analyses on images of Pokémon, faces and corridors. We evaluated two physical
category (betas resulting from the GLM) were represented as a vector, the values properties of the stimuli, eccentricity of the retinal image and curvilinearity
of which were z-scored by subtracting the voxel’s mean response and dividing of the images, and two perceived properties, physical size and animacy of the
by residualGLMvariance∕d.f.. We then computed all pairwise correlations stimuli. Corridors were chosen as they represent a category of scene stimuli that
between MVPs of one category to every other to produce the 8 × 8 RSMs in Fig. 2a. all participants probably have equal visual experience of, and because they are
Each cell is the average correlation from split-half combinations of the six runs matched to Pokémon stimuli in that they possess linear features. This provides
(for example, 1−2−3/4−5−6, 2−3−4 × /1−5−6…). MVPAs were run on in-plane a larger dynamic range between faces and scenes to more readily assess where
data using the original fMRI data in the acquired resolution. Pokémon exist in visual feature space between these stimuli classes.
Classification. To quantify the information present in MVPs of the VTC, we Eccentricity bias. To evaluate the average eccentricity of the retinal image, we
constructed a winner-takes-all classifier. The classifier was trained on one half of simulated retinal images (144 per category) in a representation of the visual field
the data and tested on how well it could predict the held-out half of data. For a spanning 150 × 150 DVA (75° in one hemifield) and used a distribution of probable
given split, we used one half of the data as a training set and the other half as the stimuli viewing distances to encapsulate the variability of viewing distances in
testing set. The winner-takes-all classifier computes the correlation between the real life and individual differences in viewing behaviour. For corridors and rooms,
MVP of given test data (MVP for an unknown stimulus) and each of the MVPs of we assumed that the image nearly always occupied the entire visual field. That
the labelled training data. It classifies the test data on the basis of the training data is, corridor/room stimuli were simulated to occupy anywhere from 95 to 100%
that yielded the highest correlation with the test data. For a given test MVP, correct of the visual field by assigning a random value of 95−100% of the size of the
classification yields a score of one and an incorrect choice yields a score of zero. 150o simulated visual field (75o radius) to produce a distribution for the retinal
Performance was computed for each category for both permutations of training image size of places. For stimuli of faces and Pokémon, we simulated Gaussian
and testing sets, yielding possible scores of 1 (both classifications were correct), distributions of retinal image sizes. For Pokémon, viewing distance is relatively
0.5 (only 1 was correct) or 0 (both incorrect). For each category, we averaged consistent, as they are viewed on the GameBoy screen (characters are presented
classification scores from all split-half combinations (ten) per participant and then in a 2 cm square and on average occupy 1.6 cm on the GameBoy screen) and
averaged classification performance across participants within a group to produce limited to a maximum of arm’s length. We assumed a relaxed position in which
the values in Fig. 2b,c. a participant would, on average, hold the device 32 cm (ref. 92) from the eyes with
a standard deviation of 10 cm. Pokémon were also viewed in childhood in the
Measurement of mean ROI response amplitudes. To evaluate the fMRI response cartoon show, which aired on television once a week for a duration of 12–14 min.
from the Pokémon-selective cortex in experienced participants, independently Thus, we estimate that much less time was spent watching Pokémon on television
from the data used to define the ROI, we used FreeSurfer to produce an average than playing the GameBoy game. B. Lechner of RCA laboratories measured
Pokémon-selective ROI that was independent of each participant’s individual data. average viewing distance at which individuals watched television (national average:
We implemented a leave-one-out approach, defining for the nth participant an 9 feet, or 2.74 m) and produced optimal viewing distances for television screens
average Pokémon ROI from n − 1 participants. In 10 experienced participants, we of a given resolution. Given Lechner’s distance for average television viewing
transformed voxels selective for Pokémon (Pokémon versus all other stimuli, t > 3, and the size of televisions in the late 1990s and early 2000s, the retinal image
voxel level) using CBA to the FreeSurfer average cortical surface (an independent produced by Pokémon from the cartoon show is comparable to the closely held
average of 39 individuals). We then generated a group average probability map of GameBoy. For faces, which have an average size of 20 cm and an average viewing
the location of Pokémon on the FreeSurfer average brain and thresholded maps distance of 150 cm (about 5−6 feet)93, we used a standard deviation of 50 cm in
from these 10 experienced participants to include only vertices that were consistent viewing distance. Although individuals may fixate on a face that is further away
across at least 30% of participants. This threshold was used in previous research or at very close distances, these viewing times are probably much shorter than the
and demonstrates the optimal point in Dice coefficients for predicting the ROI conversational viewing distance of a face, which probably comprises the majority of
location in human cortices78,91. Furthermore, the thresholding ensures that no one face-viewing time. The average size of a face was taken to be 20 cm. Each stimulus
participant can influence the group average ROI. This thresholded group ROI was of each category was then simulated as a retinal image from which we calculated
then transformed back into the left-out participant, from which we then extracted its eccentricity in degrees of visual angle, assuming that participants fixated on
the percent signal change reported in Fig. 8a. This procedure was repeated 11 the relevant item randomly sampled from the distributions described above. The
times, for each of the experienced participants. In a similar manner, we created distributions of these eccentricity values are displayed in Fig. 4a.
a group Pokémon ROI from all 11 experienced participants, thresholded at the
same 30% overlap level, on the FreeSurfer average brain. This group ROI was Rectilinearity. The lines composing a given image can be quantified in terms of
transformed using CBA into each of the novice participants’ brains, from which we their rectilinearity, that is, how straight (linear) or rounded (high curvature) the
extracted the percent signal change to our stimuli. Because CBA is not as accurate composite features of an image are. We employed the Rectilinearity Toolbox25,
as defining fROIs from data in each participant’s brain, we excluded voxels that which convolves a series of wavelet filters varying in orientation (22.5−360° in
showed significant selectivity to another category 22.5° steps), position, angle (30°, 60°, 90°, 120°, 150° and 180°) and scale (1/5,
1/9, 1/15 and 1/27 cycles per pixel) to assess the rectilinearity of our images. All
Definition of pFus- and mFus-faces. Face-selective cortex was defined in each Pokémon, face and corridor stimuli were analysed using this toolbox, whereby
participant’s brain as in previous work using cortical folds in the VTC as each image is given a score relative to other stimuli. The output of this toolbox is a
anatomical landmarks. mFus-faces was a cluster of face-selective (T values greater ranking of all provided stimuli from least to most linear. Histograms based on the
than 3 for the contrast of faces versus all other stimuli) voxels located on the lateral distribution of stimulus categories in this linear ranking are plotted in Fig. 4b.
FG, aligned to the anterior end of the MFS. pFus-faces was defined with the same
contrast and was located on the lateral FG 1−1.5 cm posterior to mFus-faces. Perceived attributes. Size. Faces and places have distinct and measurable sizes
in the environment and producing distributions around the mean size of a
Evaluating the anatomical peak location of face, Pokémon and corridor selectivity in face or place is relatively straightforward. For places, we used corridors in our
the VTC. The goal of this analysis was to determine the location of peak responses simulations as their size, compared to something open air such as a forest or
to a given category on a linear (lateral−medial) space to test the theoretical beach, is readily estimable. Given that open air places are probably larger than the
predictions illustrated in Fig. 4. Thus, in each experienced participant, we defined numbers simulated here, these simulations thus represent a conservative estimate
four anatomical bins in the VTC arranged from lateral to medial, whose posterior for the size of place stimuli. For faces and places, we simulated distributions of
and anterior extent were constrained by the posterior transverse CoS and the their real-world sizes and for Pokémon, which have no real-world size, raters
NaturE HuMaN BEHaviour | VOL 3 | JUNE 2019 | 611–624 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav 621
Articles NATure HumAN BeHAviour
report their perceived size and compare these values to those of faces and places. references
Assuming an average anatomical head height of 20 cm, we made a Gaussian 1. Ungerleider, L. G. & Mishkin, M. in Analysis of Visual Behavior (eds Ingle, D. J.
distribution with a standard deviation of 2 cm around that point. The distribution et al.) 549–586 (MIT Press, 1982).
sample size was 150. The average wall height in a standard storied building is 2. DiCarlo, J. J. & Cox, D. D. Untangling invariant object recognition. Trends
2.4 m, but can be up to > 3 m. Corridors and building interiors probably make Cogn. Sci. 11, 333–341 (2007).
up a large percentage of place interactions for our participants, however, we also 3. Desimone, R., Albright, T. D., Gross, C. G. & Bruce, C. Stimulus-selective
account for some larger scenarios that might be encountered in larger buildings properties of inferior temporal neurons in the macaque. J. Neurosci. 4,
or skyscrapers. We thus use a skewed distribution with a tail towards larger sizes; 2051–2062 (1984).
no value for corridor size was allowed to go below 2.43 m.The distribution sample 4. Logothetis, N. K., Pauls, J. & Poggio, T. Shape representation in the inferior
size was 150. Pokémon, which are modelled to have animal-like properties in temporal cortex of monkeys. Curr. Biol. 5, 552–563 (1995).
the game, have explicit sizes in the game itself. For example, a given Pokémon is 5. Hanson, S. J., Matsuka, T. & Haxby, J. V. Combinatorial codes in ventral
accompanied by information about its physical features, including its size. While temporal lobe for object recognition: Haxby (2001) revisited: is there a “face”
viewers experience the Pokémon on a small screen (similar to viewing images area? NeuroImage 23, 156–166 (2004).
of faces and corridors on a small screen), there is an inherent understanding of 6. Grill-Spector, K., Weiner, K. S., Kay, K. N. & Gomez, J. The functional
what its physical size would be in the real world. To evaluate the physical size neuroanatomy of human face perception. Annu. Rev. Vis. Sci. 3,
of Pokémon we took two approaches. First, we used the actual in-game sizes 167–196 (2017).
as the distribution of physical sizes. Second, we had an independent group of 7. Kanwisher, N., McDermott, J. & Chun, M. M. The fusiform face area: a
participants (n = 28) estimate the size of (n = 50) Pokémon randomly selected module in human extrastriate cortex specialized for face perception.
from the 144 stimuli using a 1−7 Likert scale. Each integer corresponded to a J. Neurosci. 17, 4302–4311 (1997).
reference animal of increasing size (ant, mouse, cat, dog, gorilla, horse, dinosaur). 8. Aguirre, G. K., Zarahn, E. & D’Esposito, M. An area within human ventral
Raters’ choices were converted from a Likert digit (2, corresponding to a mouse) cortex sensitive to ‘building’ stimuli: evidence and implications. Neuron 21,
to the average metric size of that animal (mouse = 7.5 cm). We found that 373–383 (1998).
independent raters perceived Pokémon to be of sizes strikingly similar to those 9. Epstein, R. & Kanwisher, N. A cortical representation of the local visual
within the game. Each rating (Likert integer) was converted to metres using
environment. Nature 392, 598–601 (1998).
the average size of the reference animal and a mean size was calculated for each
10. Ben-Shachar, M., Dougherty, R. F., Deutsch, G. K. & Wandell, B. A.
participant. Participants’ ratings were then compared to the distribution of face
Differential sensitivity to words and shapes in ventral occipito-temporal
sizes (n = 150) and corridor sizes (n = 150) from above. cortex. Cereb. Cortex 17, 1604–1611 (2007).
11. McCandliss, B. D., Cohen, L. & Dehaene, S. The visual word form
Animacy. To quantify animacy for our images, another independent group of
area: expertise for reading in the fusiform gyrus. Trends Cogn. Sci. 7,
raters (n = 42) evaluated the perceived animacy of Pokémon, faces and corridors 293–299 (2003).
on a scale of 1 to 5, with increasing values corresponding to higher animacy.
12. Cohen, L. et al. The visual word form area: spatial and temporal
Participants were shown one image at a time and asked, for each image: ‘How
characterization of an initial stage of reading in normal subjects and posterior
animate, or living, do you perceive this image to be?’ Participants rated 50 stimuli
split-brain patients. Brain 123, 291–307 (2000).
each of faces, Pokémon and corridors; stimuli from each category were randomly
13. Parvizi, J. et al. Electrical stimulation of human fusiform face-selective
selected from the total 144 stimuli used in the localizer experiment for each
regions distorts face perception. J. Neurosci. 32, 14915–14920 (2012).
category. For each participant, their mean rating of animacy was calculated by
14. Megevand, P. et al. Seeing scenes: topographic visual hallucinations evoked by
averaging their scores for faces, Pokémon or words. Distributions were then made
direct electrical stimulation of the parahippocampal place area. J. Neurosci.
over the raters’ mean values for each stimulus category.
34, 5399–5405 (2014).
15. Hirshorn, E. A. et al. Decoding and disrupting left midfusiform
Rectilinearity. To quantify how individuals may perceive different stimuli as
gyrus activity during word reading. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 113,
more or less rectilinear, we conducted another behavioural experiment in an
8162–8167 (2016).
independent group of raters (n = 50). In the experiment, they viewed images of
16. Grill-Spector, K., Weiner, K. S., Kay, K. N. & Gomez, J. The functional
faces, Pokémon characters and corridors and evaluated on a scale from 1 (very
neuroanatomy of human face perception. Annu. Rev. Vis. Sci 3,
curvy) to 7 (very linear/boxy) how linear they perceived the stimuli to be. The
167–196 (2016).
experiment was self-paced and participants were instructed to examine the lines,
17. Weiner, K. S. & Grill-Spector, K. Neural representations of faces and limbs
edges and shapes that made up a particular image and evaluate overall how linear
neighbor in human high-level visual cortex: evidence for a new organization
they perceived the particular object to be. Participants saw 40 images from each
principle. Psychol. Res. 77, 74–97 (2013).
category. From each participant we derived a mean rating for each category;
18. Weiner, K. S. et al. Defining the most probable location of the
violin plots depicting the distribution across participants for the ratings of faces,
parahippocampal place area using cortex-based alignment and cross-
Pokémon and corridors are plotted in Supplementary Fig. 4.
validation. NeuroImage 170, 373–384 (2017).
19. Malach, R., Levy, I. & Hasson, U. The topography of high-order human
Statistics. For all ANOVAs, grouping factors are described throughout the test.
object areas. Trends Cogn. Sci. 6, 176–184 (2002).
For statistical comparisons, data were assumed to be normal in distribution, but
20. Golarai, G., Liberman, A. & Grill-Spector, K. Experience shapes the
this was not formally tested. Individual participant data and distributions are
development of neural substrates of face processing in human ventral
represented in all relevant figures. The number of participants chosen was similar
temporal cortex. Cereb. Cortex 27, bhv314 (2015).
to that in other studies comparing groups of developmentally unique individuals in
21. Kanwisher, N. Functional specificity in the human brain: a window into the
high-level visual cortex52,94–96. All t-tests performed were two tailed. Data collection
functional architecture of the mind. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 107,
and analysis were not performed blind to the conditions of the experiments. No
11163–11170 (2010).
participants were excluded for data quality issues. Two novice participants were
22. Haxby, J. V. et al. Distributed and overlapping representations of faces and
unable to perform the behaviour experiment in Fig. 1 and were thus not included
objects in ventral temporal cortex. Science 293, 2425–2430 (2001).
in that behavioural comparison between groups.
23. Kriegeskorte, N. et al. Matching categorical object representations in inferior
temporal cortex of man and monkey. Neuron 60, 1126–1141 (2008).
Reporting Summary. Further information on research design is available in the
24. Hasson, U., Levy, I., Behrmann, M., Hendler, T. & Malach, R. Eccentricity
Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.
bias as an organizing principle for human high-order object areas. Neuron 34,
479–490 (2002).
Data availability
25. Nasr, S., Echavarria, C. E. & Tootell, R. B. Thinking outside the box:
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the rectilinear shapes selectively activate scene-selective cortex. J. Neurosci. 34,
corresponding author on request. There are no restrictions on the sharing of the 6721–6735 (2014).
data, apart from allowing sufficient time to curate and send them on request. 26. Konkle, T. & Caramazza, A. Tripartite organization of the ventral stream by
animacy and object size. J. Neurosci. 33, 10235–10242 (2013).
Code availability 27. de Heering, A. & Maurer, D. Face memory deficits in patients deprived of
Code used to preprocess and analyse MRI data in this experiment can be found early visual input by bilateral congenital cataracts. Dev. Psychobiol. 56,
at Vistasoft (https://github.com/vistalab/vistasoft). Remaining code used 96–108 (2014).
to further process the data in this experiment can be found at https://www. 28. Gandhi, T. K., Singh, A. K., Swami, P., Ganesh, S. & Sinha, P. Emergence of
gomezneuro.com/code. categorical face perception after extended early-onset blindness. Proc. Natl
Acad. Sci. USA 114, 6139–6143 (2017).
Received: 12 September 2018; Accepted: 21 March 2019; 29. McKyton, A., Ben-Zion, I., Doron, R. & Zohary, E. The limits of shape
recognition following late emergence from blindness. Curr. Biol. 25,
Published online: 6 May 2019
2373–2378 (2015).
622 NaturE HuMaN BEHaviour | VOL 3 | JUNE 2019 | 611–624 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NATure HumAN BeHAviour Articles
30. Dehaene, S. et al. How learning to read changes the cortical networks for 62. McGugin, R. W., Gatenby, J. C., Gore, J. C. & Gauthier, I. High-resolution
vision and language. Science 330, 1359–1364 (2010). imaging of expertise reveals reliable object selectivity in the fusiform face
31. Gomez, J., Natu, V., Jeska, B., Barnett, M. & Grill-Spector, K. Development area related to perceptual performance. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 109,
differentially sculpts receptive fields across early and high-level human visual 17063–17068 (2012).
cortex. Nat. Commun. 9, 788 (2018). 63. Op de Beeck, H. P., Baker, C. I., DiCarlo, J. J. & Kanwisher, N. G.
32. Arcaro, M. J., Schade, P. F., Vincent, J. L., Ponce, C. R. & Livingstone, M. S. Discrimination training alters object representations in human extrastriate
Seeing faces is necessary for face-domain formation. Nat. Neurosci. 20, cortex. J. Neurosci. 26, 13025–13036 (2006).
1404–1412 (2017). 64. Martens, F., Bulthé, J., van Vliet, C. & Op de Beeck, H. Domain-general and
33. Srihasam, K., Vincent, J. L. & Livingstone, M. S. Novel domain formation domain-specific neural changes underlying visual expertise. NeuroImage 169,
reveals proto-architecture in inferotemporal cortex. Nat. Neurosci. 17, 80–93 (2018).
1776–1783 (2014). 65. Jiang, X. et al. Categorization training results in shape- and category-selective
34. Sha, L. et al. The animacy continuum in the human ventral vision pathway. human neural plasticity. Neuron 53, 891–903 (2007).
J. Cogn. Neurosci. 27, 665–678 (2015). 66. Clarke, A., Pell, P. J., Ranganath, C. & Tyler, L. K. Learning warps object
35. Wiggett, A. J., Pritchard, I. C. & Downing, P. E. Animate and inanimate representations in the ventral temporal cortex. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 28,
objects in human visual cortex: evidence for task-independent category 1010–1023 (2016).
effects. Neuropsychologia 47, 3111–3117 (2009). 67. Natu, V. S. et al. Development of neural sensitivity to face identity correlates
36. Warrington, E. K. & Shallice, T. Category specific semantic impairments. with perceptual discriminability. J. Neurosci. 36, 10893–10907 (2016).
Brain 107, 829–854 (1984). 68. Jiang, X., Chevillet, M. A., Rauschecker, J. P. & Riesenhuber, M. Training
37. Martin, A., Wiggs, C. L., Ungerleider, L. G. & Haxby, J. V. Neural correlates humans to categorize monkey calls: auditory feature- and category-selective
of category-specific knowledge. Nature 379, 649–652 (1996). neural tuning changes. Neuron 98, 405–416 (2018).
38. Konkle, T. & Oliva, A. A real-world size organization of object responses in 69. Ben-Shachar, M., Dougherty, R. F., Deutsch, G. K. & Wandell, B. A. The
occipitotemporal cortex. Neuron 74, 1114–1124 (2012). development of cortical sensitivity to visual word forms. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 23,
39. Arcaro, M. J. & Livingstone, M. S. A hierarchical, retinotopic proto- 2387–2399 (2011).
organization of the primate visual system at birth. eLife 6, e26196 (2017). 70. Dehaene-Lambertz, G., Monzalvo, K. & Dehaene, S. The emergence of the
40. Huberman, A. D., Feller, M. B. & Chapman, B. Mechanisms underlying visual word form: longitudinal evolution of category-specific ventral visual
development of visual maps and receptive fields. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 31, areas during reading acquisition. PLoS Biol. 16, e2004103 (2018).
479–509 (2008). 71. Gauthier, I., Tarr, M. J., Anderson, A. W., Skudlarski, P. & Gore, J. C.
41. Osher, D. E. et al. Structural connectivity fingerprints predict cortical Activation of the middle fusiform ‘face area’ increases with expertise in
selectivity for multiple visual categories across cortex. Cereb. Cortex 26, recognizing novel objects. Nat. Neurosci. 2, 568–573 (1999).
1668–1683 (2016). 72. Op de Beeck, H. P., Deutsch, J. A., Vanduffel, W., Kanwisher, N. G. &
42. Shatz, C. J. Emergence of order in visual system development. J. Physiol. 90, DiCarlo, J. J. A stable topography of selectivity for unfamiliar shape classes in
141–150 (1996). monkey inferior temporal cortex. Cereb. Cortex 18, 1676–1694 (2008).
43. Srihasam, K., Mandeville, J. B., Morocz, I. A., Sullivan, K. J. & Livingstone, 73. Kobatake, E., Wang, G. & Tanaka, K. Effects of shape-discrimination training
M. S. Behavioral and anatomical consequences of early versus late symbol on the selectivity of inferotemporal cells in adult monkeys. J. Neurophysiol.
training in macaques. Neuron 73, 608–619 (2012). 80, 324–330 (1998).
44. Hensch, T. K. Critical period plasticity in local cortical circuits. Nat. Rev. 74. Golarai, G. et al. Differential development of high-level visual cortex
Neurosci. 6, 877–888 (2005). correlates with category-specific recognition memory. Nat. Neurosci. 10,
45. Wiesel, T. N. & Hubel, D. H. Single-cell responses in striate cortex of kittens 512–522 (2007).
deprived of vision in one eye. J. Neurophysiol. 26, 1003–1017 (1963). 75. Scherf, K. S., Behrmann, M., Humphreys, K. & Luna, B. Visual category-
46. Hubel, D. H. & Wiesel, T. N. The period of susceptibility to the selectivity for faces, places and objects emerges along different developmental
physiological effects of unilateral eye closure in kittens. J. Physiol. 206, trajectories. Dev. Sci. 10, 15–30 (2007).
419–436 (1970). 76. Peelen, M. V., Glaser, B., Vuilleumier, P. & Eliez, S. Differential development
47. Shatz, C. J. Impulse activity and the patterning of connections during CNS of selectivity for faces and bodies in the fusiform gyrus. Dev. Sci. 12,
development. Neuron 5, 745–756 (1990). 16–25 (2009).
48. Espinosa, J. S. & Stryker, M. P. Development and plasticity of the primary 77. Cantlon, J. F., Pinel, P., Dehaene, S. & Pelphrey, K. A. Cortical representations
visual cortex. Neuron 75, 230–249 (2012). of symbols, objects, and faces are pruned back during early childhood. Cereb.
49. Grill-Spector, K. & Weiner, K. S. The functional architecture of the ventral Cortex 21, 191–199 (2011).
temporal cortex and its role in categorization. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 15, 78. Gomez, J. et al. Microstructural proliferation in human cortex is coupled with
536–548 (2014). the development of face processing. Science 355, 68–71 (2017).
50. Gauthier, I., Skudlarski, P., Gore, J. C. & Anderson, A. W. Expertise for cars 79. Weiner, K. S. & Zilles, K. The anatomical and functional specialization of the
and birds recruits brain areas involved in face recognition. Nat. Neurosci. 3, fusiform gyrus. Neuropsychologia 83, 48–62 (2016).
191–197 (2000). 80. Hasson, U., Harel, M., Levy, I. & Malach, R. Large-scale mirror-symmetry
51. James, T. W. & James, K. H. Expert individuation of objects increases organization of human occipito-temporal object areas. Neuron 37,
activation in the fusiform face area of children. NeuroImage 67, 1027–1041 (2003).
182–192 (2013). 81. Lewis, T. L. & Maurer, D. Multiple sensitive periods in human visual
52. Nordt, M., Gomez, J., Natu, V. S. & Jeska, B. Learning to read increases the development: evidence from visually deprived children. Dev. Psychobiol. 46,
informativeness of distributed ventral temporal responses. Preprint at bioRxiv 163–183 (2005).
https://doi.org/10.1101/257055 (2018). 82. Blais, C., Jack, R. E., Scheepers, C., Fiset, D. & Caldara, R. Culture shapes
53. Harel, A., Gilaie-Dotan, S., Malach, R. & Bentin, S. Top-down engagement how we look at faces. PLoS One 3, e3022 (2008).
modulates the neural expressions of visual expertise. Cereb. Cortex 20, 83. Biscaldi, M., Fischer, B. & Aiple, F. Saccadic eye movements of dyslexic and
2304–2318 (2010). normal reading children. Perception 23, 45–64 (1994).
54. McGugin, R. W., Newton, A. T., Gore, J. C. & Gauthier, I. Robust expertise 84. Olulade, O. A., Napoliello, E. M. & Eden, G. F. Abnormal visual motion
effects in right FFA. Neuropsychologia 63, 135–144 (2014). processing is not a cause of dyslexia. Neuron 79, 180–190 (2013).
55. Levy, I., Hasson, U., Avidan, G., Hendler, T. & Malach, R. Center-periphery 85. Dalton, K. M. et al. Gaze fixation and the neural circuitry of face processing
organization of human object areas. Nat. Neurosci. 4, 533–539 (2001). in autism. Nat. Neurosci. 8, 519–526 (2005).
56. Connolly, A. C. et al. The representation of biological classes in the human 86. Stigliani, A., Weiner, K. S. & Grill-Spector, K. Temporal processing
brain. J. Neurosci. 32, 2608–2618 (2012). capacity in high-level visual cortex is domain specific. J. Neurosci. 35,
57. Fischl, B., Sereno, M. I. & Dale, A. M. Cortical surface-based analysis. II: 12412–12424 (2015).
inflation, flattening, and a surface-based coordinate system. NeuroImage 9, 87. Willenbockel, V. et al. Controlling low-level image properties: the SHINE
195–207 (1999). toolbox. Behav. Res. Methods 42, 671–684 (2010).
58. Wandell, B. A. & Winawer, J. Computational neuroimaging and population 88. Kay, K. N., Winawer, J., Mezer, A. & Wandell, B. A. Compressive
receptive fields. Trends Cogn. Sci. 19, 349–357 (2015). spatial summation in human visual cortex. J. Neurophysiol. 110,
59. Dumoulin, S. O. & Wandell, B. A. Population receptive field estimates in 481–494 (2013).
human visual cortex. NeuroImage 39, 647–660 (2008). 89. Dale, A. M., Fischl, B. & Sereno, M. I. Cortical surface-based analysis. I.
60. Duda, R. O., Hart, P. E. & Stork, D. G. Pattern Classification 2nd edn Segmentation and surface reconstruction. NeuroImage 9, 179–194 (1999).
(Wiley, 2001). 90. Feinberg, D. A. & Setsompop, K. Ultra-fast MRI of the human brain with
61. Weiner, K. S. & Grill-Spector, K. Sparsely-distributed organization of face and simultaneous multi-slice imaging. J. Magn. Reson. 229, 90–100 (2013).
limb activations in human ventral temporal cortex. NeuroImage 52, 91. Rosenke, M. et al. A cross-validated cytoarchitectonic atlas of the human
1559–1573 (2010). ventral visual stream. NeuroImage 170, 257–270 (2018).
NaturE HuMaN BEHaviour | VOL 3 | JUNE 2019 | 611–624 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav 623
Articles NATure HumAN BeHAviour
92. Bababekova, Y., Rosenfield, M., Hue, J. E. & Huang, R. R. Font size and viewing plotting toolbox. The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis,
distance of handheld smart phones. Optom. Vis. Sci. 88, 795–797 (2011). decision to publish or preparation of the manuscript.
93. McKone, E. Holistic processing for faces operates over a wide range of sizes
but is strongest at identification rather than conversational distances. author contributions
Vision Res. 49, 268–283 (2009). J.G. and M.B. designed and conducted the study. J.G. analysed the data. K.G.-S. oversaw
94. Weiner, K. S. et al. The face-processing network is resilient to focal resection the study and data analyses. J.G. and K.G.-S. wrote the manuscript.
of human visual cortex. J. Neurosci. 36, 8425–8440 (2016).
95. Gomez, J. et al. Functionally defined white matter reveals segregated pathways Competing interests
in human ventral temporal cortex associated with category-specific The authors declare no competing interests.
processing. Neuron 85, 216–227 (2015).
96. Furl, N., Garrido, L., Dolan, R. J., Driver, J. & Duchaine, B. Fusiform gyrus
additional information
face selectivity relates to individual differences in facial recognition ability.
J. Cogn. Neurosci. 23, 1723–1740 (2011). Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41562-019-0592-8.
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
acknowledgements
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to J.G.
This research was funded by the Ruth L. Kirschstein National Research Service
Award grant no. F31EY027201 to J.G., NIH grant nos. 1ROI1EY02231801A1 and Publisher’s note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
2RO1EY022318-06 to K.G.-S. and a seed grant awarded to J.G. by the Stanford University published maps and institutional affiliations.
Center for Cognitive and Neurobiological Imaging. We thank A. Urai for her Matlab © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2019
624 NaturE HuMaN BEHaviour | VOL 3 | JUNE 2019 | 611–624 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
1
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
April
2018
Corresponding author(s): Jesse Gomez (jessegomez@berkeley.edu)
Reporting Summary
Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency
in reporting. For further information on Nature Research policies, see Authors & Referees and the Editorial Policy Checklist.
Statistical parameters
When statistical analyses are reported, confirm that the following items are present in the relevant location (e.g. figure legend, table legend, main
text, or Methods section).
n/a Confirmed
The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
An indication of whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided
Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.
A description of all covariates tested
A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
A full description of the statistics including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient) AND
variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)
For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted
Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.
For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated
Clearly defined error bars
State explicitly what error bars represent (e.g. SD, SE, CI)
Our web collection on statistics for biologists may be useful.
Software and code
Policy information about availability of computer code
Data collection Data was collected using MATLAB (R2015b, https://www.mathworks.com/products/matlab.html), and stimuli were presented with
Psychtoolbox (http://psychtoolbox.org).
Data analysis MRI data was analyzed with the following open source software packages: Vistaosft (https://github.com/vistalab/vistasoft), FreeSurfer
(https://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu), and SPM8 (https://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/software/spm8/)
For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors/reviewers
upon request. We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Research guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.
Data
Policy information about availability of data
All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable:
- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets
- A list of figures that have associated raw data
- A description of any restrictions on data availability
Further information and requests for resources should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the Lead Contact, Jesse Gomez: jessegomez@berkeley.edu
2
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
April
2018
Field-specific reporting
Please select the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.
Life sciences Behavioural & social sciences Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences
For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/authors/policies/ReportingSummary-flat.pdf
Life sciences study design
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
Sample size Sample size was based off previous, single-subject fMRI paradigms in which multiple scans are collected on single subjects to ensure data
reproducibility. For this reason, twelve subjects in each group, all of whom show a consistent effect, without data smoothing or group
averaging, leads to findings we believe will reproduce more effectively at different institutions.
Data exclusions No data was excluded.
Replication Each participant completed six runs of the localizer experiment, and analyses were designed to take subsets of the data for training and other
subsets of the data for testing. This cross-validation approach ensures the descriptive model is capturing reproducible signal within and across
subjects.
Randomization Randomization is not applicable to this study; groups were chosen specifically for their visual experience in childhood (or lack thereof).
Subjects were matched for education and age.
Blinding Blinding was not possible. However, all data was analyzed through a single pipeline to ensure minimization of influence from the researcher.
Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods
Materials & experimental systems Methods
n/a Involved in the study n/a Involved in the study
Unique biological materials ChIP-seq
Antibodies Flow cytometry
Eukaryotic cell lines MRI-based neuroimaging
Palaeontology
Animals and other organisms
Human research participants
Human research participants
Policy information about studies involving human research participants
Population characteristics Human participants were between the ages of 18 and 44, with a mean and standard
deviation of 26.8 ± 4.8 years. Participants were split into two groups: experienced (n=11; age 24.3 ± 3.8) and novice participants
(n=11; age 29.6 ± 5.4). The former group was selected initially through self-report, with the inclusion criteria that (1) participants
began playing the original Nintendo Pokémon games between the ages of 5 and 8 on the handheld GameBoy device, (2)
continued to heavily play the game and its series throughout their childhood, and (3) either continued to play the game into
adulthood or revisited playing the game at least once in adulthood. Novice participants were chosen as individuals who never
played the Pokémon game and had little to no interaction with Pokémon otherwise. All participants completed a 5-choice
naming task designed to test the naming ability of participants; experienced participants scored significantly better than novices
(Fig 1A). All participants provided written consent to participate in the experiment per Stanford University IRB.
Recruitment See above
Magnetic resonance imaging
Experimental design
Design type Block design
3
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
April
2018
Design specifications All participants underwent functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), completing six runs of the experiment, with
different images across runs. Each run was 218 seconds in duration, and across the six runs, counterbalanced 4s blocks
presented 8 stimuli at 2Hz. Categories included faces, headless bodies, 8-bit Pokémon sprites from the original
Nintendo game, animals, popular cartoon characters from television of the late 1990s and early 2000s, pseudowords,
cars, and corridors. Stimuli, as illustrated in Fig 1B, were presented on a
textured background produced by phase scrambling a stimulus from another category80. Stimuli were presented
approximately in the center of the background square, but were jittered in size and position to minimize differences in
the average image between categories. Stimuli were run through the SHINE toolbox81 to remove luminance differences
between categories or potential outlier stimuli.
Behavioral performance measures All participants completed a 5-choice naming task designed to test the naming ability of participants; experienced
participants scored significantly better than novices (Fig 1A).
Acquisition
Imaging type(s) Functional, structural
Field strength 3 Tesla
Sequence & imaging parameters Anatomical MRI: T1-weighted anatomical volumes of the entire brain were collected for each subject at a resolution of
1mm isotropic at the end of each functional scanning session. Anatomical scans were acquired with a T1-weighted
BRAVO pulse sequence with the following parameters: inversion time = 450ms, flip angle of 12o, field of view = 240mm.
Anatomical volumes were processed using FreeSurfer83, https://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu. Volumes were
segmented to gray and white matter to produce a reconstruction of the cortical surface as well as a definition the
cortical ribbon (gray matter). Functional data were restricted to the cortical ribbon.
fMRI acquisition: T2*-weighted data were collected on a 3 Tesla GE Discovery scanner using a gradient echo
simultaneous multi-slice (SMS) acquisition protocol for 3x simultaneous slice readout with CAIPI-z phase shifting to
improve SNR of the reconstructed image84. Slices (16 prescribed, 48 in total after SMS) were aligned parallel to the
parieto-occipital sulcus (POS) in each subject to guarantee coverage of the occipital and ventral temporal lobes.
Parameters were as follows: FOV = 192mm, TR= 2, TE = 0.03s, voxel size 2.4mm isotropic, no interslice gap.
Area of acquisition Occipital and temporal lobes
Diffusion MRI Used Not used
Preprocessing
Preprocessing software Vistasoft, which uses FreeSurfer and SPM8 functions. See above for links to most recent software versions.
Normalization Normalization (z-scoring) was used to in decoding analysis to minimize effects driven by absolute magnitude and
capture patterns across voxels, which were central to hypotheses of the manuscript. For the analysis of finding were
Pokemon selectivity overlapped across subjects, data from participants were aligned to the FreeSurfer cortical average.
Otherwise data was always analyzed in single-subject space.
Normalization template FreeSurfer cortical average, using cortex-based aligned.
Noise and artifact removal Functional data were motion-corrected within and between scans and aligned to an anatomical reference volume per
the standard Vistasoft pipeline72, see https://github.com/vistalab/vistasoft. Localizer data were unsmoothed and
always analyzed in native subject space
Volume censoring N/A
Statistical modeling & inference
Model type and settings Random-effects analyses were used to compare group differences.
Effect(s) tested Where appropriate, ANOVAs were always run before post-hoc t-tests.
Specify type of analysis: Whole brain ROI-based Both
ROIs were defined either using thresholded parameter maps (T-values > 3), or were anatomically defined
in the case of ventral temporal cortex defined with the following anatomical landmarks: laterally by the
Anatomical location(s)
occipitotemporal sulcus, anteriorly by the anterior tip of the mid-Fusiform Sulcus, medially by the
collateral sulcus, and posteriorly by the posterior transverse collateral sulcus.
Statistic type for inference For each voxel, the timecourse was transformed from arbitrary scanner units to percent-signal change (PSC) by dividing
(See Eklund et al. 2016) every timepoint by the mean response across an experiment. Localizer data were fit with a standard general linear
model by convolving stimulus presentation times with a difference-of-gaussians hemodynamic response function
implemented in SPM (www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm). The GLM were also used to perform contrast maps between different
stimulus conditions.
Correction Voxelwise, uncorrected.
4
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
April
2018
Models & analysis
n/a Involved in the study
Functional and/or effective connectivity
Graph analysis
Multivariate modeling or predictive analysis