Articles
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-020-00995-5
Counterevidence of crime-reduction effects from
federal grants of military equipment to local police
Anna Gunderson 1, Elisha Cohen 2, Kaylyn Jackson Schiff 2, Tom S. Clark 2 ✉, Adam N. Glynn2,3
and Michael Leo Owens 2
In 2017, the Trump Administration restored local law enforcement agencies’ access to military weapons and some other types of
surplus military equipment (SME) that had been prohibited by the Obama Administration. The Justice Department background
paper used to justify this decision cited two papers published by the American Economic Association. These papers used SME
data collected with a 2014 Freedom of Information Act request and concluded that SME, supplied to local law enforcement by
the federal government via the 1033 Program, reduces crime. Here we show that the findings of these studies are not credible
due to problems with the data. Using more detailed audit data on 1033 SME, we show that the 2014 data are flawed and that
the more recent data provide no evidence that 1033 SME reduces crime.
M
ilitarization is a prominent development in policing on the claim that transfers of SME improve the quality and effi-
across the globe1–6. In the United States, it has followed cacy of local law enforcement activities. In particular, the Trump
a reorientation of policing towards ‘police-invoked law Administration used that claim in 2017 to reverse the 2014 restric-
enforcement’, whereby “the police themselves initiate the action tions the Obama Administration placed on the program, which
in the specific instance, though sometimes in response to a gen- banned transfers of military-grade weapons and some other promi-
eral public concern over the problem, and whatever action they nent military equipment. Given the policy claim and its influence,
take is on their own authority.”7,8 Political and public debate about and the 1033 Program’s importance in contributing to militarization
militarization often focuses on a number of choices and actions by of local police and sheriffs, social scientists seek to identify the posi-
police departments and sheriffs’ offices that increase their posses- tive (and negative) effects of the program.
sion and deployment of military-grade or military-style equipment Generally, however, rigorous empirical studies of the causes and
and attire5,9–11. Of course, the increased possession, display and use consequences of the variation in the transfers of SME to local LEAs
of military or military-style equipment by subnational law enforce- via the 1033 Program are nascent18–27. This is unfortunate, because
ment agencies (LEAs) has been underway for decades. Moreover, whether the militarization of local LEAs, particularly through the
there is a history in the United States of occasionally using military 1033 Program, especially affects crime in cities and counties is an
forces for domestic policing at local level (for example, colonial mili- important empirical matter, one with civic, policy and normative
tias, US Army control of the South during Reconstruction, National implications. One reason for the lack of evidence about the effects of
Guard deployments during the Civil Rights Movement, protests the 1033 Program on US policing is the lack of public, high-quality
against the Vietnam War, and urban and rural unrest and riots)4–6,12. data on SME transfers. Indeed, it was only in 2014 that the federal
However, current trends have been particularly facilitated by fed- government made public 1033 Program data, though the data the
eral programs that are intended to support local LEAs. Among the government released were crudely aggregated. We show that those
most important federal policies and programs that have contributed data were fundamentally flawed for empirical research and pub-
to police militarization is the provision of SME to local police and lic policymaking. Since the release of the 2014 data, the two most
sheriffs via the 1033 Program. That program is administered by the prominent and cited studies, published together in 2017, report a
Law Enforcement Support Office (LESO) within the Department range of positive effects from the 1033 Program22,23. In both stud-
of Defense and has its origins in the War on Drugs. However, it has ies, which received broad media and policymaker attention, the
evolved over time to allow local agencies to request SME for vir- research question is the effect of the aggregate amount of SME—
tually any law enforcement function, including both tactical and value and quantity of items—sent to a county. The reported benefits
non-tactical supplies4–6,11,13–16. Today, at least 7,000 LEAs participate, include reductions in all types of crime, without negative effects on
according to the LESO, and as of 2017 approximately US$7 billion case closure rates, arrest rates or assaults and injuries to officers,
worth of SME had been transferred to subnational LEAs17. This as well as reductions in citizen complaints against the police and
equipment ranges from ‘high-visibility’ and tactical goods imme- declines in civilian assaults and deaths of police officers22,23.
diately associated with military purposes to more general goods. More granular agency-level data on SME from the 1033 Program
For example, agencies can access vehicles and aircraft, but they can exist to allow scholars to better assess the robustness of past empiri-
also access medical supplies or gym equipment. A majority of SME cal findings. It has been publicly available for a while, though few
transferred comprises those more general supplies. scholars have accessed it. Others may have been unaware of its exis-
Despite the varied nature of the SME items the 1033 Program tence. A notable exception that relies on these less crudely aggre-
transfers, and that most SME items obtained by local law enforce- gated agency data reports that the 1033 Program has an even larger
ment are not tactical, many policymakers justify the 1033 Program effect on crime reduction than what earlier studies found20. In terms
1Department of Political Science, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA, USA. 2Department of Political Science, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA.
3Department of Quantitative Theory and Methods, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA. ✉e-mail: tom.clark@emory.edu
NATurE HuMAN BEHAviOur | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NATUrE HUMAN BEHAvIOUr
of research design, that study, which is unpublished, is closest to existing empirical research, a fourth reason may best explain the
our study here, which similarly uses sub-county measures of SME disparate findings: the 2014 federal data from the 1033 Program,
transfers to assess the effects of the 1033 Program on crime rates. based on a Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) request by National
However, that study uses a different approach to estimate the causal Public Radio (NPR), are deeply flawed.
effect of SME than the published studies we revisit in our analy- However, the federal government does collect cleaner, more
sis. Moreover, that study argues that a substantial portion of the comprehensive, and disaggregated data. Given the availability of
estimated effect is due to displacement of crime to other localities these richer data, we have two related and original goals in this
rather than absolute reduction in crime. Additionally, other stud- article. First, we assess the validity of government records about
ies using agency-level data, both published and unpublished, and SME transfers to local LEAs. Second, we test the robustness of the
a variety of approaches report evidence of a relationship between high-profile empirical findings and revisit a main empirical claim
SME from the 1033 Program and civilian deaths28,29. To the extent on which federal policymaking has rested, and even altered federal
the evidence suggests that SME leads to a displacement of crime, policymaking across presidential administrations—that SME trans-
along with an increase in violence against civilians, the collective fers from the 1033 Program reduce crime. Our findings suggest
results of these agency-level studies present a potentially troubling that any extant conclusions that the transfer of SME via the 1033
picture of the effects of SME on public safety. Program to cities and counties causes lower crime rates are likely
Indeed, scholars motivated by this type of concern have gone driven by faulty data. We also demonstrate key barriers to generat-
beyond the proximate effects of SME to report effects as theoreti- ing credible assessments of the effects, whether positive or negative,
cally tenuous as a decrease in suicide rates30 or reductions in charita- of SME support for local law enforcement.
ble giving and volunteering among Black Americans31. Other studies We focus exclusively on the effects of SME on crime rates for
observe that police militarization may produce adverse effects for a number of reasons. First, it is that effect that has featured most
communities20,24–26. Most notably, an analysis of the deployment of prominently in political and policy debates. As noted above, the
special weapons and tactics (SWAT) teams finds that police militari- claim that the 1033 Program reduces crime was at the centre of the
zation neither reduces crime nor decreases harm to officers by civil- Trump Administration’s justification for undoing Obama-era limi-
ians but may harm public attitudes about the police (for example, tations to the transfer of SME to local police and sheriffs. And, it
support for funding or perceived legitimacy, confidence and trust is that finding that scholars have most consistently analysed across
in the police)26. different empirical studies20,22,23. Second, many of the civic outcomes
There are at least three explanations for the conflicting results that previous studies have considered at the county or state level
of previous studies of the effects of the militarization of local law are either difficult or impossible to measure at local level. As it is,
enforcement. First, the form of militarization differs across studies. accurately measuring crime rates is a particularly fraught undertak-
This is most obvious when comparing studies focusing narrowly on ing35. Indeed, the citizen complaint data reported in one previous
SWAT data versus studies that rely on 2014 SME data from the 1033 study are, in fact, not even aggregated at the county level but rather
Program22,23,26. However, even among the studies that solely use selected from a non-random single jurisdiction from within each
1033 Program data, there can be differences in findings due to the county23. (We learned this through personal correspondence with
existence of multiple categories of SME, including weapons, optics, the authors of the original study.) Therefore, to the extent that our
radar and vehicles. Local LEAs’ stock of 1033 Program equipment analysis calls into question prior empirical findings about crime
varies greatly across these categories, with some categories of equip- rates, we believe there is room for future work beyond the scope of
ment yielding different effects on, for instance, crime rates. Both of a single study to revisit the entire literature on the effects of SME on
the studies we focus on below disaggregate total SME by key catego- public safety and other civic consequences.
ries and report differential effects by categories of equipment. Our results contravene extant findings that militarization of
Second, empirical studies have used different units of analysis. police and sheriffs necessarily makes the community better. In
As noted, the most prominent studies analyse county-level rela- particular, in this article, we find no evidence that federal distribu-
tionships between SME and public safety outcomes22,23. However, tions of SME to local LEAs across the United States reduce crime
because the majority of decisions regarding the procurement of rates, neither violent nor nonviolent crime rates, in the jurisdictions
SME are made below the county level, at the level of independent that receive it. Consequently, we posit that, because of serious data
local LEAs, the use of county-level data raises a concern of ecologi- problems and debatable methodological choices in prior studies, the
cal bias. In particular, if crime rates are declining for urban agen- empirical foundations on which social scientists, along with policy-
cies and SME transfers are large for suburban agencies in the same makers and the public, stand when making causal claims about the
counties, then county-level analysis would mistakenly attribute effects of the transfers of SME may be no firmer than quicksand.
the urban crime reduction to the suburban use of SME. Hence,
county-level measures of SME create a serious challenge to infer- results
ence, a key issue we discuss in detail below. It is in this spirit that Our analysis comprises two related tasks. First, we use two differ-
the more recent studies making use of agency-level data advance ent data releases by LESO to assess the quality of government SME
the study of SME20,24,29. However, at the same time, other studies records. Second, we assess the robustness of empirical claims about
aggregate even further to state level21,25,32,33. For instance, one study the effects of SME on crime reduction given the data problems we
makes the case for a state-level analysis based on states’ oversight, document. As we detail below, there are considerable discrepancies
accountability and use of SME from the 1033 Program31. However, in the data about which LEAs have and use SME. Moreover, while
it is unclear how much of a role or influence states have in the deci- the more recent audit data represent an important improvement
sion by local LEAs—city and county police departments and sher- over previous records—indicating the agencies that received the
iffs’ offices—to apply for 1033 Program aid34. equipment, not just the county to which it was shipped—they still
Third, while most studies of local law enforcement militariza- suffer from one important limitation, namely that any equipment
tion focus on the distribution of SME from the 1033 Program (for that was obtained by a department but subsequently destroyed,
the exception, see Mummolo26), they tend to measure militarization lost or returned will not appear in these audits, because they only
differently. Studies can use the quantity of SME the 1033 Program capture what is currently in local law enforcement possession. And,
transfers to agencies, municipalities and counties, or they can use unfortunately, it is not possible to completely reconstruct the data.
the monetary value of SME transferred to localities22,23. In addition We attempted to, by filing a request pursuant to the FOIA (case
to these three reasons that we identify for inconsistent findings from number DLA-DSERV2018-005182; details and response included
NATurE HuMAN BEHAviOur | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NATUrE HUMAN BEHAvIOUr Articles
Fig. 1 | Locations of jurisdictions with military transfer aid, 2010–2015. Points show the locations of the 2,855 unique cities to which SME was transferred.
Darker colours indicate more military aid transferred. Locations of US states from the US Census Bureau.
in the Supplementary Figures), and requested the agencies that acquiring SME are responsible for transporting the SME or paying
held the accountable items prior to Fiscal Year 2017. In response, for shipping. In addition, there is variation in the costs to an agency
the Defense Logistics Agency (DLA) informed us that they did not for participating in the program—some states charge a flat fee to
even record the name of the agency to which the equipment was individual agencies for administering the program, whereas other
shipped before Fiscal Year 2017. The DLA does retain records of states charge a rate based on the assessed value of the SME acquired.
equipment returned or reported destroyed. However, those records Of course, there are also budgetary explanations, such as the agen-
similarly are insufficient to identify who had what at what point in cies’ fiscal stress—departments with fewer resources might be com-
time. For example, from FY14 through FY16, as the federal govern- pelled to rely on SME more than are departments that have the
ment began to audit the program more carefully, dozens of LEAs ability to purchase their own equipment. Related, given the scarcity
were suspended from participation in the 1033 Program because of high-value items available from the DLA, there is a large random
they had lost or could not account for controlled items which were component to whether an agency acquires a piece of equipment,
supposed to be in their possession34. which is affected by the amount of time and energy the agency can
devote to searching and writing justifications for equipment. Finally,
Data discrepancies. With the agency-level data in hand, we can and especially in the aftermath of the 2016 events we describe above,
better describe the geographic distribution of SME. We are also able one might expect that local political conditions influence a depart-
to identify a number of problems with the county-level data. That is, ment’s capacity to make use of the program.
we can identify systematic inconsistencies between the two different In examining the agency-level data, we uncovered a variety of
versions of the data on which scholars have relied. inconsistencies in the county-level data, those from a FOIA request
Figure 1 shows the location of each agency that received a by NPR in 2014. Table 1 summarizes documented examples of these
transfer of SME from the DLA between 2010 and 2015. The points concerns, which we also describe here in greater detail. Essentially,
show the location of the agency, and the colour corresponds to the each of the problems we uncover relates to differences between
total amount, in US dollars, of the value of the transfers to each records of what was shipped and recent inventories. Those discrep-
agency—darker colours indicate more aid. In general, there seem ancies undermine the positive findings and implications of past
to be some patterns, such as more transfers going to more popu- studies of the 1033 Program that employed the earlier data.
lous parts of the country. At the same time, there is some interest-
ing variation not necessarily associated with population. The State Missing controlled items. First, in line with high-profile controver-
of Mississippi, for example, stands out for its relative lack of trans- sies in the media, there are many instances of controlled items for
fers, as do Virginia, North Carolina and West Virginia. There have which receiving agencies cannot account. In the county-level data,
been a large amount of transfers to Appalachia and the coastal these items are shown to have been shipped, but the agency to which
parts of the Mid-Atlantic region. they were shipped was not recorded. However, the recent invento-
There could be a number of reasons explaining the geographic ries also cannot account for the location of these items. Indeed, as
variation in the distribution of this equipment. Some past work mentioned above, in some localities losing track of controlled equip-
assumes that the acquisition of equipment is affected by an agency’s ment has become such a problem that LEAs have been suspended
proximity to one of the major distribution centres, because agencies from participation in the 1033 Program. For example, Maricopa
NATurE HuMAN BEHAviOur | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NATUrE HUMAN BEHAvIOUr
Table 1 | Documented problems causing differences between recent LESO inventory data and the 2014 NPr FOiA data
Problem Description Example(s)
Missing controlled Some controlled items (such as weapons) that In the NPR FOIA data, Baldwin County, AL received four pod-loc bipod support
items were in the NPR FOIA data are missing from more pieces for sniper rifles in 2010. Those items, which are classified in the weapons
recent LESO inventory data. category, are not included in recent LESO inventory data.
Missing Uncontrolled items (tools, office supplies and In the NPR FOIA data, Clark County, IN received 910 feet of radiofrequency
uncontrolled items other items that are not weapons) are removed cable, a pair of binoculars and a wrench in 2010. Those items are not included
from the LESO inventory after one year. Therefore, in recent LESO inventory data.
there are many uncontrolled items that were in
the NPR FOIA data that are no longer in the
LESO inventory.
Missing counties Some counties (or county-years) are missing from Sanpete County, UT is missing from the NPR FOIA data for 2009 and 2010,
the NPR FOIA data. but that same county is recorded as having received reflex sights and rifles in
2009 and 2010 in the LESO inventory data. Howard County, MD is also missing
from the NPR FOIA data for 2010, but that same county is recorded as having
received items in 2010 based on recent LESO inventory data.
Inconsistent item Some items identified as matches (having the In the NPR FOIA data, Yuba County, CA received a truck (NSN 2320-01-107-
values same description, national stock numbers (NSN) 7153) worth US$47,069 in 2012. In recent LESO inventory data, Marysville
and shipping date) have different values. Police Department in Yuba County (the only agency in that county to receive
a vehicle in that year) received a truck with the same NSN worth US$63,894
in 2012.
Inconsistent item Some items identified as matches (having the In the NPR FOIA data, Humboldt County, CA received a utility truck valued at
records same description, are in the same county and are US$47,609 with NSN 2320-01-107-7153 that was shipped on 10 December
the only items of that type shipped to that county 2012. In recent LESO inventory data, Ferndale Police Department in Humboldt
in that year) have different NSN and shipping County (the only agency in that county to receive a vehicle in that year)
dates, as well as values. received a utility truck valued at US$89,900 with NSN 2320-01-346-9317 that
was shipped on 3 January 2012.
State and federal It is unclear how items received by state and In the NPR FOIA data, there is no record of items received by Fulton County,
agencies federal LEAs were recorded in the NPR FOIA AR in 2011. However, in recent LESO inventory data, the Arkansas State Parks
data. The inclusion (or not) of state and federal Department, which is geolocated to Fulton County, received 69 rifles in 2011.
agencies in county totals could be a source of some The Arkansas State Parks Department is the only LEA in Fulton County, AR in
discrepancies between the NPR FOIA data and the 1033 Program. The 69 weapons do not appear to be elsewhere in the NPR
more recent LESO inventory data. FOIA data.
County Sheriff Joe Arpaio admitted in 2014 that the county could Missing counties. In the county-level data, there are some counties
not account for nine firearms it received through the program. At that report no military surplus transfers, even while recent records
that point in time, a large number of separate agencies were sus- indicate that they received equipment during the period covered by
pended from the 1033 Program34,36. It is difficult to determine the those data. Possible reasons include the indirect transfer process
extent of this problem in our data, as even discrepancies between described above as well as simple errors in the original data released.
the two datasets may be attributable to item returns or destruction In total, there are 76 unique counties missing in the NPR FOIA data
rather than true missingness. However, we attempt to show the that we have data for in our dataset, for a total of 1,274 observations,
overall discrepancies in Fig. 2, a scatterplot of the data grouped by approximately 1.5% of our total dataset. These counties tend to be
national stock number (NSN), county, state and shipping date; That fairly small (10,000 to 20,000 residents), so it is possible their items
is, each observation is a discrepancy in value for the same item, for are shipped to other jurisdictions with larger populations, attribut-
each county-day. Only 2% of the data are exact matches (see incon- ing those items to a different county in the NPR dataset (Table 2).
sistent item values below for more information); nearly 78% of the
data is on the y axis, with a positive value listed in the NPR dataset Inconsistent item values. There are discrepancies between the
but no item listed in the LESO dataset, while 7.4% is on the x axis, value associated with individual items in the original, county-level
with a positive value listed in the LESO dataset but no item (or an data and the value reported in the more recent, agency-level data.
item with zero value; see below) listed in the NPR dataset. While Discrepancies go both ways—sometimes items were assigned
this scatterplot is only an estimate of our data discrepancies (and higher values in the original data, while sometimes they are
includes both controlled and uncontrolled items), it highlights the assigned higher values in the more recent data. The consequences
vast differences between the two datasets. of these discrepancies are direct, as a common operationalization
of military transfers is the total value (per capita) of aid sent to each
Missing uncontrolled items. LEAs acquire ownership of uncontrolled locality. We do know the source of one piece of inaccurate infor-
items after one year and do not need to report possession for inven- mation: of the 243,328 observations in the NPR dataset, 11,436
tories. The more recent agency-level data therefore cannot account (approximately 5%) have a listed item value of US$0 (items such
for all uncontrolled items. As above, it is difficult to evaluate the as motorcycles, night-vision sights and buses). Only 21 observa-
extent of this problem, but Fig. 2 shows how widespread the data tions in the 76,598 observations in our dataset have a listed value
discrepancies are. While missing uncontrolled items is a less theo- of US$0 (mainly binoculars, but also an armoured truck and a new
retically interesting problem, it is an issue of consistency across SME terrain vehicle). In addition to inconsistencies across data releases,
transfer datasets and represents a limitation for working with recent we also find that, within versions of the data, identical items
inventory data. are sometimes assigned different values. We are not sure of the
NATurE HuMAN BEHAviOur | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NATUrE HUMAN BEHAvIOUr Articles
100,000,000
7.4% on x axis
77.8% on y axis
2% exact matches
100,000
reasons for these discrepancies, though the degree of this variation forces’. In our data, there are 125 unique agencies that match these
can be substantial. characteristics, for a total of 8,175 observations, accounting for
roughly 5% of our dataset.
Inconsistent item records. In some instances, the original data report While we cannot determine the exact cause of these discrepan-
items that have been transferred to a county, but we cannot locate cies, recent media reports and a government study highlight the
such an item in the more recent inventory, even while we can locate lack of rigorous controls to track this equipment which can result in
a similar item in that county. In Table 1, for example, we describe (a) unreported transfers of equipment from one agency to another,
two vehicles, one which was reported in the county-level data and the (b) equipment being lost or damaged but not reported or (c) poor
other in the agency-level data, with similar shipping dates, but differ- record keeping of the equipment transferred in the first instance.
ent serial numbers. Because there are several discrepancies across the For example, in a sting operation, the Government Accountability
two datasets, it is not possible to determine the extent of this problem. Office was able to create a fictitious LEA and gained permission
to receive over US$1 million in military surplus equipment17.
State agencies. Equipment shipped to state agencies, which can ulti- In addition, because the original data only report the county to
mately be deployed anywhere in a state, are associated with only the which equipment is shipped, it is possible that there are items that
county to which it was shipped. This will result in an inflated level have been shipped to one county on behalf of an agency located
of military aid to counties with state agency receiving locations. We in another county. For example, we have learned of instances in
identified non-local agencies by filtering agency names with words which aircraft and vehicles have first been sent to one location for
such as ‘state agencies’, ‘state departments’ (parks and recreations or repair, other maintenance or even training, before being ultimately
correctional departments), or ‘multi-county or multi-agency task directed to the agency that has custody of the equipment.
)$SU(
eulav
RPN
)$SU(
eulav
RPN
2006 2007 2008 100,000,000
100,000
100
2009 2010 2011 100,000,000
100,000
100
2012 2013 2014
100 100,000,000
100,000
100
10 1,000 100,000 10,000,000 10 1,000 100,00 10 0,000,000 10 1,000 100,00 10 0,000,000 10 1,000 100,00 10 0,000,000
LESO value (US$) LESO value (US$)
Fig. 2 | item discrepancies between the NPr FOiA data and the LESO inventory data. The black dots represent a total of 138,283 observations matched on
county, state, NSN and shipping date, showing all results from 2006 to 2014 (left) and individual scatterplots by year (right). The exact matches are those
items that have a positive value in both datasets (that is, items with a listed value of zero are excluded).
Table 2 | Hypothesized problems causing differences between recent LESO inventory data and the 2014 NPr FOiA data
Problem Description Example(s)
Damaged items Damaged items that are reported to LESO state coordinators are We have no way of knowing which
removed from the LESO inventory after some time. The removal of items are no longer in the LESO
damaged items could cause discrepancies between the NPR FOIA data inventory because they were
and recent LESO inventory data. damaged.
Transferred items Items can be transferred legally (approved by LESO state coordinators) We have no way of knowing which
or transferred illegally (no approval) between LEAs. These transfers items in the LESO inventory were
could cause discrepancies between the NPR FOIA data and recent LESO transferred.
inventory data.
Inconsistent shipping locations LEAs arrange for the shipping of items obtained through the 1033 Without analysing the individual
Program and have flexibility regarding where the items are sent. The NPR requests submitted to LESO state
FOIA data are based on shipments to counties, but the more recent LESO coordinators, we cannot identify
inventory data are based on the agencies responsible for the items. Items which (if any) LEAs and counties are
shipped to a county different from the county of the LEA could cause subject to this problem.
differences between the two datasets.
NATurE HuMAN BEHAviOur | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NATUrE HUMAN BEHAvIOUr
The implication of these various discrepancies is that the data there are over 19,000 local jurisdictions across the 50 states, just
released by the LESO program are unreliable and ill-suited to sys- over 9,000 of those reported crime data to the national government.
tematic analysis of the effects of SME on law enforcement outcomes. (Formally, there are 19,354 ‘incorporated places’ in the United States
Most alarming is that only 2% of the data can be matched exactly as of 2018.) Therefore, our sample includes the approximately 9,000
across the two data releases. In conjunction with the myriad other agencies reporting crime data which could potentially request SME
problems we identify, we have no reason to believe that either ver- through the 1033 Program.
sion of the data is comprehensive or valid, though there do seem to Figure 3 summarizes the results of our three analyses: the rep-
be greater problems with the county-level data. licated results from BG, our replicated analysis aggregating the
agency-level data to the county level (the same unit as BG) and
Replication analyses. Our replications focus on two promi- our analysis run at the agency level. In each analysis, we employ
nent studies that were published simultaneously in the American their exact research design, but use different data and/or units of
Economic Journal. We focus on them because of (a) the broad media analysis. Our results, both in the replication county estimations
coverage of their findings and (b) the use of their findings by the and the agency-level estimations, differ substantially from those of
Trump Administration to justify revoking limitations that the BG. We find no clear evidence of a significant effect of military aid
Obama Administration imposed on the 1033 Program, including on a variety of crime rates. For our preferred agency-level analy-
prohibitions against the transfer of certain types of SME to local sis, many of our point estimates are positive (that is, the opposite
LEAs. For instance, on 28 August 2017, then-US Attorney General direction from BG), and those that are negative are insignificant.
Jeff Sessions spoke before the National Fraternal Order of Police, For our aggregated county-level analysis, most of the coefficients
remarking in defense of the Trump Administration’s recent full are negative, but insignificant. The two significant negative coef-
restoration of the 1033 Program that “Studies have shown [surplus ficients (for robbery and burglary) are barely significant and are
military] equipment reduces crime rates, reduces the number of accompanied by agency-level estimates that are insignificant and
assaults against police officers, and reduces the number of com- of the wrong sign. Furthermore, this pattern of insignificance does
plaints against police officers. Those restrictions went too far. We not seem to be simply a matter of low power. In the Supplementary
will not put superficial concerns above public safety.” Information, we show that our analysis is generally well powered.
Specifically, we conduct the same analyses presented in Bove and Additionally, in all crime categories, at least one of our estimates
Gavrilova (BG)22 and Harris, Park, Bruce and Murray (HPBM)23, has tighter confidence bounds and higher power than the original
using the agency-level data. We conduct three separate analyses for BG analysis. Therefore, even if the NPR FOIA data were valid and
each study: first, using the authors’ code and data, we replicate their the BG research design perfect, it is more likely that the BG find-
published results exactly. Second, we attempt to replicate their find- ings are due to an underpowered design overstating an effect than
ings using our agency data, aggregated to the county (more details that our null findings are due to a lack of power37. Additionally,
on this in the Supplementary Methods). Finally, we use the more using the equivalence test approach of Gross38 and Rainey39, we find
recently released DLA data to estimate the relationship between that we can rule out substantively large effect sizes, as well as all
1033 Program disbursements and crime rates at the agency level. of the significant effects presented in BG (see the Supplementary
Both BG and HPBM use instrumental variables in their analysis, Results for details).
and we calculate identical instrumental variables in our data using As with BG, HPBM study how military transfers affect crime
their methods. The first-stage results for both analyses, as well as rates of varying types. They also analyse the effect on other out-
the full replication tables, are given in the Supplementary Results. comes, including citizen complaints, assaults on officers and arrest
For the original BG analysis, our county-level replication and our rates. For the purposes of this replication, however, we focus solely
agency-level replication, all first-stage results are positive and sig- on their analysis regarding crime rates. Also as in BG, HPBM iden-
nificant. We also note that both our aggregated county-level and tify this relationship at the county level. We again replicate their
agency-level replications provide larger first-stage estimates, and as study using their design and our more recent data. Figure 4 reports
in the original BG analyses have F statistics far above 10 (the typical the results of this exercise.
rule of thumb for a sufficiently strong instrument). For the origi- Our analysis yields no support for HPBM’s finding of significant
nal HPBM analysis, only some of the coefficients on the individual and negative relationships between the logged number of items
instruments were significant in the first stage of both the item and given to counties and robbery, assault and vehicle theft rates. We
value analyses, but the F statistic was significant for both analy- find no statistically significant effect on those, or any other, catego-
ses. That said, for the original HPBM analysis, the F statistic for ries of crime rates. Indeed, when we aggregate data to the county
the value analysis was below 10. For our aggregated county-level level, we only find qualitatively similar results in the analysis of
first-stage replication analyses, none of the individual instruments homicides, though even those results do not support the claim that
were significant, but as with HPBM, the F statistics were significant SME reduces crime. The county-level results seem to be driven by
for both the item and value analyses. Additionally, the F statistic different patterns in jurisdictions within counties receiving more
from our aggregated county-level value analysis was below 10 but aid relative to those receiving less (or no) aid. When aggregated,
larger than that from HPBM, while the F statistic from our aggre- that heterogeneity is masked, and one draws the incorrect conclu-
gated county-level item analysis was just below 10. Finally, for our sion that places receiving more aid experience lower crime rates.
agency-level first-stage replication analyses, again none of the indi- Similarly, if we instead examine the logged value of items, HPBM
vidual instruments were significant, but the F statistics were signifi- find a significant and negative relationship between military equip-
cant and well above 10 for both the item and value analyses. ment transfers and robbery, assault and vehicle theft rates, whereas
BG seek to understand the effect of militarization aid on a variety we find no significant negative effect of the value of military equip-
of outcomes such as arrest rates, offenders killed and civilian com- ment transfers on a variety of crime rates.
plaints, among others. For our purposes, we focus on their analysis Specifically, in all of these analyses, we typically find no evi-
of the effect of military aid on a variety of county crime rates—total, dence of an effect, and in our preferred agency-level analysis, many
homicide, robbery, assault, burglary, larceny and vehicle theft. To of our point estimates are positive (that is, the opposite direction
ensure we have complete coverage on the number of jurisdictions from HPBM), and those that are negative are insignificant (with
that could request equipment from the federal government, in the the exception of the value-based analysis for robbery). For our
replication we include all cities and all counties in all states that aggregated county-level analysis, most of the coefficients are nega-
reported crime data, the main outcome variable of interest. Though tive, but insignificant. The two significant negative coefficients (for
NATurE HuMAN BEHAviOur | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NATUrE HUMAN BEHAvIOUr Articles
100
Total 50
crime 0
rate −50
−100
0.25
Homicide 0
−0.25
5
Robbery 0
−5
10
5
Assault 0
−5
−10
20
10
Burglary 0
−10
−20
50
25
Larceny 0
−25
−50
20
10
Vehicle
0
theft
−10
−20
Bove and Gavrilova Replication Replication
county county agency
Fig. 3 | replication of BG analyses using both original and more recent data. County-level (left) and agency-level (right) analyses. Points are point
estimates, and bars are 95% (two-tailed) confidence intervals. The BG estimates correspond to their models and can be matched back to the results
in their Table 2. The BG results suggest a statistically significant negative impact of lagged total military aid on five out of seven crime outcomes (total
crime rate, robbery, assault, larceny and vehicle theft). However, our county-level replication results suggest a statistically significant negative impact
of lagged total military aid on only two crime outcomes (robbery and burglary). Our agency-level replication results suggest no statistically significant
impact of lagged total military aid on any crime outcomes. For BG, total crime rate: β = −59.29, P < 0.001, 95% CI = [−87.1, −31.48]; homicide:
β = −0.06, P = 0.506, 95% CI = [−0.25, 0.12]; robbery: β = −6.1, P < 0.001, 95% CI = [−8.26, −3.95]; assault: β = −5.31, P = 0.03, 95% CI = [−9.96,
−0.65]; burglary: β = −8.75, P = 0.109, 95% CI = [−19.26, 1.76]; larceny: β = −27.43, P < 0.001, 95% CI = [−41.73, −13.13]; vehicle theft: β = −11.64,
P < 0.001, 95% CI = [−17.2, −6.08]. For our county-level replication, total crime rate: β = −20.81, P = 0.092, 95% CI = [−44.57, 2.94]; homicide:
β = 0.02, P = 0.617, 95% CI = [−0.05, 0.09]; robbery: β = −0.65, P = 0.005, 95% CI = [−1.08, −0.22]; assault: β = −1.78, P = 0.241, 95% CI = [−4.72,
1.16]; burglary: β = −6.9, P = 0.019, 95% CI = [−12.46, −1.34]; larceny: β = −10.06, P = 0.174, 95% CI = [−24.37, 4.25]; vehicle theft: β = −1.16,
P = 0.124, 95% CI = [−2.61, 0.29]. For our agency-level replication, total crime rate: β = 7.91, P = 0.639, 95% CI = [−24.92, 40.73]; homicide:
β = −0.07, P = 0.594, 95% CI = [−0.33, 0.19]; robbery: β = 0.44, P = 0.516, 95% CI = [−0.88, 1.77]; assault: β = −1.63, P = 0.468, 95% CI = [−5.99,
2.73]; burglary: β = −7.6, P = 0.066, 95% CI = [−15.52, 0.33]; larceny: β = 8.06, P = 0.457, 95% CI = [−13.02, 29.14]; vehicle theft: β = −0.93,
P = 0.387, 95% CI = [−3.02, 1.16]. The replication regressions are run on county data with 15,683 observations from 2010 to 2014 and agency data
with 45,331 observations from 2010 to 2015. The BG county data are from 2006 to 2012 and include 17,822 observations. All regression specifications
control for percent in poverty, logged median household income, unemployment, logged population, share male, share Black, share aged 15–19 yrs,
share aged 20–24 yrs, share aged 25–34 yrs, and agency/county and year fixed effects. We removed from the agency-level database outliers that had
total crime rates of over one million.
robbery and vehicle theft in the value-based analysis) are barely seem to replicate the HPBM finding. However, we are sceptical of
significant. Notably, the agency-level vehicle theft estimate is insig- any results relying on the value of SME, because they compound
nificant. Again, this pattern of insignificance does not seem to be errors in the data on both the number of items shipped and their
simply a matter of low power. In the Supplementary Information, assigned values. As we show in the Supplementary Information,
we show that our analysis is generally well powered. In every case there is considerable variation in the values of identical items in the
where HPBM had a significant negative finding, our county analy- various versions of data available. Additionally, using the equiva-
sis is insignificant with tighter confidence bounds and more power. lence test approach of Gross38 and Rainey39, we can rule out sub-
Therefore, again even if the NPR FOIA data were valid and the stantively large effect sizes, as well as all of the significant effects
HPBM research design perfect, it is more likely that the HPBM presented in HPBM with the exception of the value-based robbery
findings are significant due to an underpowered design overstating finding discussed above (see the Supplementary Results for details).
an effect than that our null findings are due to a lack of power. The Even if we limit the analysis to only the years in which we have over-
value-based robbery findings are the only case where our analyses lapping data between HPBM, BG and our data (from 2010 to 2012),
NATurE HuMAN BEHAviOur | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NATUrE HUMAN BEHAvIOUr
4
2
Homicide 0
−2
−4
20
10
Robbery 0
−10
−20
200
100
Assault 0
−100
−200
100
Vehicle
0
theft
−100
HPBM county HPBM county HPBM county HPBM county HPBM agency HPBM agency
items value replication items replication value replication items replication value
Fig. 4 | replication of HPBM analyses using both original and more recent data. County-level (left) and agency-level (right) analyses. Points are point
estimates, and bars are 95% (two-tailed) confidence intervals. The HPBM estimates correspond to their models and can be matched back to the results
in their Table 8. The HPBM results suggest statistically significant negative impacts of lagged military aid items and value on three of four crime outcomes
(robbery, assault and vehicle theft). However, our county-level replication results suggest statistically significant negative impacts of lagged military aid
items and value only on robbery, and of aid value only on vehicle theft. Our agency-level replication results generally suggest no statistically significant
impacts of lagged military aid items and value on any crime outcomes, except for the impact of aid value on robbery. For HPBM and aid items, homicide:
β = −0.22, P = 0.466, 95% CI = [−0.81, 0.37]; robbery: β = −15.39, P < 0.001, 95% CI = [−21.73, −9.06]; assault: β = −145.8, P < 0.001, 95%
CI = [−211.6, −79.99]; vehicle theft: β = −114.51, P < 0.001, 95% CI = [−143.76, −85.25]. For HPBM and aid value, homicide: β = 0.35, P = 0.216,
95% CI = [−0.2, 0.9]; robbery: β = −6.23, P = 0.03, 95% CI = [−11.85, −0.62]; assault: β = −110.35, P = 0.009, 95% CI = [−192.97, −27.73]; vehicle
theft: β = −55.94, P = 0.001, 95% CI = [−90.37, −21.5]. For our county-level replication and aid items, homicide: β = −0.32, P = 0.54, 95% CI = [−1.35,
0.71]; robbery: β = −5.63, P = 0.04, 95% CI = [−11, −0.25]; assault: β = −4.44, P = 0.683, 95% CI = [−25.74, 16.86]; vehicle theft: β = 2.19, P = 0.789,
95% CI = [−13.87, 18.26]. For our county-level replication and aid value, homicide: β = 0.11, P = 0.529, 95% CI = [−0.22, 0.44]; robbery: β = −4.37,
P < 0.001, 95% CI = [−6.38, −2.36]; assault: β = −2.63, P = 0.419, 95% CI = [−9, 3.74]; vehicle theft: β = −8.07, P = 0.003, 95% CI = [−13.42, −2.71].
For our agency-level replication and aid items, homicide: β = −1, P = 0.397, 95% CI = [−3.33, 1.32]; robbery: β = 0.7, P = 0.912, 95% CI = [−11.79, 13.2];
assault: β = −4.4, P = 0.812, 95% CI = [−40.63, 31.82]; vehicle theft: β = 0.2, P = 0.987, 95% CI = [−24.67, 25.07]. For our agency-level replication
and aid value, homicide: β = −0.01, P = 0.982, 95% CI = [−0.62, 0.61]; robbery: β = −3.81, P = 0.016, 95% CI = [−6.89, −0.72]; assault: β = 0.53,
P = 0.898, 95% CI = [−7.55, 8.61]; vehicle theft: β = −3.89, P = 0.3, 95% CI = [−11.24, 3.46]. The replication regressions are run on county data with
15,460 observations from 2010 to 2014 and agency data including 45,055 observations from 2010 to 2015. The HPBM county data are from 2000 to
2013 and include 36,671 observations. All regression specifications control for lagged arrest rates, economic controls, and agency/county and year
fixed effects. We removed from the agency-level database outliers that had total crime rates of over one million.
the purported negative relationship between transfers of mili- Discussion
tary equipment and crime at local level does not appear, either in Militarization is a part of modern policing. In the United States,
the county-level or agency-level analysis. The HPBM sample size intergovernmental aid, particularly the transfer of SME from the
decreases, however, as their original data covers 2000 to 2013, so Department of Defense to police departments and sheriffs’ offices,
the results could be partially due to a decrease in statistical power. contributes to the militarization of local law enforcement. Such
While it is important to note that our analyses use different time equipment includes vehicles, weapons and attire more traditionally
periods, the results here suggest that the conclusions from both BG associated with military combat and interstate conflict, along with a
and HPBM are sensitive to the selection of either the time period or range of other surplus goods.
unit of analysis, or both. We therefore cannot conclude definitively Militarization of policing raises normative concerns. Many con-
that military aid exerts an influence on crime rates, at either the cerns in the United States involve the consequences of the shift in
county or agency level. how police appear and behave, especially when their appearance
NATurE HuMAN BEHAviOur | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NATUrE HUMAN BEHAvIOUr Articles
and behaviour are associated with intergovernmental transfers of subsequent inventories. For those years, therefore, our estimates of SME for each
SME. A key concern is whether SME transfers to police and sheriffs agency are a lower bound on how much SME each agency had.
are consequential for public safety, either positively or negatively.
Reliability concerns. Through attempting to match item records between these
After all, the primary policy assumption for SME transfers is that datasets and through communication with Kenneth (Ken) MacNevin, the
they produce a net positive for public safety. Chief Spokesperson for DLA Disposition Services, we identified the many
Past empirical studies of police militarization in the United States inconsistencies between the NPR FOIA data and the LESO inventory data
have concluded that SME transfers to local police and sheriffs cut discussed in this article and detailed in Tables 1 and 2 and Fig. 2 (more information
about the complexities in working with this militarization data is provided in the
crime22,23. They claim, too, that such transfers reduce injuries to offi-
Supplementary Methods). To more thoroughly document the extent to which these
cers and have no adverse effects on civilian injuries or complaints inconsistencies arise, we also match on NSN, county, state and shipping date to
about local law enforcement officer behaviour. Our study, however, see how the values for the same items shipped on the same day to the same county
which includes replication of key studies and leverages refined data differ across datasets. In the data, only 2% are exact matches (having positive
values of aid in both datasets), though nearly 8% are exact matches when we
measuring SME transfers, invites reconsideration of prior conclu-
include observations in the NPR dataset with an item value of zero (that is, there
sions and claims.
is an item for that county–NSN–day in the NPR dataset with a listed value of zero,
We highlight the measurement problems of prior data on SME but we do not have any item listed for that day). Nearly 78% of the data is on the
transfers via the 1033 Program, which the DLA maintains and y axis (no record in the LESO dataset but a positive record in the NPR dataset),
shares. We also produce empirical findings that contradict key while 7.4% is on the x axis (a positive value in the LESO data but nothing listed in
the NPR data). While the records missing from the LESO inventory dataset can
extant studies. As a result, our analysis counsels against drawing
be explained by uncontrolled items dropping off of the inventory after a year, as
firm conclusions and promoting claims about the positive policy
is the procedure for relinquishing control of those generic office equipment items
efficacy of police militarization in general, and via the 1033 Program to the LEA, the items missing from the NPR dataset but in the LESO inventory
in particular, especially for crime rates, which is the most important suggest important inconsistencies between the controlled items recorded in the
policy concern. two datasets. Moreover, Supplementary Figs. 4–7 map the differences between
the military aid data used by BG and HPBM, revealing inconsistencies, likely
Based on our empirical findings, we recommend that policy-
differences in interpretation and other potential problems even in working with the
makers and social scientists seeking to make reliable claims about
(assumed) same county-level SME transfer records. These inconsistencies and the
police militarization employ more recent and limited but far cleaner other problems that we document suggest caution in working with these records of
and more valid data on SME transfers26. Additionally, our findings SME transfers.
suggest that scholars and policymakers would benefit from a more
rigorous effort to obtain systematic data on the kinds of account- Ecological fallacy concerns. Furthermore, a particular concern in working with the
NPR FOIA data is that all item shipment records provide only the name of the
able, controlled, military-grade equipment that local LEAs possess,
county to which the equipment was shipped, rather than indicating the specific
both SME from the 1033 Program and other equipment purchased local LEA that requested the item. The immediate cause of concern, then, is a
via financial subsidies of other government programs (for example, matter of ecological fallacy. In this setting, an ecological fallacy would occur if,
Urban Area Security Initiative grants) and local source revenue. for example, military aid was going disproportionately to more suburban or rural
parts of a county, while crime rates were decreasing in the more urban parts of the
That is important: just as we lack systematic, comprehensive and
county, or vice versa. A county-level analysis would indicate a positive correlation
accessible data on police use of force against civilians, we lack simi-
between military equipment and crime reduction, while an agency-level analysis
lar data on the kinds of enhanced or high-level military-oriented would indicate a negative correlation between military equipment and crime
equipment supplied to police and sheriffs by and beyond the reduction. Note, the concern here is not about ecological displacement, where the
US military. effect of militarization simply shifts the location of crime elsewhere. The concern
about ecological fallacy can be driven by heterogeneity among jurisdictions in
Improving the empirical basis for justifying (or critiquing) police
changes in crime rates (even unrelated to militarization), which is masked when
militarization is important. As past studies of the United States rec-
agency-level data are aggregated to the county level. Under conditions such as
ognize, the civic (and political) effects of policing, generally, are the example we offer, inaccurate inferences about those jurisdictions may follow
widespread but often more deeply felt by some communities relative from analysing county-level data. The agency-level data provided by the LESO
to others. Police officers and sheriffs are ubiquitous representatives inventories avoid this problem and allow us to replicate the results of previous
studies at both the county and agency level, described more below. Differences
of the state and, therefore, have an out-sized effect on how citizens
in the county-level results and the agency-level results suggest ecological fallacy
perceive and experience government. While we focus here on the
concerns, as well as the influence of the data inconsistencies that we describe.
effects of police militarization on crime rates, our results should also
cause us to question similar analyses that claim to find no evidence General replication approach. We replicate and extend the two most prominent
of deleterious effects of militarization on citizen perceptions of and studies of the effects of the 1033 Program, namely BG and HPBM, using more
recent, agency-level SME transfer data. Thus, the sources of data that we use are
interactions with the police.
the authors’ datasets and replication code, the agency-item dataset representing
LESO’s 1033 Program inventory that we downloaded on 31 March 2018, the
Methods Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)’s Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR) Program
We seek to assess the quality and validity of government SME transfer records data used by the previous studies and demographic data from the Census Bureau
and to replicate and evaluate the robustness of high-profile empirical findings also used by the previous studies. With the LESO inventory data, we construct
that claim that SME transfers from the 1033 Program reduce crime. The sections an agency-level dataset and also aggregate to the county level for a county-level
below detail the relevant processes and estimation strategies used for each of these dataset (more information about the construction of our datasets is provided in the
components of our analysis, with further detail provided in the Supplementary Supplementary Methods).
Methods. Note that all statements of statistical significance are based on
two-tailed tests. Sample and time period. To use the LESO inventory data, we first needed to match
the agency-level data to jurisdictions. We used the Google Maps application
Assessing the quality and validity of SME transfer records. The most prominent programming interface to search for the name of each agency and retrieve its
studies of the effects of SME rely on data that report items shipped from the DLA address, locality, latitude and longitude. These pieces of information allow us to
and the county in which the recipient was located. This dataset was released by the link the agency to a specific jurisdiction (city or town) and county. Then, while
LESO of the DLA in response to a FOIA request by NPR. However, the government the agency-level data provide us with information for agencies participating in
also requires that LEAs report quarterly inventories of the SME they have in their the 1033 Program, they obviously do not provide us with information for agencies
possession, a process that was formalized and required by law by the FY2017 not participating in the program. In other words, we only have those agencies
Defense Authorization Act. The availability of these agency-level data allows us for which there were any military transfers. We are left to construct the set of
to not only compare the county-level records from the NPR FOIA data used by jurisdictions that received no military transfers. To overcome this issue, we rely on
previous studies with the agency-item LESO inventory, but also to generally assess the universe of cities that report crime rates to the FBI. This is neither the universe
the quality, reliability and validity of the LESO SME transfer records. The DLA of agencies receiving military transfers nor the universe of agencies in the United
did not retain records of agency inventories before 2014; therefore, for earlier States. The sample in our data, then, is the set of agencies reporting crime rates to
years, we must reconstruct the inventories using what information is contained in the FBI. While we have no reason to believe that this constitutes a random sample
NATurE HuMAN BEHAviOur | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NATUrE HUMAN BEHAvIOUr
of agencies, it is the full set of agencies that are available to be studied given the the Supplementary Information. In addition, results for controlled items only are
research design set out in the analyses we replicate. Thus, the final sample for our included in Section 2.6 of the Supplementary Information.
replication datasets includes about 9,000 agencies that report crime data and that Using the code and data provided by BG, we are able to replicate all tables
could request SME through the federal 1033 Program. in their paper in both Stata and R. All the coefficient estimates are identical, but
In regards to the time period of study, the BG county-level data span from the standard errors are slightly different between R and Stata due to the different
2006 to 2012, and the HPBM county-level data span from 2000 to 2013. However, methods used to compute clustered standard errors. However, with our replication
in our main results, we use replication agency-level data from 2010 to 2015 and county-level and agency-level datasets, we do not find similar negative impacts on
replication county-level data from 2010 to 2014. We use these different time crime rates, and instead find insignificant effects, as shown in Fig. 3.
periods for our replication data because they represent the most recent years of
data available through the more recent LESO inventory release and because of data Replication of HPBM. Like BG, HPBM recognize the potential for endogeneity
limitations with the UCR series. Therefore our sample size is determined by the in the estimation of the effect of military aid on crime rates and employ an IV
number of agencies reporting crime rates over this time period. Nonetheless, in approach. However, they use a different instrument. In fact, they propose four
Section 2.7 of the Supplementary Information, we also run our analyses subsetting different IVs, all of which focus on the likelihood a county will receive aid based
all data to 2010 to 2012, as these are the years for which we have overlap across all on its location. Though the federal government distributes SME to subnational
of the datasets. With this smaller but more comparable set of observations, we find agencies free of charge, agencies must pay the costs of shipping the equipment
similar results to our main results. We still do not find that military aid reduces from a field activity centre (FAC), of which 18 exist around the country. Therefore,
crime rates at either the county or agency level. an agency’s proximity to a FAC directly contributes to the likelihood that an agency
will request aid, on the logic that it is cheaper for an agency closer to a FAC to get
Discussion of mechanisms and limitations. One potential alternative mechanism any military equipment than an agency further from it. HPBM use two IVs that
is that an increase in equipment from the 1033 Program displaces, but does not measure distances to/from FACs. However, as with BG, because their data are only
decrease, violent crime. If this is the effect that BG and HPBM are finding, it available aggregated by county, those instruments are measured at the the county
would have to be that criminal activity is being displaced across county lines level, rather than at the level of an individual agency that makes the decision about
in order to see the relationship between an increase in 1033 equipment and a whether to acquire the equipment. The first instrument is the inverse distance from
decrease in violent crime. (One study suggests that SME might contribute to the closest FAC, and the second is the inverse distance from the sixth-largest FAC.
crime displacement20.) Additionally, this relationship should still be visible in The authors use two separate measures of the distance from a FAC because an item
our agency-level approach, but is not. Displacement is not the same thing as a could originate from any of the 18 FACs across the country, and no one centre has
reduction in crime, and so even if these studies’ conclusions are sound, they do not all categories or types of equipment. The last two instruments consider factors
support the public policy justification for the 1033 Program. that contribute to the likelihood of the agencies in a county requesting equipment,
HPBM argue that their findings are the result of a deterrence mechanism namely the county’s geographic size and its degree of drug trafficking. HPBM use a
whereby increasing 1033 equipment deters crime. In support of this mechanism, county’s land area and whether it was designated a High Intensity Drug Trafficking
they discuss how the relationship between the instrument and total aid is stronger Area as additional instruments, with both measures positively influencing the
for counties that received aid for multiple years. However, this would suggest that probability that agencies in a county will request SME. In addition, as distinct from
we should see a very strong deterrence effect in our data which occurs later as BG, they examine military aid in various categories of equipment, separately.
agencies and counties have had 1033 equipment for potentially many more years. Importantly, our data differ slightly from HPBM because of data limitations
The fact that we find no such effect suggests either that this mechanism is not at the city level. First, while they include a set of controls concerning arrest rates
supported or that 1033 equipment can deter crime for only a few years. Even if the at the county level, not all of those data are made available at the city level. We
latter is true, it again is weak justification for the 1033 Program. only include that information that is listed by the FBI, so our arrest data only
While we do not find evidence supporting the claim that an increase in 1033 consider arrests made on charges of murder, rape, robbery, burglary and assault.
equipment by police is associated with a decrease in crime, we caution against Second, while the county data record gun assault crimes, the city data do not. So,
drawing strong conclusions for no association as well. With the problems and the dependent crime variables we look at are rates of murder, robbery, assault and
inconsistencies we have documented in the data, we would be hesitant to draw vehicle theft (columns 1, 2, 4 and 5 in Table 8 of HPBM). Finally, there remain
strong conclusions from any analyses using these data. notable discrepancies between the instruments used in HPBM and the ones we
calculate from their description of those instruments in the paper (see Section 1.6.1
Replication of BG. To disentangle the effect of police militarization on crime of the Supplementary Information).
from a likely endogenous relationship, BG employ an instrument that combines Following HPBM, we estimate the following specification:
information about military spending by the federal government and previous
acquisitions of SME by counties. Specifically, they construct a variable by Crimea;t¼β 1E^ a;t �1þβ 2Xa;tþβ 3La;t �1þα aþν tþϵ a;t ð2 Þ
interacting a county’s likelihood of receiving any SME with US military spending,
as a county is only eligible to receive that aid if federal military spending is The outcome of interest in the second-stage regression is the reported crime
sufficiently high in the previous year. They sum the quantity of items received by rates—for the crimes of homicide, robbery, assault and vehicle theft—for agency a
each county and divide that number by the lagged amount of military spending at time t. Note that the HPBM analysis also examines crime rates for gun assaults.
by the US government. Essentially, this allows the authors to compare counties However, the agency-level data do not contain information on this variable, so it
that frequently receive aid with counties that rarely do, in years following high US is excluded from the results reported here. The variable E^ a;t 1 is the estimate of
military spending relative to those following lower military spending. the lagged equipment for jurisdiction a at t − 1. In this
anIal(cid:31)
ysis, we examine two
Following BG, we estimate the following specification: variables regarding equipment: either the logged number of items shipped in the
previous year, or the logged value of those shipments. Second, X is a matrix of
Crimea;t¼βEquip^ment a;t �1þα aþδ t;sþγXa;tþϵ a;t ð1 Þ controls including per capita personal income, unemployment and population (all
collected from the US Census Bureau), and L , the lagged arrest rates for the
where Equip^ment a;t 1 is the fitted monetary value of equipment at agency a at crimes of murder, rape, robbery, burglary anda ,t a− s1 sault (from UCR). Finally, α and
lagged yIear t − 1, fro(cid:31)m a first-stage regression. The model also includes agency ν represent vectors of agency and year fixed effects, respectively. The first-stage
fixed effects α and interactive state–time fixed effects δ. Finally, we include a and reduced-form results are included in Section 2.4 of the Supplementary
matrix of demographic control variables, X a,t, following BG: percent in poverty, Information.
median household income, unemployment, population, population male, Next, we estimate the IV regression model using both the replication data
population Black, population aged 15–19 yrs, population aged 20–24 yrs and from HPBM and our disaggregated information at the agency level. Similar to the
population aged 25–34 yrs. All control variables were collected from the US Census BG replication, the summary statistics shown in Supplementary Tables 20 and 21
Bureau. First-stage and reduced-form results are included in Section 2.2 of the reveal that our county replication data do not differ notably from the replication
Supplementary Information. data from HPBM, except for the militarization variables, which again suffer
Next, we estimate the instrumental variables (IV) regression model using both from the issues discussed in this article. We use the same estimation strategy for
the replication data from BG and our disaggregated information at the agency both datasets, including additive year and either county or agency fixed effects.
level. The summary statistics shown in Supplementary Tables 20 and 21 reveal that Finally, we cluster our standard errors by either county or agency. The results of
our county replication data do not differ very substantially from the replication both of these regressions are presented in Supplementary Table 2. As with the
data from BG, except for the militarization variables, which are plagued by the BG replication, we removed from the agency-level database outliers that had all
issues discussed in this article. We use the same estimation strategy for both crime rates over one million, which heavily skewed our regression results (three
datasets, including interactive state and year and either county or agency fixed observations in the HPBM models). Results including all observations are included
effects. Finally, we cluster our standard errors by state, as BG do in their analysis. in Section 2.8 of the Supplementary Information. In addition, results for controlled
The results of both of these regressions are presented in Supplementary Table 1. items only are included in Section 2.6 of the Supplementary Information.
We removed from the agency-level database outliers that had all crime rates over Using the code and data provided by HPBM, we are able to replicate all tables
one million, which heavily skewed our regression results (one observation in the in their paper in both Stata and R. All the coefficient estimates are identical, but
BG models). Results including all observations are also included in Section 2.8 of the standard errors are slightly different between R and Stata due to the different
NATurE HuMAN BEHAviOur | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NATUrE HUMAN BEHAvIOUr Articles
methods used to compute the clustered standard errors. However, as with the 24. Lawson, E. Jr. Police militarization and the use of lethal force. Polit. Res. Q.
replication of BG, we do not find similar negative impacts on crime rates using 72, 177–189 (2018).
our replication county-level and agency-level datasets. Instead, we find either 25. Carriere, K. R. & Encinosa, W. The risks of operational militarization:
insignificant effects or large and significant positive impacts on crime rates, as increased conflict against militarized police. Peace Econ. Peace Sci. Public
shown in Fig. 4. Policy 23, 1–13 (2017).
26. Mummolo, J. Militarization fails to enhance police safety or reduce
Reporting Summary. Further information on research design is available in the crime but may harm police reputation. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 115,
Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article. 9181–9186 (2018).
27. Ramey, D. M. & Steidley, T. Policing through subsidized firepower: an
Data availability assessment of rational choice and minority threat explanations of police
participation in the 1033 Program. Criminology 56, 812–856 (2018).
The data that support the findings of this study are publicly available
28. Lawson, E.Jr Trends: police militarization and the use of lethal force.
through our Dataverse, found at https://dataverse.harvard.edu/dataverse/
Polit. Res. Q. 72, 177–189 (2019).
politicsofpolicinglabnaturemilitarization/. Data are publicly available, but users
29. Masera, F. Police safety, killings by the police, and the militarization
may be required to create an account.
of us law enforcement. Preprint at SSRN https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3342922
(2019).
Code availability
30. McQuoid, A. & Vitt, D. Public safety, private harm: the impact of police
The code that support the findings of this study is publicly available militarization on mortality and suicide. Preprint at SSRN https://doi.
through our Dataverse, found at https://dataverse.harvard.edu/dataverse/ org/10.2139/ssrn.3072433 (2018).
politicsofpolicinglabnaturemilitarization/. The code is publicly available, but users 31. Insler, M. A., McMurrey, B. & McQuoid, A. F. From broken windows to
may be required to create an account. broken bonds: militarized police and social fragmentation. J. Econ. Behav.
Organ. 163, 43–62 (2019).
Received: 13 December 2019; Accepted: 6 October 2020; 32. Wickes, G. C. Demystifying ‘militarization’: a partial analysis of the impact of
Published: xx xx xxxx the U.S. Department of Defense’s ‘1033’ equipment transfer program on police
officer safety outcomes. Graduate thesis, Georgetown University. http://hdl.
handle.net/10822/760998 (2015).
references
33. McQuoid, A. F. & Haynes Jr., J. B. The thin (red) blue line: police militarization
1. Lutterbeck, D. Blurring the dividing line: the convergence of internal and
and violent crime. Departmental Working Papers 56 https://ideas.repec.org/p/
external security in Western Europe. Eur. Secur. 14, 231–253 (2005).
usn/usnawp/56.html (United States Naval Academy Department of
2. Fassin, D. Enforcing Order: An Ethnography of Urban Policing (Polity, 2013).
Economics, 2017).
3. Roziere, B. & Walby, K. The expansion and normalization of police
34. Davenport, A. C. et al. An Evaluation of the Department of Defense’s Excess
militarization in Canada. Crit. Criminol. 26, 29–48 (2018).
Property Program (RAND Corporation, 2018).
4. Balko, R. Rise of the Warrior Cop: The Militarization of America’s Police Forces
35. Maltz, M. D. & Targonski, J. A note on the use of county-level UCR data.
(Public Affairs, 2013).
J. Quant. Criminol. 18, 297–318 (2002).
5. Kraska, P. B. & Kappeler, V. E. Militarizing American police: the rise and
36. Cassidy, M. MCSO terminated from military-surplus program. AZcentral.com
normalization of paramilitary units. Soc. Probl. 44, 1–18 (1997).
https://www.azcentral.com/story/news/local/phoenix/2014/09/10/
6. Hall, A. R. & Coyne, C. J. The militarization of US domestic policing. Indep.
mcso-terminated-military-surplus-program/15429659/ (10 September, 2004).
Rev. 17, 485–504 (2013).
37. Gelman, A. & Carlin, J. Beyond power calculations: assessing type S (sign)
7. Wilson, J. Q. Varieties of Police Behavior: The Management of Law and Order
and type M (magnitude) errors. Perspect. Psychol. Sci. 9, 641–651 (2014).
in Eight Communities (Harvard Univ. Press, 1978).
38. Gross, J. H. Testing what matters (if you must test at all): a context-driven
8. Slovak, J. Styles of Urban Policing: Organization, Environment, and Police
approach to substantive and statistical significance. Am. J. Polit. Sci. 59,
Styles in Selected American Cities (NYU Press, 1988).
775–788 (2015).
9. Kraska, P. B. Militarization and policing – its relevance to 21st century police.
39. Rainey, C. Arguing for a negligible effect. Am. J. Polit. Sci. 58,
Policing J. Policy Pract. 1, 501–513 (2007).
1083–1091 (2014).
10. Phillips, S. W. Police Militarization: Understanding the Perspectives of Police
Chiefs, Administrators, and Tactical Officers (Routledge, 2018).
Acknowledgements
11. Balko, R. Overkill: The Rise of Paramilitary Police Raids in America
(Cato Institute, 2006). The authors received no specific funding for this work. Drafts of this paper were
12. Laurie, C. D. & Cole, R. H. The Role of Federal Military Forces in Domestic presented at the 2018 Annual Meeting of the American Political Science Association,
Disorders, 1877–1945 (Government Printing Office, 1997). Boston, MA, and at the 2018 symposium The Benefits (and Costs) of Policing, organized
13. Committee on Armed Services, US House of Representatives. The Department by the Policing Project at New York University School of Law. We thank M. Harris,
of Defense Excess Property Program in Support of US Law Enforcement J. Park, D. Bruce and M. Murray for comments and feedback. We thank P. Zachary
Agencies: An Overview of DOD Authorities, Roles, Responsibilities, and for assistance in developing this study.
Implementation of Section 1033 of the 1997 National Defense Authorization
Act (US Government Publishing Office, 2014). Author contributions
14. Coyne, C. J. & Hall, A. R. Tyranny Comes Home: The Domestic Fate of US A.G. contributed to the research design, analysis and collection of data, and is the lead
Militarism (Stanford Univ. Press, 2018). author. E.C. and K.J.S. contributed to the analysis and collection of data and writing.
15. Schrader, S. Badges without Borders: How Global Counterinsurgency T.S.C. contributed to development of the research idea, research design, collection of
Transformed American Policing (Univ. of California Press, 2019). data, interpretation of the analysis, and writing. A.N.G. contributed to development of
16. Ashton, P., Petteruti, A. & Walsh, N. Rethinking the Blues: How We Police in the research idea, research design, direction of the analysis, interpretation of the analysis,
the US and at What Cost (Justice Policy Institute, 2012). and writing. M.L.O. contributed to development of the research idea, the literature
17. US Government Accountability Office. DOD Excess Property: Enhanced Controls review and writing.
Needed for Access to Excess Controlled Property (US Government, 2017).
18. Ajilore, O. The militarization of local law enforcement: is race a factor? Competing interests
Appl. Econ. Lett. 22, 1089–1093 (2015).
The authors declare no competing interests.
19. Baumgart, Z. Crime, Arrests, Legitimacy or Race? Militarization of American
Police from 1990 to 2007 (Univ. of Wisconsin-Madison, 2016).
20. Masera, F. Bringing war home: violent crime, police killings and the Additional information
overmilitarization of the US police. Preprint at SSRN https://doi.org/10.2139/
Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/
ssrn.2851522 (2016).
s41562-020-00995-5.
21. Delehanty, C., Mewhirter, J., Welch, R. & Wilks, J. Militarization and police
violence: the case of the 1033 Program. Res. Politics https://doi. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to T.S.C.
org/10.1177/2053168017712885 (2017). Peer review information Primary handling editor: Aisha Bradshaw.
22. Bove, V. & Gavrilova, E. Police officer on the frontline or a soldier? The effect
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
of police militarization on crime. Am. Econ. J. Econ. Policy 9, 1–18 (2017).
23. Harris, M. C., Park, J., Bruce, D. J. & Murray, M. N. Peacekeeping force: Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
effects of providing tactical equipment to local law enforcement. Am. Econ. J. published maps and institutional affiliations.
Econ. Policy 9, 291–313 (2017). © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2020
NATurE HuMAN BEHAviOur | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
1
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
April
2020
Corresponding author(s): Tom Clark
Last updated by author(s): Sep 10, 2020
Reporting Summary
Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency
in reporting. For further information on Nature Research policies, see our Editorial Policies and the Editorial Policy Checklist.
Statistics
For all statistical analyses, confirm that the following items are present in the figure legend, table legend, main text, or Methods section.
n/a Confirmed
The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
A statement on whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided
Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.
A description of all covariates tested
A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
A full description of the statistical parameters including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient)
AND variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)
For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted
Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.
For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated
Our web collection on statistics for biologists contains articles on many of the points above.
Software and code
Policy information about availability of computer code
Data collection R Version 3.6.1
Data analysis R Version 3.6.1
For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors and
reviewers. We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Research guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.
Data
Policy information about availability of data
All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable:
- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets
- A list of figures that have associated raw data
- A description of any restrictions on data availability
The data that support the findings of this study are publicly available through our Dataverse, found at https://dataverse.harvard.edu/dataverse/
politicsofpolicinglabnaturemilitarization/.
2
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
April
2020
Field-specific reporting
Please select the one below that is the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.
Life sciences Behavioural & social sciences Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences
For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/documents/nr-reporting-summary-flat.pdf
Behavioural & social sciences study design
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
Study description This study uses quantitative data on 1033 Program transfers and crime rates to analyze how militarization (via 1033 Program
transfers) affects crime rates.
Research sample We primarily use two existing datasets: the 1033 Program data publicly available through the DLA. We use the version from March
31, 2018. Link to the current version of the data: https://www.dla.mil/DispositionServices/Offers/Reutilization/LawEnforcement/
PublicInformation/
Second, we use the FBI Uniform Crime Reports data series for city and county crime rates. Link to the website: https://www.fbi.gov/
services/cjis/ucr
Sampling strategy Our sample size is determined by the number of agencies reporting crime rates over this time period. We then link those agencies
that report crime rates to DLA militarization records.
Data collection We collected the data from the public sources identified above and stored them on a shared Dropbox.
Timing We collected the data from the public sources identified above in spring 2018 onto a shared Dropbox.
Data exclusions In our main analyses, we exclude agencies with crime rates over 1 million (1-3 observations), though we include all observations in
our supplementary materials. Otherwise, no data is excluded from the two public datasets identified above (pending that they
matched accurately across datasets).
Non-participation No participants dropped out or declined participation.
Randomization Participants were not allocated into experimental groups.
Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods
We require information from authors about some types of materials, experimental systems and methods used in many studies. Here, indicate whether each material,
system or method listed is relevant to your study. If you are not sure if a list item applies to your research, read the appropriate section before selecting a response.
Materials & experimental systems Methods
n/a Involved in the study n/a Involved in the study
Antibodies ChIP-seq
Eukaryotic cell lines Flow cytometry
Palaeontology and archaeology MRI-based neuroimaging
Animals and other organisms
Human research participants
Clinical data
Dual use research of concern