Articles
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-020-0927-5
Changing occupational structures and residential
segregation in New York, London and Tokyo
Maarten van Ham 1,2 ✉, Masaya Uesugi 3, Tiit Tammaru 1,4, David Manley 1,5 and
Heleen Janssen 1
Based on data from the 1980s, Sassen’s influential book ‘The Global City’ interrogated how changes in the occupational struc-
ture affect socio-economic residential segregation in global cities. Here, using data for New York City, London and Tokyo, we
reframe and answer this question for recent decades. Our analysis shows an increase in the share of high-income occupations,
accompanied by a fall in low-income occupations in all three cities, providing strong evidence for a consistent trend of profes-
sionalization of the workforce. Segregation was highest in New York and lowest in Tokyo. In New York and London, individuals
in high-income occupations are concentrating in the city centre, while low-income occupations are pushed to urban peripheries.
Professionalization of the workforce is accompanied by reduced levels of segregation by income, and two ongoing megatrends
in urban change: gentrification of inner-city neighbourhoods and suburbanization of poverty, with larger changes in the social
geography than in levels of segregation.
T
he global city thesis (also known as the social polarization of this question; on the changes in residential segregation between
thesis), developed by Sassen1,2, linked globalization-induced income-based occupational groups in global cities. A recent study
transformations of urban economic structures with increas- of socio-economic segregation in European capital cities observed
ing social polarization by occupation and income. Taking London, increasing levels of residential segregation between the top and bot-
New York and Tokyo as exemplars, Sassen argued that global eco- tom occupational status groups since the 2000s (ref. 9), with the rich
nomic restructuring is leading to the decline of manufacturing and and poor increasingly living separated lives. The study suggested
the growth of producer services and finance. This is resulting in that increasing levels of socio-economic segregation are the result
increasing numbers of highly skilled workers earning the highest of interactions between welfare provision and housing systems,
incomes, such as professionals and managers, and a simultaneous the lasting imprint of historical developments and other forms of
expansion of the group of low-skilled workers earning the lowest segregation, as well as increasing inequality and changing occupa-
incomes. Since the publication of Sassen’s book ‘The Global City’1, tional structures under the influence of globalization. Additionally,
there has been extensive debate about the social polarization thesis. segregation patterns also depend on national and local contexts10–12.
According to Hamnett3, the concept and definition of social polar- Thus, even if globalization does result in changes in the occupational
ization is ambiguous, as it omits other occupational trends. For structure, the geographical manifestation of that change is unlikely
example, empirical work in London provides supporting evidence to be uniform across cities and nation states. On the basis of a lit-
for processes of professionalization4 and socio-economic upgrad- erature review on the forces shaping socio-economic segregation, as
ing5, although more recent evidence indicates that there are also well as on the way in which they play out in different local contexts
other forms of occupational changes since 2000 (refs. 6,7). Hill and (see the Supplementary Discussion), we expect that the growth in
Kim8 further argued that there are important differences between residential segregation between income-based occupational groups
liberal capitalist states and developmental states. Tokyo is charac- since the 1980s will be greatest in New York and smallest in Tokyo,
terized by late industrialization and this potentially leads to differ- leaving London in between.
ent trajectories of occupational change compared with London and This study investigates changes in residential segregation
New York. The variety of national experiences and outcomes for between 1980 and 2010–2011 in Sassen’s original three global
global cities brings into question the validity of the global city thesis cities1,2: New York, London and Tokyo. The following research
on occupational change over space and time. questions are addressed. (1) To what extent has the occupational
The social polarization thesis1,2 is particularly focused on urban structure in the three cities changed since the 1980s? (2) To what
spaces where the changes in industrial, occupational and earnings extent have levels of residential segregation changed between high-
structures manifest themselves. In her book, Sassen2 uses the idea of and low-income occupational groups? (3) How has the geography
spatial polarization, and asks the question “how the greater income of the residential distribution of high- and low-income occupations
polarization in the leading industries … is constructed socially; that changed over time? The answers to these questions help to better
is to say, is it merely a change in the income distribution, or are understand the changes in the occupational structure (profession-
there new social forms associated with an increase of high-income alization versus polarization) and how they link to changes in resi-
and of low-income workers? What is the social geography emerg- dential segregation between income-based occupational groups in
ing from this transformation?”. Our study focuses on the latter part global cities.
1Department of Urbanism, Faculty of Architecture and the Built Environment, Delft University of Technology, Delft, The Netherlands. 2School of Geography
and Sustainable Development, University of St Andrews, St Andrews, UK. 3Faculty of Socio-Environmental Studies, Fukuoka Institute of Technology,
Fukuoka, Japan. 4Department of Geography, Institute of Ecology and Earth Sciences, Faculty of Science and Technology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia.
5School of Geographical Sciences, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK. ✉e-mail: m.vanham@tudelft.nl
NaTUre HUMaN BeHavioUr | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTure HumaN BeHavIOur
This study uses national census data for the period between Population
1980 and 2010–2011 reporting on occupational status, aggre-
0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100%
gated into small areas, in all three cities. We classify occupations
as high-income, middle-income and low-income, and study the 1980 25.9 50.6 23.5
changes in segregation indices and the associated geographies of seg-
1990 30.6 48.1 21.2
regation. Occupation-based segregation studies9 usually ignore the
income levels of different occupational groups. This is an important
36.8 42.2 21.0
shortcoming, since occupations can experience substantial changes
in income over time. Moreover, it is income, not occupation, that 37.6 40.1 22.3
buys choice in the housing market13, and high-income groups tend
to define the evolution of patterns of residential segregation14,15. To
overcome this problem, we used nationally representative survey
Population
data for each census year and for each city, which contains infor-
mation on occupations and income, to create income-based occu-
pational groups that will also be used to characterize changes in
occupational structure.
results
Change in occupational structure. Figure 1 shows the changing
occupational structure between 1980 and 2010–2011 for New York,
London and Tokyo using three income-based occupational catego-
ries (high, middle and low). A detailed direct comparison of the
income-based occupational structures of the three cities is difficult
Population
as there are small differences in the data, and changes over time in
classifications. We therefore focus on more general trends instead of
detailed differences.
In New York, there is noticeable growth of the high-income
occupational groups and clear shrinkage of the middle-income
occupational group since 1980. The share of individuals belonging
to the bottom or low-income occupational group decreased slightly
between 1980 and 2000. However, it is notable that there is a small
increase in the proportion of the low-income occupational group
between 2000 and 2010. So, while the high-income occupational
group increased by almost 12 percentage points from 25.9% to
37.6% between 1980 and 2010, this was at the expense of the middle
group, which fell from 50.6% to 40.1%. The low-income occupa-
tional group remained stable at around 22–23% when comparing
1980 and 2010. The clear growth of the high-income occupational
group, accompanied by a thinning out of the middle group, and a
stable low-income group, provides support for occupational profes-
sionalization taking place in the occupational structure of New York the two cities is that in New York, the middle group became much
between 1980 and 2010. smaller, whereas in London this group remained stable. Although
In London, there was a sharp increase in the share of individu- the changes between 2000–2001 and 2010–2011 are small, in both
als belonging to the high-income occupational group, accompa- cities the share of the low-income occupational group neverthe-
nied by a marked decrease of the proportion of the population in less increased. This might suggest marginal polarization between
the low-income occupational group between 1981 and 2011. The 2000 and 2010 at the expense of the middle group (which remains
sharp drop in the share of the low-income group between 1991 and the largest). However, there is also the important caveat that small
2001 is partly an artefact of the broad categories of occupations that changes might be an artefact of the categories used and the changes
were available to us, but the general trend is clear. Interestingly, as in definitions over time rather than real change.
with New York, there is also a small increase in the share of the The changes in the occupational structure of Tokyo show a clear
low-income occupations between 2001 and 2011 in London. trend of professionalization between 1980 and 2010. The share of
Although there was substantial variation in the size of the middle the high-income occupational group increased and the share of
group, the share varied between 41% and 43% when comparing the the low-income occupational group fell, with the consequence that
years 1981 and 2011. The data suggest that in London, a process of the middle-income group remained more or less stable over time.
professionalization also took place during the 1980s and the 1990s It is noticeable that the extent of change in the high-income occu-
(ref. 3). In 1981, the size of the low-income occupational group was pational group is much smaller in Tokyo compared with the other
twice that of the high-income occupational group—but during the cities. A consequence of this limited change is that the high-income
1990s this pattern started to change, and by 2011 the high-income occupational group in Tokyo in 2011 is much smaller compared
occupational group was much larger than the low-income occupa- with the other two cities: 23.8%. This share is comparable with the
tional group. Overall, the occupational structure of London is also situation in New York and London in the 1980s. The low-income
characterized by professionalization between 1980 and 2010. occupational group in Tokyo steadily declined between 1980 and
When comparing London with New York in 1981, it is clear 2010, from 36.1% to 28.9%, but even then, this group in Tokyo
that in London, the high-income occupational group was much remains larger than in the other two cities.
smaller, and the low-income occupational group was much larger. Our first research question was: to what extent has the occu-
However, by 2010–2011 the occupational distribution of the three pational structure in the three cities changed since the 1980s?
groups has become similar in both cities. A big difference between The three global cities show distinct patterns of income-based
raeY
raeY
raeY
New York
2000
2010
High Middle Low
London
0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100%
1981 18.4 42.6 38.9
1991 30.5 31.5 38.0
2001 32.5 46.0 21.5
2011 34.1 41.0 24.9
High Middle Low
Tokyo
0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100%
1980 18.2 45.7 36.1
1990 20.0 47.3 32.7
2000 20.7 48.2 31.1
2010 23.8 47.3 28.9
High Middle Low
Fig. 1 | Changes of occupational structure. Three socio-economic
groups are classified according to income level (high, middle and low)
by occupational classification. Numbers indicate the percentage of the
population in each income category.
NaTUre HUMaN BeHavioUr | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTure HumaN BeHavIOur Articles
Table 1 | index of dissimilarity and multi-group dissimilarity index
iDa MDib
New York London Tokyo New York London Tokyo
CT LSoa Grid Cho CT LSoa Grid Cho
1980 0.4471 0.2645c 0.2720 ND 0.2605 0.1663c 0.1390 ND
1990 0.4199 0.2375c 0.2613 ND 0.2466 0.1742c 0.1309 ND
2000 0.4020 0.2952 0.2337 0.2403 0.2545 0.1611 0.1164 0.1220
2010 0.4239 0.3062 ND 0.2347 0.2726 0.1671 ND 0.1214
CT, census tracts; LSOA, lower layer super output areas; ND, no data. aTwo groups: high and low. bThree groups: high, middle and low. c10% Sample data.
occupational structures and change over time, but they all share segregation between 1980 and 2010, regardless of the geographical
a strong and consistent growth of the high-income occupational units used. This decrease in segregation is consistent and notable,
group and a stabilizing (New York) or shrinking (London and especially given the suggestion from the literature that levels of
Tokyo) low-income occupational group. Our analyses show a segregation are increasing in global cities. The pattern of change
consistent trend of professionalization of the occupational struc- in segregation in London is similar to that of New York, but more
ture in all three cities—as suggested by Hamnett3—and we found pronounced. In the 1980s the level of segregation dropped (as mea-
no evidence for the social polarization thesis by Sassen1. Only sured by ID); it then increased again in the subsequent decades. It is
between 2000–2001 and 2010–2011 is there a small increase in important to note that the ID value for London increased between
the share of low-income occupations in New York and London, 1990 and 2000, and that this might have been caused by the reclas-
which could hint towards polarization; nevertheless, in both cities sification of ‘Administrative and secretarial occupations’ from the
the share of the low-income group was smaller in 2010–2011 than low-income occupational group to the middle-income occupational
in 1980–1981. Crucially, in all three cities the middle-income group, thereby reducing the share of the low-income occupational
group remained the largest. group in this period.
Despite the commonalities, there are also differences between Overall, the drop in segregation in all three cities coincided
the cities. In New York, there is clear shrinkage of the share of with strong and consistent professionalization of the labour force.
the middle-income group since 1980, whereas the share of the This suggests a link between professionalization and reducing lev-
low-income occupations has remained more or less stable. In els of segregation by income. Interestingly, for both New York and
London, the middle-income group has remained stable, whereas London, the share of low-income occupations increased slightly
the share of the low-income group has dropped, similar to what between 2000–2001 and 2010–2011 and this coincided with a
can be seen for Tokyo. In New York and London, the share of the slight increase in the level of segregation by income. It may be
high-income occupations has grown much faster than in Tokyo. In the case that increasing levels of polarization in the workforce are
conclusion, our results show a clear trend of professionalization of linked with increasing levels of segregation, but to confirm this
the workforce in New York, London and Tokyo, in line with the pro- hypothesis we would need the 2020–2021 round of census data.
fessionalization thesis as proposed by Hamnett3. Despite the potential links between changes in the occupational
structure and levels of residential segregation, we should point
Level of socio-economic residential segregation. To answer the out that the levels of segregation in London (measured by MDI)
second research question, we investigated changes in levels of resi- have been much more stable than the occupational structure. In
dential segregation between occupational groups (using the same other words, substantial changes in the occupational structure do
three income-based occupation categories as before) in each of not necessarily translate into large changes in residential struc-
the three cities and explored whether these changes are related to tures as measured by segregation indices, or at least not immedi-
changes in their occupational structures. Table 1 shows the index ately, as there might be time lags.
of dissimilarity (ID) and the multi-group dissimilarity index (MDI) Our second research question asked to what extent levels of
for all three cities between 1980 and 2010 for high-income and socio-economic segregation have changed between the top and
low-income occupational groups. For Tokyo, there was no consis- bottom income-based occupational groups. We found consider-
tent small-scale geography available over the four censuses used, able differences among the three cities, with New York being the
and therefore data is presented for two temporally overlapping spa- most segregated city and Tokyo being the least segregated. In 2010,
tial units (Cho districts (Japanese administrative spatial units for the the value of the ID between high-income and low-income occu-
presentation of census data) and 500 m-square grid cells). pations was 0.42 in New York, 0.31 in London and 0.23 in Tokyo.
Table 1 highlights that New York consistently has the highest We observed relatively little change in the levels of segregation in
levels of socio-economic residential segregation compared with the each city, despite profound changes that took place in the occupa-
other two cities. For example, in 2010 New York had an ID value tional structures. The ID for New York fell between 1980 and 2000,
of 0.42, and an MDI value of 0.27. The ID for New York dropped but then increased again in 2010, but the overall outcome for the
somewhat between 1980 and 2000, but then climbed again to the study period was that residential segregation between occupa-
1990 level. The MDI for New York first dropped, but then increased tional groups was slightly lower in New York at the end. Changes
between 1990 and 2010. These results suggest a stable level of segre- in the level of socio-economic segregation are similar in London to
gation between high-income and low-income occupational groups, what we found for New York: in the 1980s the level of segregation
but with increases in the last decades, especially when all three dropped and then increased again in the following decades. Unlike
groups are taken into account. New York, London was more segregated in 2010 compared with
By contrast, in 2010, Tokyo is the least segregated city of the three, 1980. By contrast, the ID is not only lower in Tokyo compared to
with an ID value of 0.23, and an MDI value of 0.12. Furthermore, London and New York, but there was also a steady decline during
both indices demonstrate a decrease in socio-economic residential the 1980–2010 study period.
NaTUre HUMaN BeHavioUr | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTure HumaN BeHavIOur
New York London Tokyo
Q1
Q2 1980 1981 1980
Q3
Q4
Not included
02.55 10 15 20km 02.55 10 15 20km 0 2.5 5 10 15 20km
1990 1991 1990
02.55 10 15 20km 02.55 10 15 20km 0 2.5 5 10 15 20km
2000 2001 2000
02.55 10 15 20km 02.55 10 15 20km 0 2.5 5 10 15 20km
2010 2011 2010
02.55 10 15 20km 02.55 10 15 20km 0 2.5 5 10 15 20km
Fig. 2 | The distribution of the high-income occupational group. Q1–Q4 comprise the quartiles of the distribution for the absolute number of the
high-income occupations. The colours indicate the neighbourhoods in each quartile. New York, census tracts. London, consistent LSOAs (10% sample)
(1981 and 1991) and LSOAs (2001 and 2011). Tokyo, grid cells (1980 and 1990) and Cho districts (2000 and 2010). Maps were created using ArcGIS
software by Esri. The 1980 US Census shapefile originates from ref. 55. The UK Census shapefiles originate from ref. 56. The London map contains National
Statistics data © Crown copyright and database right 2012 and contains Ordnance Survey data © Crown copyright and database right 2012.
The social geography of changing occupational structures. The and potentially mask important underlying changes. Theoretically,
city-wide single-number indices of segregation only partly explain without any change in segregation levels, the underlying social
the changing social geographies in New York, London and Tokyo, geography of where different occupational groups live can change
NaTUre HUMaN BeHavioUr | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTure HumaN BeHavIOur Articles
New York London Tokyo
Q1
Q2 1980 1981 1980
Q3
Q4
Not included
02.55 10 15 20km 02.55 10 15 20km 0 2.5 5 10 15 20km
1990 1991 1990
02.55 10 15 20km 02.55 10 15 20km 0 2.5 5 10 15 20km
2000 2001 2000
02.55 10 15 20km 02.55 10 15 20km 0 2.5 5 10 15 20km
2010 2011 2010
02.55 10 15 20km 02.55 10 15 20km 0 2.5 5 10 15 20km
Fig. 3 | The distribution of the low-income occupational group. Q1–Q4 comprise the quartiles of the distribution for the absolute number of the
low-income group members. The colours indicate the neighbourhoods in each quartile. New York, census tracts. London, consistent LSOAs (10% sample)
(1981 and 1991) and LSOAs (2001 and 2011). Tokyo, grid cells (1980 and 1990) and Cho districts (2000 and 2010). Maps were created using ArcGIS
software by Esri. The 1980 US Census shapefile originates from ref. 55. The UK Census shapefiles originate from ref. 56. The London map contains National
Statistics data © Crown copyright and database right 2012 and contains Ordnance Survey data © Crown copyright and database right 2012.
completely. Figures 2 and 3 show the spatial distribution of the number of neighbourhoods that together contain a quarter of all
high-income and low-income occupational groups, respectively. high-income (Fig. 2) or low-income (Fig. 3) occupations in each
The neighbourhoods in the Q1 category represent the smallest city. These maps identify how widely distributed a particular group
NaTUre HUMaN BeHavioUr | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTure HumaN BeHavIOur
is within the city and the degree to which they are concentrated in the workforce. For London, Hamnett18 explains that this is partly
specific locations16. caused by an increase in the perceived desirability of East London as
In New York, people belonging to the high-income occupational a place to buy property for an increasingly professional workforce,
group concentrate in the northwest suburban area and, increasingly, and a marked growth in demand for housing in East London that
in Manhattan. Meanwhile, the low-income occupational group has not been met by an increased supply.
(Fig. 3) is highly concentrated in the western part of the Bronx and In Tokyo, the high-income occupational group has consistently
central Queens. In London, in the 1980s, the high-income group was been concentrated in the western part of the city, which includes
strongly represented at the edges of the urban region. Since then, inner-city neighbourhoods. This residential pattern is strongly
this group has increasingly concentrated in the centre of London. related to the physical geography of Tokyo, with people belonging
Whereas people with high-income occupations were highly concen- to the high-income group residing in those areas that are elevated
trated in areas such as Enfield and Bromley in the 1980s, they now above the sea level, and thus at less at risk of flooding. However,
live in the central part of London along the River Thames. People in recent decades, people with high-income occupations have also
with low-income occupations are increasingly residing in neigh- moved to the harbour area in the eastern part of the city, where
bourhoods located in the peripheral parts of London, in the west expensive high-rise apartments have been developed. The rela-
(Hillingdon and Ealing) and northeast (Barking and Dagenham, tively stable residential geography of occupations in Tokyo is also
Newham and Waltham Forest). Compared with New York, the spa- related to the phenomenon of vertical segregation, which has also
tial concentration of the low-income occupational group becomes be observed in Southern Europe19–21. As a result, neighbourhoods
more visible over time in London. Despite the overall similar pat- are relatively mixed by income, but higher income groups live on
tern of people with high-income occupations concentrating in the higher floor levels than lower income groups.
central parts, and people with low-income occupations concentrat- The residential pattern of the low-income occupational group is
ing in the peripheral parts of the city, the geography of high-income almost the inverse of that of the high-income groups. In Tokyo, the
and low-income occupational group appear to be more polarized in low-income occupational group is concentrated in the eastern parts
London compared with New York. This is worth noting, as levels of of the city (the lowlands), and despite some spatial dispersal of the
segregation are considerably higher in New York than in London. group to the northwestern parts of the city, the pattern is remark-
Tokyo shows a very clear east–west pattern of segregation. The ably stable over time. In New York and London, the concentration of
high-income occupational groups are concentrated in the west of the low-income occupational group has decreased in the most cen-
the city, whereas the low-income group mainly resides in the east. tral areas, and increased in the more peripheral areas. In New York,
Interestingly, this pattern overlaps with the physical geography of individuals belonging to the low-income occupational group have
Tokyo; people with low-income occupations mainly live in the low- concentrated in the western part of the Bronx and central Queens,
land areas in the east, which are at high risk of flooding in case of and in London in these individuals have concentrated in the west
an earthquake, and people with high-income occupations live in (Hillingdon and Ealing) and northeast (Barking and Dagenham,
the higher areas in the west. However, over time this pattern has Newham and Waltham Forest). In both London and New York,
become less clear as the Q1 neighbourhoods of the high-income some of the low-income concentrations overlap with high concen-
occupational group have become more dispersed, with some new trations of racial and ethnic minority groups, such as in the north-
clustering in the southeastern part of Tokyo. A new concentration ern part of Brooklyn and on both sides of the Harlem River, ranging
emerged from 2000 onwards at the waterfront area around the Chuo from north Manhattan to southeastern Bronx.
and Koto Wards. This area has been redeveloped as part of the urban
renaissance policy of the Government. The low-income occupa- Discussion
tional group continues to have a strong presence in the eastern part Since Sassen’s1 work on occupational structure change and the
of Tokyo and in the southern Ohta Ward, and has also expanded to accompanying debates on polarization and professionalization
the northern parts of the city (a part of the Shinjuku area). What is trends, relatively little attention has been paid to the spatial foot-
common for all three cities is that, whereas the global segregation print of occupational structure change in global cities. This study
measures reported relatively little change (Table 1), there are sub- investigated long-term changes in the occupational structures,
stantial changes in the underlying social geography taking place in levels of residential segregation and the social geographies of
the three global cities. income-based occupational groups in New York, London and
Our third research question asked how the geography of the resi- Tokyo, the three global cities originally studied by Saskia Sassen1,2.
dential distribution of high-income and low-income occupations We found four regularities that characterize socio-spatial change in
changed over time. In general, people belonging to the high-income our three case study cities: (1) professionalization of the workforce
occupational groups tend to concentrate in the most desirable is the main trend of occupational structure change in all three cities;
locations in each of the three cities. In New York and London, it (2) occupational change is bigger than city-wide change in levels
is clear that since the 1980s, the high-income occupational group of residential segregation between occupational groups; (3) profes-
has concentrated in the central parts of the city. In New York, the sionalization in the occupational structure tends to be associated
high-income group is concentrating in Manhattan, with further with lower city-wide levels of segregation; (4) changes in the geog-
expansions to nearby Brooklyn and the northwest suburban area, raphy of segregation of occupational groups are bigger than changes
a trend that has continued through the study period. In London, in the city-wide levels of segregation between occupational groups.
the high-income occupational group was strongly represented at Although the dominant trend is one of professionalization, and
the edges of the urban region in the 1980s, in areas such as Enfield New York and London have converged to a similar occupational
and Bromley. Since then, this group has concentrated in the centre structure since the 1980s, there is no convergence towards a uni-
of London along the River Thames. Areas of concentrated occupa- versal outcome of socio-spatial change in global cities. All three
tional upgrading include Tower Hamlets and South Hackney in the cities are shaped by globalization, but the regularities found are
2000s, as well as other new developments along the Thames and also shaped by city-specific contextual factors that lead to different
redevelopments in Camden and Islington7,17, where property prices outcomes of occupational change, residential segregation between
have increased substantially. It is striking that the concentration of occupational groups, and how occupational change and residential
the high-income group in the central areas of New York and London segregation are linked; there are multiple contextual forces that lead
coincided with a sharp increase in the share of the high-income to distinct trajectories of occupational and residential changes in
occupational group, and an overall trend of professionalization of New York, London and Tokyo.
NaTUre HUMaN BeHavioUr | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTure HumaN BeHavIOur Articles
The results of our analyses provide support to Hamnett’s claim3,4 There are several interrelated mechanisms that connect changes
that social polarization might not be a universal feature of occu- in the occupational structure with changes in socio-economic seg-
pational structure change in global cities as initially predicted by regation within a city31. With a changing occupational structure in
Sassen. Our findings demonstrate that the occupational structure an urban region, the balance of purchasing power between income
of all three cities report a consistent trend of professionalization of groups also changes. An increase in the size of the high-income
the workforce over the past three decades. Only between 2000–2001 occupational group will, all other things being equal, lead to increas-
and 2010–2011, there seems to be a small increase in the share of ing real estate prices in the most desirable locations, with spill-
low-income occupations in both New York and London, which in over effects to neighbouring areas. As locational preferences have
combination with a growth in the share of high-income occupa- changed, higher income households have moved to central areas,
tions, could signal marginal polarization. The increase in the share pushing lower income households to lower cost areas at some dis-
of low-income occupations may be related to immigration. As the tance. The globalization-related increase of tourism and new forms
share of high-income occupations increases, demand for low-income of housing commodification, such as short-term renting, further
jobs is met by immigrants, and as a consequence, immigrants tend contribute to the differential residential mobility of households with
to be overrepresented in those jobs22,23. As a consequence, a polar- different incomes by increasing real estate prices in central parts of
ized or ‘dual’ labour market may emerge with migrants employed in the cities32. At the same time, demographic processes, such as popu-
jobs with lower pay and lower social security, and natives employed lation shrinkage or growth and in situ upward and downward social
in jobs with higher pay and higher social security1,2,24,25. By contrast, mobility are also affecting the population composition in different
Tokyo has experienced very little immigration from abroad, shows types of neighbourhoods. Migration from outside the region and
relatively little growth in the share of high-income occupations and abroad often reinforces existing patterns, with high-income immi-
a consistent drop in the share of low-income occupations. grants moving to expensive areas, and low-income immigrants
When comparing changes in the occupational structures and seg- entering areas offering lower cost housing. Generally, high levels
regation levels in the three cities, an important regularity seems to of international immigration are related to higher levels of social
emerge: professionalization of the workforce tends to be accompa- polarization and higher levels of residential segregation.
nied by lower levels of residential segregation between occupational Although there are similarities between the mechanisms, pro-
groups. This finding is reinforced by the fact that the small increase cesses and outcomes in global cities, there is no single global city
in the share of low-income occupations between 2000–2001 and model, as local variation produces strongly contextualized out-
2010–2011 in New York and Tokyo coincides with an increase in comes of urban socio-spatial change9,10,33. In explaining occupa-
the level of residential segregation. This could suggest that polar- tional change, residential segregation between occupational groups
ization is related to higher levels of residential segregation, but it is and how occupational change and residential segregation are
not possible to draw hard conclusions on this on the basis of only linked, government policy has an important role, especially policies
one year of data with a small increase in the share of low-income related to labour, housing markets and immigration. Both national
workers. Despite the common trend of professionalization, there are and city-level policies can increase or decrease income inequality,
marked differences in the levels of segregation between the three and the effects of income inequality between occupational groups
cities. The level of segregation is highest in New York and lowest in on residential segregation between occupational groups34. High lev-
Tokyo. These differences are rooted in the history of these cities, but els of income inequality will make it more difficult for low-income
are also likely to be related to their occupational structures. By the households to move to better neighbourhoods, thereby reinforc-
1980s, New York already had a relatively high share of high-income ing patterns of residential inequality35. The United States is a clas-
workers, whereas Tokyo always had the lowest share of high-income sic example of a liberal welfare regime and the United Kingdom
workers. A close look at the social geography of the cities can pro- represents a more mixed model36, whereas Japan has strong gov-
vide more insight into the changing socio-spatial patterns. ernmental influence that seeks to maintain low levels of inequal-
Notably, the observed changes in the social geography of where ity. This is reflected in the Gini Index, which is the lowest in Tokyo
the different income-based occupational groups live appear to be (0.3337), followed by London (0.4438) and New York (0.5539). Indeed,
more substantial than the changes observed in the measures of seg- Tokyo is the biggest outlier among global cities, as it is among the
regation. Although levels of segregation have changed only a little, wealthiest, but also one of the most equal, cities in terms of income
the spatial organization of households with different socio-economic distribution38.
status has shown great change, with two ongoing urban megatrends: Public policy does not influence only income inequality; it also
the gentrification of inner-city neighbourhoods and the suburbaniza- influences the supply of different types of housing and their spatial
tion of poverty26. Both of these megatrends—moves of high-income configuration. Tokyo is not only one of the most equal global cities
households to formerly low-income areas, and the subsequent push in terms of income, but it is also one of the least segregated global
of low-income households towards the urban peripheries—initially cities, with mixed housing options in different parts of the city. This
contribute to the segregation paradox. The professionalization of is related to government policy to promote urban renewal that has
the workforce leads to increasing shares of high-income workers; been applied in Tokyo by the central government since the 1980s,
these high-income workers have developed a preference for living aiming to facilitate economic growth40. Although actively deregu-
in central areas of cities, leading to more social mixing in centrally lating city planning, stimulating redevelopment through private
located urban neighbourhoods, and thus, as we see in our data, investments and liberalizing labour and housing markets are part
dropping levels of residential segregation. However, this mixing is of the state-led urban renewal policy in Tokyo, an implicit control
likely to be temporary, as with time, the extent of neighbourhood by the state has remained intact41,42. For example, through strict
change in some central city neighbourhoods becomes so marked labour market regulations and restrictions on immigration to fill
that it has been labelled ‘super-gentrification’27,28, referring to the low-income jobs.
continued influx of wealthy people into inner-city and waterfront Earlier studies have suggested that immigration is an important
areas14,29,30; the initial social mixing gives way to over-representation factor for understanding both occupational structure change and
of high-income occupational groups in the neighbourhoods residential segregation43. Under strong state control, Tokyo has
where they settle. Such processes of super-gentrification have led experienced the lowest level of immigration compared with the
to a situation where neighbourhoods perceived as more attractive other two cities. In high-immigration cities such as New York and
in the central parts of the city have also become unaffordable for London, social and ethnic inequalities increasingly tend to overlap,
middle-income households. providing a basis for what Andersson and Kährik44 call ‘eth-class’
NaTUre HUMaN BeHavioUr | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTure HumaN BeHavIOur
segregation. In London, this overlap is related to the ethnic struc- structures. Occupational structure change is not the only factor
ture of housing tenures; Hamnett and Butler45 showed that ethnic affecting levels of segregation. The regularities of how occupational
minorities in London are becoming increasingly concentrated in change takes place and shapes city-wide levels of residential segrega-
council and social housing, which leads to their residential concen- tion relate to contextual factors such as national and urban policies
tration in certain neighbourhoods. In many West European cities, towards issues such as immigration, labour market and housing.
growing immigration is an important driving force of increasing Despite relatively minor changes in levels of segregation, we found
residential segregation between occupational and income groups46. that the professionalization of the workforce coincides with large
In US cities, both immigration as well as historically formed and changes in the social geography of the three cities. In New York and
slowly changing ethnic and racial structures shape occupational London, and to a much lesser extent in Tokyo, two ongoing mega-
structures and segregation levels47. While between 1981 and 2011, trends are characterizing urban change: gentrification of inner-city
the share of foreign-born residents increased in New York and neighbourhoods and suburbanization of poverty. An increasing
London from 24% to 37% and 18% to 37%, respectively, the share of share of high-income workers has a profound and spatially polar-
residents with non-Japanese citizenship was only still 4% in Tokyo izing effect on the social geography of cities.
in 2010. Strict policies limit the immigration of low-skilled workers
to Japan48, whereas the inward flow of such workers is a major cause Methods
of residential segregation in European capital cities43. In the US Ideally, this study would use detailed income data for small neighbourhoods or
context, Maloutas and Fujita10 observe that the growth of social and census tracts, but census data for London, New York and Tokyo do not include
income. However, censuses do include occupational information, and this
spatial polarization is partly a result of a strong interplay between
information has been extensively used in comparative studies on socio-economic
social and racial inequalities. residential segregation9. Occupations in census data are classified using the
Despite important new insights provided by our analysis of resi- International Standard Classification of Occupations ISCO-88. In this classification,
dential segregation between income-based occupational groups, we occupational categories are broadly ordered on the basis of occupational status
note several limitations of our study. Ideally, the study would have and the complexity of tasks involved in the jobs. Typically, managers and
professionals are classified as the top occupational group; administrative, skilled,
been based on detailed income data for small neighbourhoods or
sales, non-manual technician and security occupations are classified as the middle
census tracts, but such data are not available for our three cities. occupational group; and service, manual and semi-skilled occupations are classified
We therefore had to use occupational data from the census. Because as the bottom occupational group. Although there is a strong correlation between
the incomes of occupations can change over time, and because the occupation and income, this relationship is not consistent. Generally, the higher
occupational categories (managers and professionals) have high incomes and the
incomes of occupations can differ between cities, we combined
lower occupational categories (low-skill service and manual jobs) have low incomes.
occupational data from the census with income data from surveys.
However, occupations in the middle categories show more income variation.
We have provided a detailed and transparent account of how we Moreover, the relationship between occupation and income is likely to differ between
linked occupational and income data, and how we classified occu- countries, and over time, occupations may have increased or decreased income
pations to the high-income, middle-income and low-income occu- relative to other occupations. Not taking into account such differences and changes
over time could be problematic, as we are interested in the spatial patterning of
pational groups (see Methods and Supplementary Methods). Since
occupational categories in cities, and it is income and not occupation that leads to
money buys choice, focusing on income helps to better understand
access to good neighbourhoods and good housing.
the changes in residential segregation compared with studies of resi- To overcome these problems and to gain a better comparative insight into
dential segregation based solely on occupation. However, the link- residential segregation in the three global cities studied by Sassen, we have
ing of income and occupational data has two limitations. First, the developed an income-based ranking of occupations. This approach, which adds
incomes to occupations, reflects that some occupations have higher or lower
census and the income surveys use relatively broad occupational
incomes than their ranking by occupational status would suggest. The approach
categories, which means that our strategy does not enable us to take
takes into account that, over time, the income of occupations can change because
into account the variation of income within occupational categories. an occupational category might move up or down in income relative to other
Second, our strategy leads to changing of some occupations between occupational categories.
middle-income and low-income groups, as the relative income hier-
Occupational data. Fine-grained occupational data for each city were obtained
archy of occupational groups may change over time. By compari-
from national population censuses (the US Census Bureau for New York; the Office
son, it is rare that occupations move into or out of the high-income for National Statistics for London; and the Statistics Bureau, Ministry of Internal
group and consequently the results for high-income occupations are Affairs and Communications for Tokyo). We collected data from publicly available
more consistent. Although our approach is not without problems, sources for each decennial census period from 1980 to 2010 for the United States,
we are confident that the trends we see in the data are robust. To with comparable information for the United Kingdom for the 1981 to 2011 period.
From 2010, data on occupation were not collected by the decennial long form of the
support this, we have provided analyses using occupational groups
US census and therefore occupational data from the American Community Survey
based on occupational data only (see Supplementary Fig. 3 and 5 yr estimates (2006–2010) were used. For Tokyo, the population census is conducted
Supplementary Methods). Comparing these with the analyses of every five years, and for reasons of comparability data were used from the 1980,
income-based occupational groups shows very similar patterns and 1990, 2000 and 2010 censuses, as these matched most closely with what was available
trends over time, although there are quantitative differences. for the United States and the United Kingdom. Although the census year differed
slightly between countries, we refer to our study period as 1980–2011 in this paper.
Finally, in her work on London, New York and Tokyo, Sassen1,2
From the census data, we have used spatially aggregated occupations following the
hypothesized that the polarization of occupational structures in International Standard Classification of Occupations (ISCO-88). For each census
global cities may lead to increasing levels of residential segregation year, the occupational categories were classified into high-income, middle-income
by income. First, in our study we found no evidence for the polar- and low-income occupational groups on the basis of their income levels (see ‘Income
data’ for more details). In doing so, we have excluded a small number of agricultural,
ization thesis; indeed, we found strong and consistent evidence for
forestry and fishery workers as well as unclassified workers, from the analysis.
professionalization of the occupational structure in all three cities.
There are several limitations to the census data that were used. Occupational
Between 1980 and 2010 in all three cities, the share of high-income classifications differ between the three cities and there are also some changes
occupations increased and the share of low-income occupations over time in the classifications. There was a major change in the occupational
decreased. Between 2000–2001 and 2010–2011, we found that in categories in the United States and Japan between 1990 and 2000, and between
2005 and 2010. In the United Kingdom, the categories changed every census year,
New York and London, the share of low-income occupations again
and for the 1981, UK census occupational status was not available, so the variable
increased; this hints at polarization, but further releases of the
‘socio-economic group’ was used. A detailed overview of occupational categories
decennial censuses are needed to confirm this. Second, we found for each city and year is available for reference in Supplementary Fig. 1.
that, generally speaking, professionalization coincides with decreas-
Income data. To combine occupational data with income data, we rely on survey
ing levels of residential segregation. Changes in levels of residen- data that links occupations to incomes for each city and year of analysis. We
tial segregation were more modest than changes in occupational have sourced the best possible data for this task, but the income data remained
NaTUre HUMaN BeHavioUr | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTure HumaN BeHavIOur Articles
incompletely comparable between cities and over time. The definition of income and low-income occupations is determined by a combination of income and
differs in different data sources (hourly, daily, weekly or annual income, and occupational status. This is most easily explained for the high-income occupations.
reported as occupational mean or median), and the income data were not always In all three cities and in all years, the managers and professionals have the highest
available for the same metropolitan boundaries as the census data. Supplementary incomes. As these are also the highest status occupations, we have assigned them
Table 1 presents more detail on the income data used. For New York City, we used consistently to the high-income occupations, which is in line with the approach
the median weekly earnings at the national level from the Current Population that uses only occupational status (see Supplementary Methods). If over time
Survey of, 1983 and 1989, which are derived from Mellor49, and Ilg and Haugen50, the number of jobs in the high-income occupations increases, this means that,
respectively. Additionally, we used the Occupational Employment Statistics to according to the ISCO classification, there are more jobs in this category, reflecting
obtain the mean hourly wage by occupation for New York State for the 2000–2010 a growth in the number of top jobs.
periods. For London, our income data are based on the New Earnings Survey Assigning occupations to either the middle-income or the low-income
(NES) and the Annual Survey of Hours and Earnings (ASHE). The nationwide groups was less straightforward, because the income range at the lower end of the
NES occupational tables cited by Routh51 provide average annual pay, as of 1979, distribution is more compressed52 and because the occupational categories used in
by occupation. The NES 1990 and the ASHE 2000–2010 provide median gross the income data are sometimes less detailed than what was available in the census
weekly pay for full-time employees. The NES 1979 and 1990 data are nationwide, (due to smaller sample sizes). A good example is New York in 1990, where the
and the later data is for the London region. Finally, for Tokyo, we obtained income income data is clearly less detailed than the occupational data (Supplementary
data from the Employment Status Survey (1982, 1992, 2002 and 2012) for Tokyo Fig. 1). In these cases, we have assigned occupations to either the middle-income
Prefecture via tailor-made aggregations from the Japanese Statistic Bureau. Using or the low-income groups on the basis of more detailed occupational categories
these datasets, we calculated the mean daily male wage for occupational categories from the previous or the next census. In deciding the cut-off between low- and
by dividing the total amount of annual income of employees by the total number of middle-income jobs, we tried to achieve a minimum possible switching of the
annual days worked. occupations between income groups, and we took into account occupational
status. For example, in Tokyo in 1980, the production process and related workers,
Defining neighbourhoods. Obtaining comparable geographies (that is, the and the service workers clearly earn the least, and these are also the least skilled
spatial units of aggregation) for the three cities and four time periods was also a manual jobs. We thus assigned them to the low-income group, which also reflects
challenging task. The aim was to obtain geographies that were both as consistent the occupational status of the jobs. It is clear from Supplementary Fig. 1 that
as possible over time within a city and comparable between cities. Census in distinguishing between low- and middle-income jobs, a strictly quantitative
tracts were used in New York, LSOAs in London and both Cho districts and approach is not suitable. Therefore, for each city and each year, we have carefully
500 m by 500 m grid cells in Tokyo. While the US census data provides almost considered assignments of occupations to the middle-income or low-income
consistent-through-time census tracts since 1980, the data for London and Tokyo categories on the basis of income levels, occupational status and consistency
were more challenging. For London, LSOAs are only available for the 2001 and over time within a city. Below we explain how we categorized occupations in
2011 censuses. For earlier censuses, smaller enumeration districts were available; middle-income and low-income groups for each city.
therefore, to solve this issue, we created consistent LSOAs for the whole period, From 1991, the UK census data adopted occupational classifications that were
with enumeration districts for 1981 and 1991 mapped on these consistent LSOAs comparable to those in the United States and Japan, but the 1981 classifications are
according to the overlapping areas. While this approach does not provide perfect substantively different. For the 1981 data, we adopted a cutting point for mid- and
correspondence between the enumeration district and LSOA boundaries (some low-income earners between ‘semi-skilled manual workers’ and ‘personal service
interpolation is required) it allows a consistent set of areas to be produced. It workers’. Although the income data did not allow us to derive separate income
should also be noted that the 1981 and 1991 data are based on a 10% sample of the measures for these two groups, we elected to categorize the ‘personal service
population. In Tokyo, there are two types of small-area data available, although workers’ as low-income on the basis of income data for other census years. Also,
the occupational data was not released at Cho district level for 1990. For the 500 m when using only occupational status information, personal service workers are
grid square units, direct comparison over time is difficult because the geographic often categorized as low-status, and semi-skilled workers as middle-status jobs
coordinate system changed in 2001. We therefore use Cho district data for 2000 (see also ref. 9). For 1991, the split is made between ‘plant and machine operatives”
and 2010 and grid data for 1980 and 1990. As with the UK data, this requires a and “sales occupations” to avoid switching. Although the income differences
compromise, but the trade-off is that we have a longer time series to gain insight between these two groups are not very large at the beginning of the study period,
into changing levels of socio-economic segregation. Throughout the paper we use the differences become more marked during the later censuses. In later census
the term ‘neighbourhood’ to characterize the smallest spatial units used. years, the sales occupations are among the lowest paid in the UK, and we thus
For the analyses, we have defined a city region for each of the three cities. We classified them as low-income in 1991. For 2001 and 2011, the split is between
defined New York City as including five boroughs, Manhattan, Brooklyn, Queens, ‘administrative and secretarial occupations’ and ‘personal service occupations’. This
the Bronx and Staten Island. London was defined to include the Greater London decision was based on the fact that administrative and secretarial occupations are
County consisting of 32 boroughs. Tokyo was defined on the basis of the ‘special ranked fourth in terms of occupational status according to the ISCO classification,
wards’ area, which is composed of 23 wards. Maps of each of the areas, including and they evidently pay much more than the personal service occupations. The
authority names, are presented in Supplementary Fig. 2. ‘administrative and secretarial occupations’ are an interesting group, as in the
earlier years they were among the lowest paid, whereas in more recent years they
Creating income-based occupational groups. We assigned occupational had more middle-income levels.
categories from the census data to high-income, middle-income and low-income For Tokyo, the split between middle and low-income occupations runs between
groups on the basis of income and occupational data from surveys carried out at ‘clerical worker’ and ‘production process and related workers’ in 1980, based on
roughly the same time as the census for each country. This approach results in both income and skill levels required. In 1990 and 2000, the split runs between
occupational groups that are more coherent in terms of income compared with ‘transport and communication workers’ and ‘production process and related
an approach that takes only occupational status into account. Previous studies9 workers’ for similar reasons. Although ‘transport and machine operation workers’
have assigned occupations to different occupational groups on the basis of only earn slightly less than ‘construction and mining workers’ in 2020, they are labelled
occupational status from the ISCO classifications. The cut-off points between the as middle-income as we follow the definition used in the previous period in order
different occupational status groups were based on the status and complexity of to be as consistent as possible.
the jobs. That this approach is problematic can be illustrated with the example Categorizing occupations by income was most challenging New York. This was
of ‘clerical and secretarial occupations’ in London in 1991. According to the partly due to the reordering of occupations between years based on their income
occupational status ranking, these occupations are the fourth in the ranking, levels, and partly because in 1991, incomes were only available for rather broad
and based on an occupations-only classification, these would be classified as occupational categories. In 1980, ‘machine operators, assemblers, and inspectors’
middle-status or middle-income occupations (see also ref. 9). However, when were categorized as low-income occupations, and ‘administrative support
taking income into account, one can see in Supplementary Fig. 1 that ‘clerical and occupations, including clerical’ were categorized as middle-income occupations,
secretarial occupations’ are actually the lowest paid of all occupational categories. even though their income levels were very similar. We decided to do so to avoid
Using our approach, we therefore classify these occupations as low-income switching and to maintain the consistency of classification with 1990, when
occupations. To assess to what extent the occupations-only approach (see administrative and clerical occupations had relatively high incomes. The cut-off
Supplementary Fig. 3) and our approach of combining income and occupational between middle-income and low-income and status occupations was made on the
data (see Fig. 1) lead to different outcomes, we compared the two approaches basis of the skill level and status of the occupational categories. Since the New York
in Supplementary Methods. On the basis of this assessment, we conclude that, income data for 1990 has very broad occupational categories, we decided to take
although there are important differences between the two approaches, qualitatively into account information from the previous and the next census years to decide
the patterns found are very similar both in terms of the sizes of the occupational how to categorize more detailed occupational categories. ‘Machine operators,
status groups and in terms of the measured levels of segregation. assemblers, and inspectors’ and ‘handlers, equipment cleaners, helpers and
To assign occupational status groups to the high-income, middle-income and labourers’ were categorized as low-income occupations. This was done despite the
low-income groups, we initially ranked occupations by income, as in our approach fact that the broad occupational group they fell into had a relatively high-income.
it is income that determines the order of occupations, and not occupational status Similarly, ‘protective service occupations’ were categorized as middle-income
(Supplementary Fig. 1). The cut-off point between high-income, middle-income occupations, despite the fact that their broad occupational category has relatively
NaTUre HUMaN BeHavioUr | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTure HumaN BeHavIOur
low incomes. In the previous and next census year, these occupations fall clearly references
into the middle-income group, justifying our choice. The classification was more 1. Sassen, S. The Global City (Wiley, 1991).
straightforward for 2000 and 2010, and the cut-off point between middle-income 2. Sassen, S. The Global City: New York, London, Tokyo 2nd edn
and low-income occupations runs between ‘transportation and material moving (Princeton Univ. Press, 2001).
occupations’ and ‘production occupations’. 3. Hamnett, C. Social polarisation in global cities: theory and evidence.
From this detailed account, it is clear that although our approach better reflects Urban Stud. 31, 401–424 (1994).
the incomes of different occupational categories, it also has its limitations. These 4. Hamnett, C. Socio-economic change in London: professionalization not
are discussed in more detail in the ‘Discussion’. polarization. Built Environ. 20, 192–203 (1994).
5. Butler, T., Hamnett, C. & Ramsden, M. Inward and upward: marking out
Analytical approach. The empirical analysis in this paper is divided in three parts. social class change in London, 1981—2001. Urban Stud. 45, 67–88 (2008).
First, we investigate changes in the occupational structure on the basis of the three 6. Davidson, M. & Wyly, E. Same but different: within London’s ‘static’ class
broad high-income, middle-income and low-income occupational groups. Second, structure and the missing antagonism. City 19, 247–257 (2015).
to examine residential segregation between income-based occupational groups, 7. Manley, D. & Johnston, R. London: a dividing city, 2001–11? City 18,
two classic segregation measures are calculated: the ID53 and the MDI54. The 633–643 (2014).
ID value ranges from 0 to 1, and indicates the share of the high- or low-income 8. Hill, R. C. & Kim, J. W. Global cities and developmental states: New York,
occupational group members who need to change their neighbourhood of Tokyo and Seoul. Urban Stud. 37, 2167–2195 (2000).
residence in order to the achieve a similar distribution of both groups across 9. Tammaru, T., Marcińczak, S., van Ham, M. & Musterd, S. Socio-Economic
neighbourhoods within a city. The MDI value characterizes the spatial distribution Segregation in European Capital Cities: East Meets West (Routledge, 2016).
of more than two groups: in our case, high-income, middle-income and 10. Maloutas, T. & Fujita, K (eds) Residential Segregation in Comparative
low-income occupational groups. Its value also ranges from 0 to 1, with a higher Perspective: Making Sense of Contextual Diversity (Ashgate, 2012).
value representing greater levels of residential segregation. 11. Musterd, S. & Ostendorf, W. The changing distribution of incomes in Dutch
The third part of our analysis focusses on better understanding the changing cities: myth and reality. GeoJournal 46, 29–38 (1998).
social geography of the three cities. We map the residential concentration of the 12. Marcińczak, S. et al. Patterns of socioeconomic segregation in the capital
high-income and low-income occupational groups. All neighbourhoods in a cities of fast-track reforming postsocialist countries. Ann. Assoc. Am.
city are classified into four categories, Q1–Q4, which comprise the quartiles of Geographers 105, 183–202 (2015).
the distribution of the absolute number of the group’s members, which are then 13. Hulchanski, J. D. The Three Cities Within Toronto: Income Polarization Among
mapped16. For example, to examine the residential concentration of the high-income Toronto’s Neighbourhoods, 1970-2005 (Univ. of Toronto, 2010).
occupations, all neighbourhoods are ranked in order on the basis of the absolute 14. Atkinson, R. Limited exposure: Social concealment, mobility and engagement
number of people from this group living in each neighbourhood. All neighbourhoods with public space by the super-rich in London. Environ. Plan. A 48,
in which up to the first quarter of people in the high-income category live are labelled 1302–1307 (2016).
Q1. Similarly, the neighbourhoods in which the second, third and fourth quarters of 15. Atkinson, R. & Ho, H.-K. in Research Handbook on Urban Segregation
people in the high-income occupations live are labelled Q2, Q3 and Q4, respectively. (ed. S. Musterd) (Edward Elgar, 2019).
The fewer neighbourhoods there are in the Q1 category, the more concentrated this 16. Johnston, R., Jones, K., Manley, D. & Owen, D. Macro-scale stability with
group is in that particular city. The same method is used to investigate the residential micro-scale diversity: modelling changing ethnic minority residential
concentration of the low-income occupational group. segregation—London 2001–2011. Trans. Inst. Br. Geographers 41,
389–402 (2016).
Reporting Summary. Further information on research design is available in the 17. Cunningham, N. & Savage, M. An intensifying and elite city: new
Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article. geographies of social class and inequality in contemporary London. City 21,
25–46 (2017).
Data availability 18. Hamnett, C. Spatially displaced demand and the changing geography of
The main data used in our study are national census data for the United States, Japan house prices in London, 1995–2006. Hous. Stud. 24, 301–320 (2009).
and the United Kingdom. The data for each country are publicly available and owned 19. Leal, J. & Sorando, D. in Socio-Economic Segregation in European
by the respective governments (the US Census Bureau for New York; the Office for Capital Cities: East Meets West (eds Tammaru, T. et al.) 214–237
National Statistics for London; and the Statistics Bureau, Ministry of Internal Affairs (Routledge, 2016).
and Communications for Tokyo). All data can be obtained from the original source. 20. Maloutas, T. in Socio-Economic Segregation in European Capital Cities: East
Detailed information for each city is listed below. Tokyo: we used national census Meets West (eds Tammaru, T. et al.) 156–185 (Routledge, 2016).
data for Tokyo for 1980, 1990, 2000 and 2010. The 1980 and 1990 data are available 21. Hirayama, Y. in Cities and the Super-Rich: Real Estate, Elite Practices and
from Statistical Information Institute for Consulting and Analysis (http://www. Urban Political Economies (eds Forrest, R. et al.) (Palgrave Macmillan, 2016).
sinfonica.or.jp/datalist/index.html) for a fee. The 2000 and 2010 data are available 22. Kogan, I. New immigrants—old disadvantage patterns? Labour
through the e-Stat website of Statistics Bureau of Japan (https://www.e-stat.go.jp/ market integration of recent immigrants into Germany. Int. Migr. 49,
gis/statmap-search?page=1&type=1&toukeiCode=00200521). London: we used 91–117 (2010).
national census data for London for 1981, 1991, 2001 and 2011. The data for the first 23. Ruiz, I. & Vargas-Silva, C. Differences in labour market outcomes between
three of these years are available from the Casweb website (UK Data Service) of the natives, refugees and other migrants in the UK. J. Econ. Geogr. 18, 855–885
Economic and Social Research Council (http://casweb.ukdataservice.ac.uk/). Data (2018).
for 2011 are available through the Nomis website by the Office of National Statistics 24. Fullin, G. & Reyneri, E. (eds) Immigrants in West European labour markets:
(https://www.nomisweb.co.uk/) or from http://infuse.ukdataservice.ac.uk/. New a dynamic approach. Int. J. Compar. Sociol. 52, 247–263 (2011).
York: we used national census data for New York for 1980, 1990, 2000 and 2010. The 25. Doeringer, P. & Piore, M. Internal Labor Markets and Manpower Analysis
1980 and 1990 data are available through Social Explorer (https://www.socialexplorer. (Lexington, 1972).
com/). The 2000 and 2010 data are available on the American FactFinder website of 26. Hochstenbach, C. & Musterd, S. Gentrification and the suburbanization of
the US Census Bureau (https://www.census.gov/data/data-tools/american-factfinder. poverty: changing urban geographies through boom and bust periods. Urban
html). In addition to the census data, we have used nationally representative survey Geogr. 39, 26–53 (2018).
data which include information on income levels for occupations for each of the three 27. Lees, L. Super-gentrification: the case of Brooklyn Heights, New York City.
countries and for multiple periods. These data are publicly available. For New York Urban Stud. 40, 2487–2492 (2003).
City, we used data at the national level from the Current Population Survey 1983 and 28. Butler, T. & Lees, L. Super-gentrification in Barnsbury, London globalization
1989, which are derived from Mellor49, and Ilg and Haugen50, respectively. In addition, and gentrifying global elites at the neighbourhood level. Trans. Inst. Br. Geogr.
we used the Occupational Employment Statistics to obtain mean hourly wage by 31, 467–487 (2006).
occupation for New York State for the 2000–2010 period. For 1983, ref. 49; 1989, ref. 50; 29. Beaverstock, J. V., Hubbard, P. & Short, J. R. Getting away with it? Exposing
2000 and 2010, https://www.bls.gov/oes/tables.htm. For London we used data from the geographies of the super-rich. Geoforum 35, 401–407 (2004).
the NES and ASHE. The nationwide NES occupational tables cited from Routh51 30. Petsimeris, P. & Rimoldi, S. in Socio-Economic Segregation in European
provide average annual pay as of 1979 by occupation. The NES (1990) and the ASHE Capital Cities: East Meets West (eds Tammaru, T. et al.) 186–213 (Routledge,
(2000–2010) provide median gross weekly pay for full-time employees. For 1979, 2016).
ref. 51; 1990, 2000 and 2010, https://www.ons.gov.uk/employmentandlabourmarket/ 31. Tammaru, T., Aunap, R., Marcińczak, S., van Ham, M. & Janssen, H.
peopleinwork/earningsandworkinghours/datalist. Finally, for Tokyo, we used the Relationship between income inequality and residential segregation between
Employment Status Survey (1982, 1992, 2002 and 2012) which was obtained by socioeconomic groups. Reg. Stud. 54, 450–461 (2020).
requesting tailor-made aggregations from the Statistic Bureau. 32. Guttentag, D., Smith, S., Potwarka, L. & Havitz, M. Why tourists choose
Airbnb: a motivation-based segmentation study. J. Travel Res. 57,
Received: 13 May 2018; Accepted: 13 July 2020; 342–359 (2018).
33. Van Kempen, R. & Murie, A. The new divided city: changing patterns in
Published: xx xx xxxx
European cities. Tijdschr. Econ. Soc. Geogr. 100, 377–398 (2009).
NaTUre HUMaN BeHavioUr | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTure HumaN BeHavIOur Articles
34. Fujita, K. & Hill, R. C. in Residential Segregation in Comparative 53. Duncan, O. & Duncan, B. Residential distribution and occupational
Perspective: Making Sense of Contextual Diversity (eds Maloutas, T. & Fujita, stratification. Am. J. Sociol. 60, 493–503 (1955).
K.) 54–86 (Ashgate, 2012). 54. Reardon, S. & Firebaugh, G. Measures of multi-group segregation. Sociol.
35. Nieuwenhuis, J., Tammaru, T., van Ham, M., Hedman, L. & Manley, D. Does Methodol. 32, 33–67 (2002).
segregation reduce socio-spatial mobility? Evidence from four European 55. Manson, S., Schroeder, J., Van Riper, D. & Ruggles, S. IPUMS National
countries with different inequality and segregation contexts. Urban Stud. 57, Historical Geographic Information System Version 14.0 (IPUMS, 2019); https://
176–197 (2020). ipums.org/projects/ipums-nhgis/d050.v14.0
36. Esping-Andersen, G. The Three Worlds of Welfare Capitalism (Princeton Univ. 56. University of Edinburgh, Census Support. Census Support Digitised Boundary
Press, 1990). Data, 1840– and Postcode Directories, 1980– (UK Data Service, 2008); https://
37. United Nations Human Settlements Programme. State of the World’s Cities doi.org/10.5255/UKDA-SN-5819-1
2008/2009—Harmonious Cities (Earthscan, 2008).
38. Adomaitis, K. The world’s largest cities are the most unequal. Euromonitor
acknowledgements
International https://blog.euromonitor.com/the-worlds-largest-cities-are-the-
most-unequal/ (2013). The research leading to these results has received funding from the European Research
39. CivicDashboards. Gini Index for New York, NY http://www.civicdashboards. Council under the European Union’s Seventh Framework Program (FP/2007-2013),
com/compare (OpenGov, 2015). European Research Council Grant Agreement no. 615159 (European Research
40. Hiramoto, S., Katayama, S., Cho, K. & Matsutani, S. Tokyo’s large-scale urban Council Consolidator Grant DEPRIVEDHOODS, Socio-spatial inequality, deprived
redevelopment projects and their processes. 43rd ISOCARP Congress http:// neighbourhoods, and neighbourhood effects), from the Japan Society for the Promotion
www.isocarp.net/Data/case_studies/1040.pdf (2007). of Science KAKENHI Grant Number JP17K13584, from the Estonian Research Council
41. Tsukamoto, T. Neoliberalization of the developmental state: Tokyo’s (PUT PRG306, Infotechnological Mobility Laboratory, RITA-Ränne), and from TU Delft
bottom‐up politics and state rescaling in Japan. Int. J. Urban Reg. Res. 36, (visiting professorship of T.T.). The funders had no role in study design, data collection
71–89 (2012). and analysis, decision to publish or preparation of the manuscript.
42. Waley, P. Pencilling Tokyo into the map of neoliberal urbanism. Cities 32,
43–50 (2013). author contributions
43. Marcińczak, S., Musterd, S., van Ham, M. & Tammaru, T. in Socio-Economic M.v.H., M.U., T.T., D.M. and H.J. contributed equally to the conception of the work, the
Segregation in European Capital Cities: East Meets West (eds Tammaru, T. interpretation of the data and the drafting of the work. M.v.H. and T.T. designed the study
et al.) 358–382 (Routledge, 2016). and wrote its conceptual and discussion sections. M.U. was responsible for handing the data,
44. Andersson, R. & Kährik, A. in Socio-Economic Segregation in European executing the analysis and making the figures. M.v.H., as the corresponding author, was
Capital Cities: East Meets West (eds Tammaru, T. et al.) 110–131 responsible for the revisions of the manuscript with the help of all other authors.
(Routledge, 2016).
45. Hamnett, C. & Butler, T. The changing ethnic structure of housing tenures in Competing interests
London, 1991—2001. Urban Stud. 47, 55–74 (2010).
The authors declare no competing interests.
46. Musterd, S., Marcińczak, S., van Ham, M. & Tammaru, T. Socioeconomic
segregation in European capital cities. Increasing separation between poor
and rich. Urban Geogr. 38, 1062–1083 (2017). additional information
47. Iceland, J. Race and Ethnicity in America (Univ. of California, 2017).
Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/
48. Machimura, T. Symbolic use of globalization in urban politics in Tokyo. Int. J.
s41562-020-0927-5.
Urban Reg. Res. 22, 183–194 (1998).
49. Mellor, E. F. Weekly earnings in 1983: a look at more than 200 occupations. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to M.v.H.
Monthly Lab. Rev. 108, 54–59 (1985). Peer review information Primary Handling Editors: Aisha Bradshaw; Mary Elizabeth
50. Ilg, R. E. & Haugen, S. E. Earnings and Employment Trends in the 1990s. Sutherland.
Monthly Lab. Rev. 123, 21–33 (2000).
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
51. Routh, G. Occupation and Pay in Great Britain 1906–79 (Palgrave Macmillan,
1980). Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
52. Reardon, S. & Bischoff, K. Income inequality and income segregation. published maps and institutional affiliations.
Am. J. Sociol. 116, 1092–1153 (2011). © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2020
NaTUre HUMaN BeHavioUr | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
1
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Corresponding author(s): Maarten van Ham
Last updated by author(s): Jun 16, 2020
Reporting Summary
Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency
in reporting. For further information on Nature Research policies, see Authors & Referees and the Editorial Policy Checklist.
Statistics
For all statistical analyses, confirm that the following items are present in the figure legend, table legend, main text, or Methods section.
n/a Confirmed
The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
A statement on whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided
Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.
A description of all covariates tested
A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
A full description of the statistical parameters including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient)
AND variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)
For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted
Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.
For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated
Our web collection on statistics for biologists contains articles on many of the points above.
Software and code
Policy information about availability of computer code
Data collection No software was used
Data analysis We have used the Geo-Segregation Analyzer software: an open-source software for calculating residential segregation indices. http://
geoseganalyzer.ucs.inrs.ca/
For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors/reviewers.
We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Research guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.
Data
Policy information about availability of data
All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable:
- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets
- A list of figures that have associated raw data
- A description of any restrictions on data availability
The main data used in our study is national census data for the US, Japan and the UK. The data for each country is publicly available and owned by each respective
government (the US Census Bureau for New York; the Office for National Statistics for London; and the Statistics Bureau, Ministry of Internal Affairs and
Communications for Tokyo). All data can be obtained at the original source, below find detailed information for each city.
Japan: We used national census data for Tokyo for the years 1980, 1990, 2000 and 2010. The 1980 and 1990 data is available from Sinfonica (Statistical Information
Institute for Consulting and Analysis for which you need to pay a fee): http://www.sinfonica.or.jp/datalist/index.html. The 2000 and 2010 data is available through
the e-Stat website by Statistics Bureau of Japan: https://www.e-stat.go.jp/gis/statmap-search?page=1&type=1&toukeiCode=00200521.
UK: We used national census data for London for the years 1981, 1991, 2001, and 2011. The data for the 3 first years is available from the Casweb website (UK Data
2
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Service) by Economic and Social Research Council: http://casweb.ukdataservice.ac.uk/. Data for 2011 is available through the Nomis website by the Office of
National Statistics https://www.nomisweb.co.uk/ or from http://infuse.ukdataservice.ac.uk/.
US: We used national census data for New York for the years 1980, 1990, 2000 and 2010. The 1980 and 1990 data is available through the Social Explorer website
by Social Explorer Inc: https://www.socialexplorer.com/. The 2000 and 2010 data is available on the American FactFinder website by the US Census Bureau: https://
www.census.gov/data/data-tools/american-factfinder.html.
In addition to the census data, we have used nationally representative survey data which includes information on income levels for occupations for each of the
three countries and for multiple periods. This data is publicly available.
For New York City, we used data at the national level from the Current Population Survey 1983 and 1989, which are derived from Mellor (1985) and Ilg & Haugen
(2000), respectively. Additionally, we used the Occupational Employment Statistics to obtain mean hourly wage by occupation for New York State for the 2000-2010
the periods.
1983: Mellor, E.F. (1985) Weekly earnings in 1983: a look at more than 200 occupations. Monthly Labor Review, January 1985, 54-59. https://www.bls.gov/opub/
mlr/1985/01/rpt1full.pdf
1989: Ilg, R.E. and S.E. Haugen (2000) Earnings and Employment Trends in the 1990s. Monthly Labor Review, March 2000, 21–33. https://www.bls.gov/opub/
mlr/2000/03/art2full.pdf
2000: https://www.bls.gov/oes/tables.htm
2010: https://www.bls.gov/oes/tables.htm
For London we used data from the New Earnings Survey (NES) and the Annual Survey of Hours and Earnings (ASHE). The nationwide NES occupational tables cited
from Routh (1980) provides average annual pay as of 1979 by occupation. The NES 1990 and the ASHE 2000-2010 provide median gross weekly pay for full-time
employees.
1979: 1Routh, G. (1980) Occupation and Pay in Great Britain 1906-79 (second edition). London: Macmillan.
1990: https://www.ons.gov.uk/employmentandlabourmarket/peopleinwork/earningsandworkinghours/datalist
2000: https://www.ons.gov.uk/employmentandlabourmarket/peopleinwork/earningsandworkinghours/datalist
2010: https://www.ons.gov.uk/employmentandlabourmarket/peopleinwork/earningsandworkinghours/datalist
Finally, for Tokyo, we used the Employment Status Survey (1982, 1992, 2002, 2012) which was obtained by requesting tailor-made aggregations from the Statistic
Bureau.
Field-specific reporting
Please select the one below that is the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.
Life sciences Behavioural & social sciences Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences
For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/documents/nr-reporting-summary-flat.pdf
Behavioural & social sciences study design
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
Study description This study uses quantitative methods and census data for the US, Japan and the UK. This is publicly available data. See also our data
statement above.
Research sample The study does not use a sample of data. All data is based on the full census populations of the US, Japan and the UK, aggregated to small
geographical areas.
Sampling strategy The study does not use a sample, but data based on the full population.
Data collection This study uses census data, collected by the census bureaus of the US, Japan and the UK.
Timing The census data used was collected between 1980 and 2010 for the US and japan, and between 1981 and 2011 for the UK.
Data exclusions There were no data exclusions.
Non-participation All people that have participated in the census of the countries involved are in the dataset as provided by the national census bureaus.
Randomization This study did not use experimental data.
Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods
We require information from authors about some types of materials, experimental systems and methods used in many studies. Here, indicate whether each material,
system or method listed is relevant to your study. If you are not sure if a list item applies to your research, read the appropriate section before selecting a response.
3
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Materials & experimental systems Methods
n/a Involved in the study n/a Involved in the study
Antibodies ChIP-seq
Eukaryotic cell lines Flow cytometry
Palaeontology MRI-based neuroimaging
Animals and other organisms
Human research participants
Clinical data