Articles
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-020-0880-3
Objective and subjective experiences of child
maltreatment and their relationships with
psychopathology
Andrea Danese 1,2,3 ✉ and Cathy Spatz Widom 4,5 ✉
Does psychopathology develop as a function of the objective or subjective experience of childhood maltreatment? To address
this question, we studied a unique cohort of 1,196 children with both objective, court-documented evidence of maltreatment
and subjective reports of their childhood maltreatment histories made once they reached adulthood, along with extensive
psychiatric assessment. We found that, even for severe cases of childhood maltreatment identified through court records, risk
of psychopathology linked to objective measures was minimal in the absence of subjective reports. In contrast, risk of psy-
chopathology linked to subjective reports of childhood maltreatment was high, whether or not the reports were consistent
with objective measures. These findings have important implications for how we study the mechanisms through which child
maltreatment affects mental health and how we prevent or treat maltreatment-related psychopathology. Interventions for psy-
chopathology associated with childhood maltreatment can benefit from deeper understanding of the subjective experience.
C
hildhood maltreatment is an established risk factor for psy- studies have collected prospective measures of childhood maltreat-
chopathology. Despite the century-old debate on the origins ment through reports by parents, teachers, research workers or,
of this risk1,2, it is still unclear if psychopathology emerges as more rarely, self-reports by the children4. While these prospective
a function of an individual’s objective or subjective experience of measures importantly provide near-contemporaneous accounts,
childhood maltreatment3,4. This basic phenomenological question they still often rely on reports by single sources with partial and/or
has recently re-emerged because of meta-analytical evidence that biased understanding of the child’s actual experience. The stron-
prospective measures used to capture objective experience of child- gest evidence that actual maltreatment took place is the legal stan-
hood maltreatment and retrospective measures used to capture dard, a case substantiated (adjudicated) by the court after a judge
subjective experience of childhood maltreatment identify largely makes a decision based on evidence provided by child protection
distinct groups of individuals4. It is, therefore, important to charac- services, law enforcement officers, witnesses and experts5. While
terize the relative contribution of objective and subjective measures objective measures, such as court records, are not very sensitive—
to the risk for psychopathology to inform research and clinical they are likely to miss cases of childhood maltreatment in the
practice. The question is central to the selection of the most appro- population—they are highly specific in that they identify cases of
priate samples for studies investigating the mechanisms through actual childhood maltreatment with high a degree of confidence.
which maltreatment affects mental health: should aetiological stud- As such, they are the basis for legal actions to protect children
ies focus on individuals who were identified as being maltreated in and prosecute perpetrators. However, it has been very challeng-
childhood and were followed-up over their life-course; or should ing to integrate official court records into research studies for
the studies focus on young people and adults who provide their several reasons: because of concerns and barriers related to con-
own personal account of childhood maltreatment experiences? It fidentiality; because the prevalence of court-substantiated cases is
is also central to the development of more effective interventions comparatively low and it is often impossible to identify enough
for child maltreatment-related psychopathology: should treatment cases within general population samples to enable adequate sta-
aim to remediate damages/abnormalities caused by childhood tistical testing; because court-substantiated cases are not ran-
exposure to experiences of abuse or neglect; or should treatment domly distributed in the population but rather cluster in socially
aim to correct unhelpful cognitions/memories about the self and and racially disadvantaged groups and, thus, it is often difficult to
the environment? find suitable control groups in general population samples; and
Research in this area has been hampered by the shortage of because court-substantiated cases need to be followed-up pro-
human cohorts with both objective and subjective measures of spectively over their life-course to study the consequences of their
child maltreatment along with comprehensive assessment of psy- childhood experiences.
chopathology. It is relatively simple to collect subjective measures We have studied one such unique sample6,7. Maltreated partici-
of maltreatment, for example, by asking research participants to pants (n = 908) were identified as victims of child abuse or neglect
self-report their childhood experiences through interviews or based on official records from juvenile (family) and adult criminal
questionnaires. In contrast, it has proved very challenging to col- courts in a metropolitan area in the Midwest United States dur-
lect objective measures of maltreatment in research studies. A few ing 1967–1971. A comparison group was painstakingly drawn of
1Social, Genetic and Developmental Psychiatry Centre, King’s College London, London, UK. 2Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Institute of
Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, King’s College London, London, UK. 3National and Specialist CAMHS Clinic for Trauma, Anxiety, and Depression,
South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK. 4Psychology Department, John Jay College, City University of New York, New York, NY,
USA. 5Graduate Center, City University of New York, New York, NY, USA. ✉e-mail: andrea.danese@kcl.ac.uk; cwidom@jjay.cuny.edu
NAture HumAN BeHAviOur | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTure HumaN BeHavIour
children without official records of abuse or neglect matched on the Associations of objective and subjective measures of child mal-
basis of age, sex, race/ethnicity and approximate family social class treatment with internalizing and externalizing disorders and with
at the time of the child maltreatment (n = 667). During a follow-up individual diagnoses. Because the commonly described structure
assessment between 1989 and 1995 (mean age 28.7 years), 1,196 of psychopathology identifies underlying constructs of internalizing
study participants underwent a 2-h in-person interview, which and externalizing disorders8 and the two constructs may show differ-
included assessment of retrospective reports of childhood physical ential associations with risk factors, we next tested whether the above
abuse, sexual abuse and neglect, as well as assessment of current and pattern of association was sensitive to the psychopathology construct
lifetime psychopathology. used. Consistent with the above findings, participants with only
To characterize the relative contribution of objective and subjec- the objective measure of childhood maltreatment (official record)
tive experience of childhood maltreatment to the risk of psychopa- did not have different risk of internalizing disorders compared to
thology, we capitalized on this sample to test two competing a-priori those with neither objective nor subjective measure (RR = 0.87, 95%
hypotheses. First, if psychopathology emerges because of objective CI = 0.62–1.22; Fig. 1a, column 3 and Supplementary Table 2), while
experience, then risk should be heightened in participants with offi- participants with objective and subjective measures (RR = 2.08, 95%
cial records of child maltreatment, regardless of whether they also CI = 1.67–2.60) and those with subjective measures only (RR = 1.73,
retrospectively report it. Second, and alternatively, if psychopathol- 95% CI = 1.35–2.21) had significantly elevated risk. Similarly, par-
ogy emerges because of subjective experience, then risk should be ticipants with only the objective measure of childhood maltreatment
heightened in participants who retrospectively report a history of did not have different risk of externalizing disorders compared to
childhood maltreatment, regardless of whether they were also iden- those with neither objective nor subjective measure (RR = 0.96, 95%
tified through official records. CI = 0.79–1.16; Fig. 1a, column 4 and Supplementary Table 2), while
participants with objective and subjective measures (RR = 1.32, 95%
results CI = 1.16–1.51) and those with subjective measures only (RR = 1.27,
Agreement between objective and subjective measures of child 95% CI = 1.10–1.48) had significantly elevated risk.
maltreatment. Objective and subjective measures of child mal- We next examined the sensitivity of findings across individual
treatment identified largely distinct groups of participants (Cohen’s diagnoses. Different individual lifetime diagnoses showed inconsis-
κ = 0.25) with poor agreement across all maltreatment types (child tent bivariate associations with objective and subjective measures
physical abuse κ = 0.09; child sexual abuse κ = 0.17; child neglect of childhood maltreatment (Supplementary Table 3). However,
κ = 0.32; Fig. 1, column 1 and Supplementary Table 1), consistent we found that the pattern of findings described above was broadly
with meta-analytical findings4. Because objective and subjective invariant across diagnoses (Fig. 2 and Supplementary Table 2).
measures identified largely distinct groups of participants, it was
possible to separate the relative contribution of objective and sub- Associations of objective and subjective measures of child mal-
jective measures of child maltreatment to psychopathology study- treatment with psychopathology across different maltreatment
ing three target groups: (1) adult participants who were identified types. Because the agreement between objective and subjective
as victims of child maltreatment by virtue of official records but measures was inconsistent across different types of child maltreat-
did not retrospectively recall the experience (objective measure); ment (child physical abuse, child sexual abuse and child neglect;
(2) adult participants who were identified as victims of child mal- Supplementary Table 1) and because different types of child maltreat-
treatment by virtue of official records and also retrospectively ment showed inconsistent bivariate associations with psychopathol-
recalled the experience (objective and subjective measures); and ogy (Supplementary Table 4), we tested whether the associations of
(3) adult participants who retrospectively recalled being maltreated objective and subjective measures of child maltreatment with psy-
in childhood but were not identified as victims of child maltreat- chopathology varied as a function of maltreatment type. We found
ment by virtue of official records (subjective measure). that the pattern of associations described above was broadly invariant
across maltreatment types (Fig. 1b–d and Supplementary Table 5).
Associations of objective and subjective measures of child mal- Of note, these analyses were based on comparisons between partici-
treatment with psychopathology. We first tested whether, com- pants with a specific maltreatment type (for example, child physical
pared to those with neither objective nor subjective measure of abuse) and participants without such maltreatment type (for exam-
childhood maltreatment, participants in the three groups were at ple, no childhood physical abuse). However, participants without a
elevated risk of developing any psychopathology during their life- specific maltreatment type might have had other maltreatment types
time. Participants were classified as having developed any psycho- (for example, childhood sexual abuse or neglect) and, thus, might
pathology if they met lifetime criteria for a broad set of psychiatric have been an inadequate control group, possibly masking the contri-
disorders (depression, dysthymia, generalized anxiety disorder, bution of objective measures of child maltreatment to psychopathol-
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), antisocial personality disor- ogy. Therefore, we restricted our analyses to include only participants
der, alcohol abuse and/or dependence, or drug abuse and/or depen- without any maltreatment type as the control group. We found that
dence). We found that participants identified as victims of child the pattern of findings described above similarly applied here, too,
maltreatment only by virtue of official records did not have differ- although the small sample size of some study groups hindered firm
ent risk of any lifetime psychopathology compared to those with conclusions (Supplementary Fig. 1 and Supplementary Table 6).
neither objective nor subjective measure of childhood maltreatment
(objective measure: risk ratio, RR = 0.92, 95% confidence interval, Associations of objective and subjective measures of child mal-
CI = 0.78–1.08; Fig. 1a, column 2 and Supplementary Table 2). In treatment with psychopathology across genders and races.
contrast, participants with both objective and subjective measures Because the prevalence of both child maltreatment measures and
of child maltreatment showed greater risk of any lifetime psycho- psychopathology varied based on gender and race (Supplementary
pathology compared to those with neither measure (objective and Tables 7–9), we tested whether the associations between childhood
subjective measures: RR = 1.35, 95% CI = 1.21–1.50; Fig. 1a, column maltreatment measures and psychopathology also varied according
2 and Supplementary Table 2). Finally, participants identified as to these characteristics. We found that the above pattern of associa-
victims of child maltreatment only through retrospective recall also tions similarly applied to men and women (Supplementary Fig. 2
showed elevated risk of any lifetime psychopathology compared to and Supplementary Table 10). Furthermore, the above pattern of
those with neither measure (subjective measure: RR = 1.29, 95% associations similarly applied to participants of black and white
CI = 1.15–1.45; Fig. 1a, column 2 and Supplementary Table 2). races (Supplementary Fig. 3 and Supplementary Table 10).
NAture HumAN BeHAviOur | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTure HumaN BeHavIour Articles
Child maltreatment
O S Any psychopathology Internalizing disorder Externalizing disorder
1.00
0.75
173 492 252 0.50
262
Child physical abuse
Child sexual abuse
Child neglect
Recall bias test. Finally, because current psychopathology at the in childhood (both the ‘objective and subjective’ measure and the
time of recall of childhood maltreatment may negatively bias auto- ‘subjective’ measure) could have been artificially inflated. To test
biographical memory9,10, the elevated risk of lifetime psychopathol- this artifactual explanation for our findings, we restricted our analy-
ogy in participants who retrospectively recalled being maltreated ses to participants without current psychopathology at the time of
ecnelaverP
* *
* *
*
*
0.25
0
None O O + S S None O O + S S None O O + S S
1.00 * *
* *
*
0.75
*
0.50
None O O + S S None O O + S S None O O + S S
*
*
*
None O O + S S None O O + S S None O O + S S
* *
* *
* *
None O O + S S None O O + S S None O O + S S
ecnelaverP
0.25
0
1.00
0.75
0.50
ecnelaverP
0.25
0
1.00
0.75
0.50
ecnelaverP
a
1.00 1.00
0.75 0.75
0.50 0.50
0.25 0.25
0 0.00
b
O S 1.00 1.00
0.75 0.75
0.50 0.50
25 82 527
0.25 0.25
0 0
555
c 1.00 1.00
O S
0.75 0.75
0.50 0.50
42 52 241
0.25 0.25
0 0
839
d
1.00 1.00
O S
0.75 0.75
0.50 0.50
264 262 122
0.25 0.25 0.25
0 0 0
524
Fig. 1 | Prevalence of psychopathology in participants with objective and/or subjective measures of child maltreatment. a–d, Prevalence of
psychopathology with any type of child maltreatment (physical abuse, sexual abuse or neglect) (a); child physical abuse (b); child sexual abuse (c); and
child neglect (d). The first column displays the Venn diagrams for the overlap between groups identified by virtue of objective (O) and/or subjective
(S) measures (in green and/or yellow, respectively); the second column refers to any psychopathology (grey shades); the third column refers to any
internalizing disorder (depression, dysthymia, generalized anxiety or PTSD; blue shades); the fourth column refers to any externalizing disorder (antisocial
personality, alcohol abuse and/or dependence, or drug abuse and/or dependence; red shades). See Supplementary Tables 2 and 5 for details of the
analyses. Error bars, 95% CI; asterisks indicate that the corresponding prevalence estimate differs from the prevalence in the ‘none’ group at P < 0.05.
NAture HumAN BeHAviOur | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTure HumaN BeHavIour
1.00
0.75
0.50
recall. We found that the prevalence of any lifetime psychopathol- objective measure of maltreatment might have been misclassified
ogy, internalizing disorder and externalizing disorder was overall as having neither objective nor subjective measure; similarly, par-
lower in this subsample but the pattern of findings described above ticipants who should have been classified as having both objective
similarly applied here (Fig. 3 and Supplementary Table 11). and subjective measures of maltreatment might have been misclas-
sified as having only the subjective measure. However, there were
Discussion no clear differences in the prevalence of psychopathology between
The risk of psychopathology linked to objective experiences of participants with only the objective measure of maltreatment and
childhood maltreatment, even for severe cases of maltreatment those with neither objective nor subjective measure; and there
identified through official court records, is minimal in the absence were no clear differences in the prevalence of psychopathology
of a subjective appraisal. In contrast, the risk of psychopathology between participants with objective and subjective measures of mal-
linked to subjective experiences of childhood maltreatment is high, treatment and those with only the subjective measure (Fig. 1 and
whether or not subjective appraisal is consistent with objective mea- Supplementary Tables 2 and 5). As such, misclassification of chil-
sures. The findings were remarkably invariant across different types dren with objective experience of maltreatment is not a satisfactory
of maltreatment and psychopathology and across genders and races, explanation for the results.
expanding initial observations made with regard to drug abuse in Second, the stronger association of subjective compared to objec-
this cohort11. These results suggest that psychopathology emerges tive measures of childhood maltreatment with psychopathology
as a function of subjective rather than objective experience of child- might be explained by negative biases in autobiographical memory
hood maltreatment. owing to psychopathology at the time of subjective appraisal9,10.
These findings should be interpreted in the context of poten- However, we observed the same pattern of findings in a subset
tial limitations. First, the stronger association of subjective versus of participants without psychopathology at the time of subjective
objective measures of childhood maltreatment with psychopa- appraisal (Fig. 3 and Supplementary Table 11), suggesting that such
thology might reflect misclassification. This might occur because recall bias is not a satisfactory explanation for the results. It is also
official court records used here as objective measures of childhood possible that a history of psychopathology before the subjective
maltreatment are highly specific (low false positives) but are not appraisal could have biased the retrospective reports9,10. For exam-
very sensitive (high false negatives), so are unlikely to capture all ple, residual memory biases might have persisted after remission
cases of maltreatment in the population. Of note, court records have as stable vulnerability factors. Furthermore, previous psychopathol-
particularly low sensitivity for cases of child sexual abuse4,12, which ogy could have biased previous recall of maltreatment and such
are more often private, hidden by the perpetrators and untold by the biased recall of maltreatment might have been endorsed after remis-
victims. However, we observed a similar pattern of findings across sion. Further research is also needed to establish whether subjective
all maltreatment types despite the known differences in sensitivity measures of childhood maltreatment have stronger association with
(Fig. 1 and Supplementary Table 5). Furthermore, our results sug- subsequent psychopathology than do objective measures13,14.
gest that reclassification of participants would not substantially Third, the stronger association of subjective versus objective
affect the results. Because of low sensitivity in official court records, measures of childhood maltreatment with psychopathology might
participants who should have been classified as having only the be an artefact owing to treatment effects. Court substantiation of
ecnelaverP
Depression Dysthymia Generalized anxiety PTSD Antisocial personality Alcohol misuse Drug misuse
1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00
0.75 0.75 0.75 0.75 0.75 * * 0.75
* * 0.50 * 0.50 0.50 * * 0.50 * * 0.50 0.50 * * *
0.25 0.25 * 0.25 * 0.25 0.25 0.25 0.25
0 0 0 0 0 0 0
None O O + S S None O O + S S None O O + S S None O O + S S None O O + S S None O O + S S None O O + S S
Fig. 2 | Prevalence of individual diagnoses in participants with objective and/or subjective measures of child maltreatment. See Supplementary Table 2
for details of the analyses. Error bars, 95% CI; asterisks indicate that the corresponding prevalence estimate differs from the prevalence in the ‘none’ group
at P < 0.05.
1.00
0.75
0.50
ecnelaverP
Hx any Hx internalizing Hx externalizing
psychopathology (no current) disorder (no current) disorder (no current)
1.00 1.00
* * 0.75 0.75
*
0.50 0.50
* *
0.25 0.25 0.25
0 0 0
None O O + S S None O O + S S None O O + S S
Fig. 3 | Prevalence of a history of psychopathology in participants with objective and/or subjective measures of child maltreatment in the subsample
without current psychopathology at the time of subjective measure assessment. See Supplementary Table 11 for details of the analyses. Error bars, 95%
CI; asterisks indicate that the corresponding prevalence estimate differs from the prevalence in the ‘none’ group at P < 0.05. Hx, history.
NAture HumAN BeHAviOur | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTure HumaN BeHavIour Articles
maltreatment cases might have triggered legal actions to protect to reconceptualize the interpretation of findings based on subjective
the children and to buffer the mental health consequences of mal- measures of maltreatment. Because of the low agreement between
treatment through clinical interventions15, potentially leading to an objective and subjective measures of childhood maltreatment (Fig. 1
underestimate of the associations observed here. We do not have and Supplementary Table 1), aetiological studies based on subjec-
comprehensive data about mental health support received by par- tive measures of maltreatment are unlikely to identify damages or
ticipants to directly test this hypothesis. However, it is likely that abnormalities linked to actual exposure to maltreatment; rather,
minimal mental health support was provided to victims of child mal- they are likely to identify correlates of unhelpful cognitions/mem-
treatment in the late 1960s. Furthermore, treatment effects would ories about the self and the environment, which appear crucial to
have buffered the mental health consequences both in participants understanding risk of psychopathology. Brain imaging correlates of
with only the objective measure of maltreatment and in participants subjective measures of childhood maltreatment might also reflect a
with objective and subjective measures of maltreatment. However, previous history of psychopathology. Studies with sampling based
the two groups have different patterns of association with psychopa- on objective measures will still be needed to investigate the causal
thology: while participants with objective and subjective measures neurobiological effects of actual exposure to maltreatment and their
of maltreatment have elevated risk of psychopathology, participants relevance to psychopathology. Furthermore, studies with sampling
with only the objective measures do not (Fig. 1). Treatment effects based on objective measures will be needed to understand why some
are, therefore, not a satisfactory explanation for the results. maltreated children develop subjective appraisal of their ordeal
Fourth, the stronger association of subjective versus objective while others do not, for example investigating the severity of the
measures of childhood maltreatment with psychopathology might actual maltreatment experience, the intensity of subjective distress
reflect the influence of unmeasured variables. For example, we reported by maltreated children, the age at which the abuse took
acknowledge that we do not have detailed information on the sever- place, the role of social care involvement in buffering or accentuat-
ity or duration of the actual maltreatment experience, or the inten- ing the distress and the experience of later adversity. Finally, studies
sity of subjective distress reported by maltreated children. These with sampling based on objective measures will also be needed to
variables might have a causal role on psychopathology by increas- understand why some adults develop subjective appraisal of child-
ing the likelihood of subjective reports of childhood maltreatment. hood maltreatment in the absence of objective experience, including
However, these measures might also be associated with psychopa- the role of residual memory biases linked to previous psychopathol-
thology through other pathways independent of subjective reports, ogy, personality, suggestibility and source-monitoring errors.
thereby creating spurious findings. These findings also suggest that the current dominant explana-
Fifth, it is unclear if the findings in this cohort could replicate tory model whereby objective exposure to childhood maltreatment
elsewhere. However, we found that results similarly applied to men triggers a biological stress response eventually resulting in psycho-
and women as well as black and white participants (Supplementary pathology24,25 should be updated to reflect the key role of subjective
Figs. 2 and 3 and Supplementary Table 10), supporting their likely experience. These findings are not necessarily at odds with the results
generalizability to other samples. Furthermore, although this cohort of several experimental animal studies demonstrating the causal
is unique owing to its reliance on official court records for the objec- effects of early-life stress on later brain structure or function within
tive measure of childhood maltreatment, its size, the follow-up into those experimental models26. Although groups of animals with or
adult life, and the strength and breadth of its psychiatric assessment, without exposure to early-life stress show neurobiological differ-
other cohorts have found consistent results. For example, within ences, there is notable heterogeneity in outcomes within groups of
more contemporaneous but smaller groups of maltreated children animals exposed to early-life stress. Of note, results from our study
identified by child protection services, young people with concor- point to another group of at-risk individuals. Even in the absence of
dant self-reports of maltreatment typically showed more emotional an actual experience of child maltreatment, some individuals may
and behavioural symptoms than those without self-reports16–18. endorse cognitions/memories about themselves and their childhood
Similarly, subjective measures based on retrospective recall of environment that amount to a subjective experience of maltreat-
childhood adversity were more strongly related to psychopathology ment27,28, which is also associated with elevated risk of psychopathol-
than prospective measures based on maternal reports, interviewers’ ogy. A focus on subjective experience will open new opportunities
observation and case notes in the Dunedin and Environmental Risk for multidisciplinary investigations in cognitive neuroscience, psy-
(E-Risk) cohorts19,20. More broadly, the findings resonate with the chology and epidemiology to test whether manipulation of subjec-
role of individual cognitive appraisal in the response to stressors21 tive appraisal of childhood maltreatment and related cognitions
and particularly in mediating the development of psychopathology could alleviate psychopathology. Answers to these questions have
after traumatic events in children and adults9,22,23. While the role of the potential to substantially expand the way we understand, prevent
subjective appraisal has been previously discussed in the context of and treat child maltreatment-related psychopathology13,14,29.
trauma and PTSD, we present here the first evidence that it is also Of course, our results do not diminish the significance of mal-
central to the broader psychopathological consequences of child- treatment in the lives of children. Maltreatment is a fundamental
hood maltreatment. Despite these potential limitations, our find- breach in the human rights of children and it is a moral duty to
ings have implications for research and clinical practice. protect them from abuse and neglect. Our results also show that
We found that risk of psychopathology is concentrated among many children with official records and subjective appraisal of mal-
individuals with subjective rather than objective measures of child- treatment go on to develop psychopathology regardless of their sex,
hood maltreatment. These findings are important to inform sam- race and family social class. In addition, individuals who construe
pling strategies for studies investigating the mechanisms through their childhood experiences as maltreatment despite the lack of a
which maltreatment affects mental health. The findings suggest documented history are similarly at high risk for psychopathology.
that aetiological studies should focus on young people and adults New solutions to the distressing and impairing psychopathol-
who provide their own personal account of childhood maltreat- ogy associated with childhood maltreatment may be found through
ment experiences. Of course, these sampling strategies are already deeper understanding of the subjective experience.
the most prevalent in neuroscience research, owing to the inher-
ent challenges in sampling individuals with objective experiences
methods
of childhood maltreatment. Nevertheless, because of the evidence
Design. This study used the same design as ref. 30. The design information is
that objective and subjective experience of childhood maltreatment reproduced with permission and minor modifications from ref. 30, except where
identify largely distinct groups of individuals, there is an urgent need otherwise indicated.
NAture HumAN BeHAviOur | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTure HumaN BeHavIour
This prospective cohort design study was initiated in 1986 with a large Since it is not possible to randomly assign participants to groups, the assumption of
group of documented cases of childhood physical and sexual abuse and neglect equivalence for the groups is an approximation. If the comparison group included
(n = 908) and a comparison group of children matched on the basis of age, subjects who had been officially reported as abused at some earlier or later time
sex, race/ethnicity and approximate family social class at the time of the child period, this would jeopardize the design of the study. Therefore, official records
maltreatment (n = 667)31. Characteristics of the design include: (1) an unambiguous were checked and any proposed comparison group child who had an official record
operationalization of abuse and neglect; (2) a prospective design; (3) separate of abuse or neglect in their childhood was eliminated. In these cases (n = 11),
neglected and abused groups; (4) a large sample; (5) a comparison group matched a second matched subject was assigned to the comparison group to replace the
as closely as possible for age, sex, race and approximate social class background; individual excluded. Thus, the control group does not contain any known cases of
and (6) assessment of the long-term consequences of abuse and neglect beyond child abuse or neglect. The number of participants in the comparison group who
childhood and adolescence into adulthood. were actually abused, but not reported, is unknown.
The rationale for identifying the abused and neglected group was that their
cases were serious enough to come to the attention of the authorities. Only Participants. For this paper, we use data from the second phase of the study,
court-substantiated cases of child abuse and neglect were included here. Cases which involved tracing, locating and interviewing the abused and/or neglected
were drawn from the records of county juvenile and adult criminal courts in a children and comparison group members a mean of 22.3 years later (s.d. = 2.1,
metropolitan area in the Midwest during 1967–1971. To avoid potential problems range = 17–28) during 1989–1995. Of the original sample of 1,575 (908 abused
with ambiguity in the direction of causality and to ensure that temporal sequence and/or neglected individuals and 667 controls), 1,307 subjects (83%) were located
was clear (that is, child neglect or abuse led to subsequent outcomes), neglect and and 1,196 interviewed (76%). Of the people not interviewed, 43 were deceased
abuse cases were restricted to those in which children were less than 12 years of (before interview), eight were incapable of being interviewed, 268 were not found
age at the time of the abuse or neglect incident. Thus, these are cases of childhood and 60 refused to participate (a refusal rate of 3.8%). There were no significant
abuse and/or neglect. These design characteristics represent major strengths but differences between the interviewed follow-up sample (n = 1,196) and the original
they also pose limitations about the generalizability of the findings. sample (n = 1,575) in terms of demographic characteristics (male (P = 0.28); white
Identification of neglect cases is previously reported in ref. 32 and reproduced in (P = 0.10); poverty in childhood census tract (P = 0.44); current age (P = 0.88); or
this paragraph with permission and minor modifications. Neglect cases reflected group status (abuse or neglected versus controls (P = 0.11)).
a judgement that the parents’ deficiencies in child-care were beyond those found Approximately half the sample are female (48.7%) and about two-thirds are
acceptable by community and professional standards at the time. These cases white (62.9%). The mean age of the sample at the time of the follow-up interview
represented extreme failure to provide adequate food, clothing, shelter and medical was 28.7 years (s.d. = 3.84). There were no differences in the demographic
attention to children. Physical abuse cases included injuries such as bruises, welts, characteristics of the two groups (abused and/or neglected and matched controls)
burns, abrasions, lacerations, wounds, cuts, bone and skull fractures and other for gender, race/ethnicity or age. Sample members completed an average
evidence of physical injury. Sexual abuse charges included felony sexual assault, of 11.47 years (s.d. = 2.19) of school. The median occupational level for the
fondling or touching, sodomy, incest and rape. sample was semiskilled workers, with less than 7% in levels 7–9 (managers
The selection of a comparison group is described in ref. 33 and reproduced to professionals). Thus, the sample is skewed toward the lower end of the
in this paragraph with permission. A critical element of the design involved the socioeconomic spectrum.
selection of a comparison group, matched with the maltreated sample on the basis
of age, sex, race/ethnicity and approximate family social class during the time period Procedures. The procedures used are described in ref. 38 and reproduced in this
under study. Matching for approximate family social class was important in this section with permission. Two-hour in-person interviews that included a series of
study because it is theoretically plausible that any relationship between child abuse structured and semistructured questionnaires and rating scales were conducted
and neglect and subsequent outcomes may be confounded with or explained by between 1989 and 1995 obtaining information about cognitive, intellectual,
social class differences. It is difficult to match exactly for social class because higher emotional, psychiatric, social and interpersonal functioning. The interviewers were
income families could live in lower social class neighbourhoods and vice versa. blind to the purpose of the study, to the participants’ group membership and to the
The matching procedure used here is based on a broad definition of social class that inclusion of an abused and/or neglected group. Similarly, the subjects were blind
includes neighbourhoods in which children were reared and schools they attended. to the purpose of the study and were told they had been selected to participate as
Similar procedures, with neighbourhood school matches, have been used in studies part of a large group of individuals who grew up in that area in the late 1960s and
of individuals with schizophrenia34 to match approximately for social class. early 1970s. After a complete description of the study was provided to the subjects,
A more recent textbook35 also recommended using neighbourhood and subjects signed a consent form acknowledging that they were participating
hospital controls to match on variables that are related to outcomes, when random voluntarily. Institutional Review Board approval was obtained at Indiana University
sampling is not possible. Busing was not operational at the time and students and State University of New York at Albany for the procedures involved in this
in elementary schools in this county were from small, socio-economically study. For those individuals with limited reading ability, the consent form was
homogeneous neighbourhoods. The comparison group establishes the base rates of read and, if necessary, explained verbally.
pathology we would expect in a sample of adults from comparable circumstances
who did not come to court attention in childhood as victims of abuse or neglect. Measures and variables. In addition to reliability and validity, one important
To accomplish the matching, the abuse and neglect sample was divided into criterion in selecting and designing instruments for use in this research was the
two groups, those under and those of school age at the time of the abuse or neglect ability to compare findings from this research to the results of other studies. In
incident. Using county birth record information, children under school age were selecting these measures, we were mindful of structuring the interviews to be
matched with children of the same sex, race, date of birth (±1 week) and hospital sensitive to the feelings and needs of our participants and to not overwhelm them
of birth during 1967–1971. Of the 319 abuse and neglect cases, matches were with negative and highly intrusive and stressful questions.
found for 229 (72%) of the group. For children of school age, records of more than
100 elementary schools for the same time period were used to find matches with Objective experience of child maltreatment. Official reports of child abuse
children of the same sex, race, date of birth (±6 months), class in elementary school and/or neglect, based on records of county juvenile (family) and adult
during 1967–1971 and approximate home address. Since busing did not exist criminal courts from 1967 to 1971, were used to operationalize maltreatment.
during this period in this metropolitan area, the elementary schools represented Only court-substantiated cases involving children under the age of 12 years
very homogeneous neighbourhoods. Matches were never made with students at the time of abuse and/or neglect were included. Within the present sample
from another school, although it was sometimes necessary to select students from of 1,196, 56.5% were abused and/or neglected and 45.4% were neglected,
different classes or even different grades in the same school. Where an abused or 9.2% physically abused and 8.0% sexually abused. Findings based on this
neglected child had been held back a grade, resulting in a discrepancy between the objective measure of maltreatment have been replicated by several, more
child’s age and grade, the match was made with age. Where a child had attended contemporaneous cohorts39–42, showing that: (1) the construct of childhood
special education classes during the period, attempts were made to include matches maltreatment captured in our sample is similar to the construct captured by other,
from such classes. Of the 589 school-age children in the abuse and neglect sample, more recent measures and (2) that the findings are relevant to modern society.
we found matches for 438, 74.4% of the group. Overall, 667 matches (73.4%) were Of note, substantiated court records provide the legal standard on which child
found for the 908 abused and neglected children. protection actions are based and, thus, provide the strongest possible evidence
Non-matches occurred for a number of reasons. In the case of birth records, for the objective experience of child maltreatment.
they occurred if the abused or neglected child was born outside the county or In our previous work 20 years ago11, we have described court records as
state, if information about date of birth was missing or if there had been a change ‘prospective’ measures of child maltreatment. Subsequent work featured different
of name for an adopted child. In the case of school records, non-matches occurred types of prospective measures, more commonly based on parent/informant report
because the elementary school had closed during the past 20 years and class and in some cases based on medical, child protection or court records4. Therefore,
registers were consequently unavailable or because schools had been primarily we have used here the more accurate terminology of ‘objective’ measures to clarify
uniracial (they were not necessarily integrated at the time) and a same-race match which type of prospective measure was used.
could not be found.
The design36,37 involves the assumption that the major difference between the Subjective experience of child maltreatment. Retrospective self-reported measures
abused and neglected and comparison groups is in the abuse or neglect experience. were chosen to include a broad set of maltreatment experiences representative of
NAture HumAN BeHAviOur | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTure HumaN BeHavIour Articles
the experiences cited in the original (objective) court cases and participants were maltreatment, we computed the agreement between these two measures
asked to respond about experiences that occurred before age 12 years to make using Cohen’s κ.
the retrospective reports as similar to the court cases as possible. In addition, To separate the relative contribution of objective and subjective measures
because no single retrospective assessment measure is universally endorsed by of child maltreatment to psychopathology, we identified three groups: (1) adult
researchers, multiple measures of each type of maltreatment were included to be as participants who were identified as victims of child maltreatment by virtue
comprehensive as possible. of official records but did not retrospectively recall the experience (objective
Four measures were used to assess self-reports of childhood sexual abuse measure); (2) adult participants who were identified as victims of child
during Interview 1, all of which were adapted from previous work by Finkelhor43,44 maltreatment by virtue of official records and also retrospectively recalled the
and Russell45 and are described in Widom and Morris46. Two measures were experience (objective and subjective measures); and (3) adult participants who
used to assess retrospective self-reports of childhood physical abuse during retrospectively recalled being maltreated in childhood but were not identified as
Interview 1: the conflict tactics scale (CTS)47 and the self-report of childhood abuse victims of child maltreatment by virtue of official records (subjective measure).
physical (SRCAP)48. Retrospective assessments of neglect were more challenging The prevalence of psychopathology in these three groups was then compared to the
because at the time these retrospective reports were collected, the field lacked a prevalence of psychopathology in a group of participants with neither objective nor
validated neglect instrument. Lacking such an instrument, questions were designed subjective measure of childhood maltreatment. To test differences in the prevalence
to cover a range of neglect experiences (inadequate provision of food, clothing, of psychopathology between the three target groups described and participants
shelter and supervision) that were similar to the charges in the official neglect with neither objective nor subjective measure of childhood maltreatment,
petition. To assess childhood neglect, participants were asked three questions log-binomial models (log-link generalized linear model) were used.
during Interview 1: (1) ‘Were there ever times when you were a young child that To test the sensitivity of the results to various sources of artefact and bias, we
a neighbour fed you or cared for you because your parents didn’t get around to re-ran group comparisons: (1) using internalizing and externalizing disorders
shopping for food or cooking, or when neighbours or relatives kept you overnight as dependent measures; (2) using individual diagnoses as dependent measures;
because no one was taking care of you at home?’, (2) ‘When you were a young (3) using individual types of maltreatment as independent measures; (4) using
child, did anyone ever say that you weren’t being given enough to eat, or kept clean individual types of maltreatment as independent measures and restricting the
enough, or that you weren’t getting enough medical care when it was needed?’ sample to participants without any maltreatment type (rather than those without
and (3) ‘When you were a very young child, did your parents ever leave you home an individual type of maltreatment); (5) separately in males and females;
alone while they were out shopping or doing something else?’ If the participant (6) separately in black and white race individuals; and (7) restricting the sample
responded ‘yes’ to any of these questions and the age at which the neglect occurred to those without any psychopathology at the time of retrospective recall of child
was determined to be before age 12 years, they were considered to be self-reporting maltreatment history.
childhood neglect. Of note, the field still lacks a stringently validated instrument All statistical tests were two-sided. All analyses were carried out in STATA 15
to retrospectively assess childhood neglect, for example, owing to varying (ref. 55) and R 3.5 (ref. 56).
social norms, to low internal consistency of the measures reflecting the distinct
components of neglectful experiences, and to limited validation of retrospective Reporting Summary. Further information on research design is available in the
measures in children or adults with documented histories of neglect because of the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.
challenges in recruitment. Nevertheless, commonly used measures of child neglect,
such as the CTS43 or the childhood trauma questionnaire (CTQ)49, use questions Data availability
that are not dissimilar to those used in our study (for example, asking mothers
The data reported in the current article are not publicly available because
about whether they were unable to get enough food to the child, they were unable
they contain extremely sensitive information that could compromise research
to take the child to the doctor or hospital, or they had left the child alone at home;
participant privacy and confidentiality. We cannot provide individual level data
or asking for self-reports on similar topics).
from this project because our confidentiality agreement with the participants
In our previous work 20 years ago11, we have described these self-reports as
in this study precludes this. The data are available on request from C.S.W. by
‘retrospective’ measures of child maltreatment to refer to the temporal ordering
qualified scientists. Requests require a concept paper describing the purpose of
of the events. Here we refer to ‘subjective’ measures to reflect the increasing
data access, ethical approval at the applicant’s university in writing and provision
understanding of the psychological influences on these self-reports4,9,10.
for secure data access.
Lifetime and current psychopathology. Lifetime and current psychopathology Code availability
were assessed during a 2-h in-person interview between 1989 and 1995
The data analysis script is available from A.D. upon request.
(mean age = 28.7 years) according to DSM-III-R (ref. 50) criteria based on the
National Institute of Mental Health Diagnostic Interview Schedule, Version III
Revised51. Details of the Diagnostic Interview Schedule51 and its use in our Received: 28 July 2019; Accepted: 6 April 2020;
work are described in ref. 38 and reproduced in the rest of this paragraph with Published: xx xx xxxx
permission. The Diagnostic Interview Schedule51, is a highly structured interview
schedule designed for use by lay interviewers. The survey company who had used references
these methods as part of the Epidemiological Catchment Area studies52 was hired
1. Freud, S. The Aetiology of Hysteria. Wiener Klinischen Rundschau X,
to conduct the interviews. Field interviewers received a week of study-specific
22-26 (1896). [translated from German in the Complete Psychological
training and successfully completed practice interviews before beginning the
Works of Sigmund Freud, Vol. III]
study interviews. Field interviewer supervisors recontacted a random 10% of the
2. Freud, S. Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality (1905). Franz Deuticke
respondents for quality control. Frequent contacts between field interviewers and
[translated from German in the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund
supervisors were held to prevent interview drift, to monitor quality and to provide
Freud, Vol. VII]
continuous feedback. Computer programmes for scoring the Diagnostic Interview
3. Susser, E. & Widom, C. S. Still searching for lost truths about the bitter
Schedule were used to compute DSM-III-R diagnoses. Adequate reliability for the
sorrows of childhood. Schizophr. Bull. 38, 672–675 (2012).
Diagnostic Interview Schedule has been reported53.
4. Baldwin, J. R., Reuben, A., Newbury, J. B. & Danese, A. Agreement between
Participants were assessed for the following psychiatric disorders: depression,
prospective and retrospective measures of childhood victimization: a
dysthymia, generalized anxiety disorder, PTSD, antisocial personality
systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA Psychiatry 76, 584–593 (2019).
disorder, alcohol abuse and/or dependence, or drug abuse and/or dependence.
5. Child Welfare Information Gateway Working with the Courts in Child
Participants who met criteria for diagnoses of depression, dysthymia, generalized
Protection (US Department of Health and Human Services, Children’s
anxiety disorder or PTSD were classified as having experienced internalizing
Bureau, 2006).
disorder, whereas those who met criteria for diagnoses of antisocial personality
6. Widom, C. S. The cycle of violence. Science 244, 160–166 (1989).
disorder, alcohol abuse and/or dependence, or drug abuse and/or dependence
7. Widom, C. S., Czaja, S. J. & DuMont, K. A. Intergenerational
were classified as having experienced externalizing disorder. Those who
transmission of child abuse and neglect: real or detection bias? Science 347,
experienced either internalizing or externalizing disorder were classified
1480–1485 (2015).
as having experienced any psychopathology. This classification reflects the
8. Caspi, A. et al. The p factor: one general psychopathology factor in the
commonly observed structure of psychopathology8. Participants with lifetime
structure of psychiatric disorders? Clin. Psychol. Sci. 2, 119–137 (2014).
psychopathology had experienced psychopathology at any point in their lifetime.
9. Dalgleish, T. & Werner-Seidler, A. Disruptions in autobiographical memory
Participants with current psychopathology had experienced psychopathology
processing in depression and the emergence of memory therapeutics.
some time within the past year (the 12 months before the interview). Papers
Trends Cogn. Sci. 18, 596–604 (2014).
from this study using the same psychiatric assessment methods have been
10. Monroe, S. M. Modern approaches to conceptualizing and measuring human
published in leading psychiatric journals38,54.
life stress. Annu. Rev. Clin. Psychol. 4, 33–52 (2008).
11. Widom, C. S., Weiler, B. L. & Cottler, L. B. Childhood victimization and drug
Data analyses. To characterize the overlap between groups of participants abuse: a comparison of prospective and retrospective findings. J. Consult.
identified by virtue of prospective or retrospective measure of childhood Clin. Psychol. 67, 867–880 (1999).
NAture HumAN BeHAviOur | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTure HumaN BeHavIour
12. Gilbert, R. et al. Burden and consequences of child maltreatment in 41. Kim-Cohen, J. et al. MAOA, maltreatment, and gene–environment
high-income countries. Lancet 373, 68–81 (2009). interaction predicting children’s mental health: new evidence and a
13. Nanni, V., Uher, R. & Danese, A. Childhood maltreatment predicts meta-analysis. Mol. Psychiatry 11, 903–913 (2006).
unfavorable course of illness and treatment outcome in depression: a 42. Thornberry, T. P., Knight, K. E. & Lovegrove, P. J. Does maltreatment
meta-analysis. Am. J. Psychiatry 169, 141–151 (2012). beget maltreatment? A systematic review of the intergenerational literature.
14. Agnew-Blais, J. & Danese, A. Childhood maltreatment and unfavourable Trauma Violence Abuse 13, 135–152 (2012).
clinical outcomes in bipolar disorder: a systematic review and meta-analysis. 43. Finkelhor, D. Sexually Victimized Children (Free Press, 1979).
Lancet Psychiatry 3, 342–349 (2016). 44. Finkelhor, D. Sourcebook on Child Sexual Abuse (Sage Publications, 1986).
15. Macmillan, H. L. et al. Interventions to prevent child maltreatment and 45. Russell, D. E. The incidence and prevalence of intrafamilial and extrafamilial
associated impairment. Lancet 373, 250–266 (2009). sexual abuse of female children. Child Abuse Negl. 7, 133–146 (1983).
16. McGee, R. A., Wolfe, D. A., Yuen, S. A., Wilson, S. K. & Carnochan, J. The 46. Widom, C. S. & Morris, S. Accuracy of adult recollections of childhood
measurement of maltreatment: a comparison of approaches. Child Abuse Negl. victimization: Part II. Childhood sexual abuse. Psychol. Assess. 9,
19, 233–249 (1995). 34–46 (1997).
17. Shaffer, A., Huston, L. & Egeland, B. Identification of child maltreatment 47. Straus, M. A., Hamby, S. L., Finkelhor, D., Moore, D. W. & Runyan, D.
using prospective and self-report methodologies: a comparison of Identification of child maltreatment with the parent–child conflict tactics
maltreatment incidence and relation to later psychopathology. Child Abuse scales: development and psychometric data for a national sample of American
Negl. 32, 682–692 (2008). parents. Child Abuse Negl. 22, 249–270 (1998).
18. Negriff, S., Schneiderman, J. U. & Trickett, P. K. Concordance between 48. Widom, C. S. & Shepard, R. L. Accuracy of adult recollections of childhood
self-reported childhood maltreatment versus case record reviews for child victimization: Part I. Childhood physical abuse. Psychol. Assess. 8,
welfare-affiliated adolescents. Child Maltreatment 22, 34–44 (2017). 412–421 (1996).
19. Reuben, A. et al. Lest we forget: comparing retrospective and prospective 49. Bernstein, D. P. & Fink, L. Childhood Trauma Questionnaire: A Retrospective
assessments of adverse childhood experiences in the prediction of adult Self-Report Manual (The Psychological Corporation, 1998).
health. J. Child Psychol. Psychiatry 57, 1103–1112 (2016). 50. American Psychiatric Association Diagnostic and Statistical Manual
20. Newbury, J. B. et al. Measuring childhood maltreatment to predict early-adult of Mental Disorders: DSM-III-R 3rd edn, revised (American Psychiatric
psychopathology: comparison of prospective informant-reports and Press, 1987).
retrospective self-reports. J. Psychiatr. Res. 96, 57–64 (2018). 51. Robins, L. N., Helzer, J. E., Goldring, E. & Ratcliff, K. S. National Institute of
21. Lazarus, R. S. & Folkman, S. Stress, Appraisal, and Coping Mental Health Diagnostic Interview Schedule, Version III Revised (DIS-III-R)
(Springer-Verlag, 1984). 1981/04/01 edn (Washington University, 1989).
22. Ehlers, A. & Clark, D. M. A cognitive model of posttraumatic stress disorder. 52. Eaton, W. W., Regier, D. A., Locke, B. Z. & Taube, C. A. The Epidemiologic
Behav. Res. Ther. 38, 319–345 (2000). Catchment Area Program of the National Institute of Mental Health.
23. Meiser-Stedman, R., Dalgleish, T., Glucksman, E., Yule, W. & Smith, P. Public Health Rep. 96, 319–325 (1981).
Maladaptive cognitive appraisals mediate the evolution of posttraumatic stress 53. Helzer, J. E. et al. A comparison of clinical and diagnostic interview schedule
reactions: a 6-month follow-up of child and adolescent assault and motor diagnoses: physician reexamination of lay-interviewed cases in the general
vehicle accident survivors. J. Abnorm. Psychol. 118, 778–787 (2009). population. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 42, 657–666 (1985).
24. Danese, A. & McEwen, B. S. Adverse childhood experiences, allostasis, 54. Widom, C. S. Posttraumatic stress disorder in abused and neglected children
allostatic load, and age-related disease. Physiol. Behav. 106, 29–39 (2012). grown up. Am. J. Psychiatry 156, 1223–1229 (1999).
25. Shonkoff, J. P. et al. The lifelong effects of early childhood adversity and toxic 55. StataCorp. Stata statistical software: release 15. (StataCorp LLC, 2017).
stress. Pediatrics 129, e232–e246 (2012). 56. R Foundation for Statistical Computing. R: a language and environment for
26. Chen, Y. & Baram, T. Z. Toward understanding how early-life stress statistical computing. (R Foundation for Statistical Computing, 2020).
reprograms cognitive and emotional brain networks.
Neuropsychopharmacology 41, 197–206 (2016).
Acknowledgements
27. Loftus, E. Our changeable memories: legal and practical implications.
Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 4, 231–234 (2003). This research was supported in part by grants from the National Institute of Justice
28. Schacter, D. L. & Slotnick, S. D. The cognitive neuroscience of memory (NIJ nos. 86-IJ-CX-0033, 89-IJ-CX-0007 and 2011-WG-BX-0013), the National Institute
distortion. Neuron 44, 149–160 (2004). of Mental Health (NIMH nos. MH49467 and MH58386), the Eunice Kennedy Shriver
29. Danese, A. Annual Research Review: Rethinking childhood trauma—new National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD no. HD40774),
research directions for measurement, study design and analytical strategies. the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA nos. DA17842 and DA10060), the National
J. Child Psychol. Psychiatry 61, 236–250 (2020). Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA nos. AA09238 and AA11108),
30. Widom, C. S., Fisher, J. H., Nagin, D. S. & Piquero, A. R. A prospective the National Institute on Aging (NIA no. AG058683) and the Doris Duke Charitable
examination of criminal career trajectories in abused and neglected males Foundation to C.S.W. The opinions, findings and conclusions or recommendations
and females followed up into middle adulthood. J. Quant. Criminol. 34, expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the US
831–852 (2018). Department of Justice. A.D. received funding from the National Institute for Health
31. Widom, C. S. Child abuse, neglect, and adult behaviour. Am. J. Research (NIHR) Biomedical Research Centre at South London and Maudsley NHS
Orthopsychiatry 59, 355–367 (1989). Foundation Trust and King’s College London and is supported by the Medical Research
32. Nikulina, V. & Widom, C. S. Higher levels of intelligence and executive Council grant no. P005918. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors
functioning protect maltreated children against adult arrests: a prospective and does not necessarily represent the official views of the NHS, the NIHR or the
study. Child Maltreatment 24, 3–16 (2019). Department of Health and Social Care. The funders had no role in study design, data
33. Widom, C. S., Marmorstein, N. R. & White, H. R. Childhood victimization collection and analysis, decision to publish or preparation of the manuscript.
and illicit drug use in middle adulthood. Psychol. Addict. Behav. 20,
394–403 (2006). Author contributions
34. Watt, N. F. Longitudinal changes in the social behavior of children A.D. and C.S.W. contributed to the conception and design of the work, interpretation of
hospitalized for schizophrenia as adults. J. Nerv. Ment. Dis. 155, the data, revision of the work and both approved the final manuscript. A.D. was involved
42–54 (1972). in data analysis and drafting of the work. C.S.W. was involved in acquisition of the data.
35. Shadish, W. R., Cook, T. D. & Campbell, D. T. Experimental and
Quasi-Experimental Designs for Generalized Causal Inference
Competing interests
(Houghton-Mifflin, 2002).
36. Leventhal, J. M. Research strategies and methodologic standards in studies of The authors declare no competing interests.
risk factors for child abuse. Child Abuse Negl. 6, 113–123 (1982).
37. Schulsinger, F., Mednick, S. A. & Knop, J. Longitudinal Research: Methods and Additional information
Uses in Behavioral Sciences (Martinus Nijhoff Publishers, 1981).
Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/
38. Widom, C. S., DuMont, K. & Czaja, S. J. A prospective investigation of major
s41562-020-0880-3.
depressive disorder and comorbidity in abused and neglected children grown
up. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 64, 49–56 (2007). Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to A.D. or C.S.W.
39. Stouthamer-Loeber, M., Loeber, R., Homish, D. L. & Wei, E. Maltreatment Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
of boys and the development of disruptive and delinquent behavior.
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
Dev. Psychopathol. 13, 941–955 (2001).
published maps and institutional affiliations.
40. Lansford, J. E. et al. A 12-year prospective study of the long-term effects of
early child physical maltreatment on psychological, behavioral, and academic Primary Handling Editors Stavroula Kousta; Mary Elizabeth Sutherland.
problems in adolescence. Arch. Pediatr. Adolesc. Med. 156, 824–830 (2002). © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2020
NAture HumAN BeHAviOur | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
1
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Corresponding author(s): Danese & Widom
Last updated by author(s): Aug 1, 2019
Reporting Summary
Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency
in reporting. For further information on Nature Research policies, see Authors & Referees and the Editorial Policy Checklist.
Statistics
For all statistical analyses, confirm that the following items are present in the figure legend, table legend, main text, or Methods section.
n/a Confirmed
The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
A statement on whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided
Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.
A description of all covariates tested
A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
A full description of the statistical parameters including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient)
AND variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)
For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted
Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.
For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated
Our web collection on statistics for biologists contains articles on many of the points above.
Software and code
Policy information about availability of computer code
Data collection n/a
Data analysis All analyses were carried out in STATA 15 and R 3.5.
For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors/reviewers.
We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Research guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.
Data
Policy information about availability of data
All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable:
- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets
- A list of figures that have associated raw data
- A description of any restrictions on data availability
Data availability
The data reported in the current article are not publicly available because they contain extremely sensitive information that could compromise research participant
privacy and confidentiality. We cannot provide individual level data from this project because our confidentiality agreement with the participants in this study
precludes this. The data are available on request from the corresponding author [CSW] by qualified scientists. Requests require a concept paper describing the
purpose of data access, ethical approval at the applicant’s university in writing, and provision for secure data access.
Code availability
The data analysis script is available upon request from the corresponding author [AD].
2
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Field-specific reporting
Please select the one below that is the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.
Life sciences Behavioural & social sciences Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences
For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/documents/nr-reporting-summary-flat.pdf
Behavioural & social sciences study design
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
Study description Quantitative study
Research sample This prospective cohort design study was initiated in 1986 with a large group of documented cases of childhood physical and sexual
abuse and neglect (N = 908) and a comparison group of children matched on the basis of age, sex, race/ethnicity, and approximate family
social class at the time of the child maltreatment (N = 667). For this paper, we use data from the second phase of the study, which
involved tracing, locating, and interviewing the abused and/or neglected children and comparison group members a mean of 22.3 years
later (SD = 2.1, range = 17-28) during 1989-1995. Approximately half the sample is female (48.7%) and about two-thirds is White (62.9%).
The mean age of the sample at the time of the follow-up interview was 28.7 years (SD = 3.84).
Sampling strategy To sample cases of maltreatment, only court-substantiated cases of child abuse and neglect were included here. At the start of the study,
in 1986, cases were drawn from the records of county juvenile and adult criminal courts in a metropolitan area in the Midwest during the
years 1967 through 1971. A comparison group of children matched on the basis of age, sex, race/ethnicity, and approximate family social
class at the time of the child maltreatment
Data collection Official records. Official reports of child abuse and/or neglect, based on records of county juvenile (family) and adult criminal courts from
1967-1971, were used to operationalize maltreatment. Within the present sample of 1,196, 56.5% were abused and/or neglected and
45.4% were neglected, 9.2% physically abused, and 8.0% sexually abused.
Retrospective self-reports. Four measures were used to assess self-reports of childhood sexual abuse, all of which were adapted from
previous work by Finkelhor and Russell and are described in Widom and Morris40. Two measures were used to assess retrospective self-
reports of childhood physical abuse: the Conflict Tactics Scale (CTS) and the Self-Report of Childhood Abuse Physical (SRCAP).
Lifetime and current psychopathology. Lifetime and current psychopathology were assessed during a two-hour in-person interview
between 1989-1995 (mean age= 28.7 years) according to DSM-III-R criteria based on the National Institute of Mental Health Diagnostic
Interview Schedule, Version III Revised
Timing This prospective cohort design study was initiated in 1986, based on cases were drawn from the records of county juvenile and adult
criminal courts in a metropolitan area in the Midwest during the years 1967 through 1971. For this paper, we use data from the second
phase of the study, which involved tracing, locating, and interviewing the abused and/or neglected children and comparison group
members a mean of 22.3 years later (SD = 2.1, range = 17-28) during 1989-1995.
Data exclusions n/a
Non-participation For this paper, we use data from the second phase of the study, which involved tracing, locating, and interviewing the abused and/or
neglected children and comparison group members a mean of 22.3 years later (SD = 2.1, range = 17-28) during 1989-1995. Of the
original sample of 1,575 (908 abused and/or neglected individuals and 667 controls), 1,307 subjects (83%) were located and 1,196
interviewed (76%). Of the people not interviewed, 43 were deceased (prior to interview), 8 were incapable of being interviewed, 268
were not found, and 60 refused to participate (a refusal rate of 3.8%). There were no significant differences between the interviewed
follow-up sample (N = 1,196) and the original sample (N = 1,575) in terms of demographic characteristics (male [p = .28]; white [p=.10];
poverty in childhood census tract [p = .44]; current age [p=.88]; or group status (abuse or neglected versus controls [p=.11]).
Randomization Participants were not randomly allocated to childhood maltreatment because of obvious ethical concerns. However, the two main
groups of participants with vs without actual experience of maltreatment (based on official court records) showed no differences in key
demographic characteristics (i.e., gender, race/ethnicity, and age) because of a painstaking matching procedure inbuilt in the study
design.
Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods
We require information from authors about some types of materials, experimental systems and methods used in many studies. Here, indicate whether each material,
system or method listed is relevant to your study. If you are not sure if a list item applies to your research, read the appropriate section before selecting a response.
3
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Materials & experimental systems Methods
n/a Involved in the study n/a Involved in the study
Antibodies ChIP-seq
Eukaryotic cell lines Flow cytometry
Palaeontology MRI-based neuroimaging
Animals and other organisms
Human research participants
Clinical data
Human research participants
Policy information about studies involving human research participants
Population characteristics see above
Recruitment The rationale for identifying the abused and neglected group was that their cases were serious enough to come to the attention
of the authorities. Only court-substantiated cases of child abuse and neglect were included here. Cases were drawn from the
records of county juvenile and adult criminal courts in a metropolitan area in the Midwest during the years 1967 through 1971. A
comparison group of children matched on the basis of age, sex, race/ethnicity, and approximate family social class at the time of
the child maltreatment. Children were ages 0-11 when their cases came to the attention of the courts and matched control
children were identified through school and hospital of birth records.
Based on information from the interview in young adulthood, sample members completed an average of 11.47 (SD = 2.19) years
of school. The median occupational level for the sample was semi-skilled workers, with less than 7% in levels 7-9 (managers to
professionals). Thus, the sample is skewed toward the lower end of the socioeconomic spectrum.
Ethics oversight IRB at Indiana University and State University of New York at Albany
Note that full information on the approval of the study protocol must also be provided in the manuscript.