Articles
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-019-0800-6
Trait knowledge forms a common structure across
social cognition
Ryan M. Stolier 1*, Eric Hehman2 and Jonathan B. Freeman 3,4*
Researchers have noted the resemblance across core models of social cognition, in which trait inferences centre on others’
intentions and abilities (for example, warmth, competence). Current views posit that this common ‘trait space’ originates from
the adaptive utility of the dimensions, predicting a relatively fixed and universal architecture. In contrast, we hypothesize that
perceivers learn conceptual knowledge of how traits correlate, which shapes trait inferences similarly across domains (for
example, faces, person knowledge, stereotypes), from which a common trait space emerges. Here we show substantial overlap
between the structures of perceivers’ conceptual and social perceptual trait spaces, across perceptual domains (studies 1–4)
and that conceptual associations directly shape trait space (study 5). Furthermore, we find evidence that conceptual trait space
is learned from social perception and actual personality structure (studies 6 and 7). Our findings suggest conceptual trait asso-
ciations serve as a cornerstone in social perception, providing broad implications for the study of social behaviour.
T
o navigate an exceptionally complex social world, we ascribe Decades of personality research indicates that actual person-
countless traits to one another. Yet, this sea of trait inferences ality traits are in fact correlated along a lower set of dimensions
cohere into a small set of dimensions comprising a ‘trait space’ (for example, two-factor and five-factor solutions, such as the Big
in social cognition: most often two dimensions, concerning others’ Five11,12). It may be the case that perceivers learn how personality
intentions (for example, warmth, trustworthiness, communion) or correlates through various means, such as cultural transmission,
capacity to enact those intentions (competence, dominance, agency; direct observations and interactions (for reviews, see refs. 10,13), and
for reviews, see refs. 1,2). This trait space seems conspicuously sim- apply this knowledge to infer others’ traits whether in pursuit of
ilar across a variety of distinct domains in social cognition, such accuracy or due to the inevitable effects of associative processing.
as first impressions from faces3, knowledge of familiar others4 and This inferential process may be analagous to how perceivers’ cog-
group stereotypes5. Thus, it has been theorized that social cogni- nitive models of mental-state associations are applied to accurately
tion has a fixed architecture structured around a set of universal predict a target’s future mental states based on their current one14,15.
dimensions, often interpreted to reflect that humans track intention Thus, here we explore the possibility that perceivers conceptually
and capability traits given their utility in guiding adaptive social learn actual trait associations and use those learned conceptual
behaviour2,6. While such a process may explain why certain traits associations when perceiving others.
are central to trait dimensions (for example, morality to the warmth Here, we extend this conceptually driven stance on trait infer-
dimension7,8), recent research has found substantial variation in the ences to explain a commonality in trait space structure across social
dimensionality of trait space9, and it is still unclear why the count- cognitive domains (including face impressions, familiar person
less traits (for example, sociability, humour, neuroticism, liberalism) knowledge and group stereotypes; studies 1–5; Fig. 1), which may
correlate along these dimensions as they do. Moreover, it is unclear be a by-product of applying learned trait knowledge to form initial
whether the organization of trait inferences along low-level dimen- inferences (studies 6 and 7). This process diverges from a universal
sions is merely an emergent property of social perception (for exam- account2 in that the mechanism underlying trait space structure is
ple, tracking central traits of warmth and competence2), or plays a not an evolved tendency for tracking functionally adaptive infor-
functional role in forming social perceptions and trait inferences mation, but rather reflects general conceptual knowledge about
in the first place. personality. Because such knowledge may differ across individuals
Another possible explanation of a common trait space in social depending on their experiences or learning, this perspective also
cognition is that perceivers may hold subjective conceptual knowl- provides a parsimonious account of emerging evidence that trait
edge of how personality traits correlate in others, which then guides space changes across individual perceivers and social contexts9,16–18.
trait inferences similarly across many social cognitive domains. We find evidence in support of this account across several studies.
For instance, perceivers may believe kind others are often intelli- All stimuli, data and analysis scripts (Python, R) are available on the
gent, and thus judge a kind face, reputed other or social group to Open Science Framework (OSF), from which results may be repro-
also be intelligent. This would cause trait inferences to correlate duced (https://osf.io/2uzsx/).
similarly across social perception, thus producing a common trait
space. Classic research regarding such conceptual associations (that Results
is, implicit personality theory10) has shown that they influence Study 1. In study 1, we compared models of various social per-
trait inferences and trait space during impression formation based ceptual trait spaces to a model of conceptual trait space (Methods;
on vignettes7,11. Fig. 2). Distinct sets of participants reported their conceptual
1Department of Psychology, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA. 2Department of Psychology, McGill University, Montreal, Québec, Canada.
3Department of Psychology, New York University, New York, NY, USA. 4Center for Neural Science, New York University, New York, NY, USA.
*e-mail: rms2262@columbia.edu; jon.freeman@nyu.edu
NaTuRE HuMaN BEHaviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NatuRe HumaN BeHavIOuR
(RSA), testing the Spearman correlation between unique values in
Conceptual Face impressions each matrix pair (Spearman correlation used so as to not assume a
associations
strictly linear relationship between distances in any two spaces20). In
effect, this tests whether the relative degree of correlation between
trait pairs across different trait spaces is the same. To account for
structured dependency of matrices and allow inference towards
Friendly Self- our participants (given studies 1, 2 and 7 collapse across subjects),
disciplined
additional approaches for all such RSA analyses are reported in the
Supplementary Results.
All pairwise trait space matrix analyses are depicted in Fig. 2b–d.
We tested our hypothesis that a common social perceptual trait
space may reflect a more domain-general conceptual trait space.
Consistent with this hypothesis, we observed significant similarity
between the conceptual trait space matrix and all social perceptual
trait space matrices (Fig. 2b–d; conceptual matrix predicts: face trait
space matrix, Spearman ρ(103) = 0.796, ρ2(103) = 0.634, P < 0.0001,
95% confidence interval (CI) = [0.713, 0.857]; familiar person trait
space matrix, Spearman ρ(103) = 0.739, ρ2(103) = 0.545, P < 0.0001,
95% CI = [0.637, 0.815]; social group trait space matrix, Spearman
ρ(103) = 0.779, ρ2(103) = 0.606, P < 0.0001, 95% CI = [0.690, 0.844]).
Additional analyses confirmed a strong correspondence among the
three social perceptual trait matrices (Supplementary Results). RSA
using a valence similarity matrix (Supplementary Fig. 1) demon-
strated that all reported effects occur above and beyond any effects
due to valence alone. These findings provide evidence in support of
our theoretical hypothesis that a domain-general conceptual trait
space is reflected in a common social perceptual trait space seen
across several domains.
Study 2. An important aspect of our theoretical perspective is
that trait conceptual knowledge drives inferences regarding
social cognition, which are used for understanding other people
and predicting their behaviours. We may predict a ‘kind’ per-
son who behaves affectionately to be ‘extroverted’ and socialize
frequently. One alternative interpretation of the results is that
the correlation of any two trait inferences, such as ‘kind’ and
‘extroverted’, is due merely to how participants find any two words
synonymous in semantic meaning (for reviews, see refs. 10,21). To
highlight the role of the trait concepts measured here as meaning-
ful concepts that reflect perceivers’ differential predictions about
human behaviour15, eliminate concerns regarding semantics and
provide a conservative conceptual replication of study 1, in study
2 we designed a set of tasks emphasizing traits as distinct con-
cepts used to predict distinct behaviours in a substantive man-
ner15. Rather than asking participants about the same trait terms
across domains (for example, ‘Is this face kind?’ and ‘Is this
group kind?’), we used different items for each domain, which asked
associations between traits (n = 116; for example, ‘Are kind people about the behavioural tendencies thought to underlie personality
often intelligent?’) and impressions towards unfamiliar faces (for a traits (for example, instead of ‘kind’: ‘Is this face likely to agree
collection of social perceptual similarity matrices in studies 1 and 2, with others?’ and ‘Is this social group likely to compliment others?’).
sample size reported is total participant raters, where subsets of this We gathered several items to correspond uniquely to each trait.
total reported sample rated each trait; n = 484; for example, ‘How Thus, we used behavioural tendency descriptions as proxies for
kind/intelligent is this face?’), familiar famous and historical people traits for each of the different social perceptual domains, and
(n = 503; for example, ‘How kind/intelligent is Barack Obama?’) and compared the similarity matrices to the conceptual similarity
social groups (n = 488; for example, ‘How kind/intelligent are teach- matrix collected in study 1 that used direct trait terms. Items were
ers?’). We looked at a trait space of 15 trait terms across domains, chosen from the NEOPI (Neuroticism–Extraversion–Openness
made up of three subtraits per each of the Big Five factors of person- Personality Inventory)19, given both its use of behavioural tendency
ality (Methods; Fig. 219). From these data, we computed a similarity descriptions to collect information about people’s personalities,
matrix for each of these four domain models (Fig. 2a). Each matrix and prior validation of these items and their relation to actual
is a collection of all pairwise ‘similarities’ in each domain, where personality traits.
similarity in the conceptual trait space matrix is the conceptual We collected new matrices of face (n = 496), familiar person
association between each trait pair (‘How likely are kind people to knowledge (n = 478) and social group trait space (n = 489) using
be intelligent?’; 1–7 Likert-type item), and in each perceptual trait distinct trait descriptions between each task (Methods). The data of
space matrix is the pairwise Pearson correlation between each trait study 1 were used for the conceptual similarity matrix. Consistent
inference (for example, correlation of ‘kind’ and ‘intelligent’ face with our hypothesis, we again observed a significant correlation
impressions). We then applied representational similarity analysis between the conceptual trait space matrix and the three social
denilpicsid-fleS
denilpicsid-fleS
denilpicsid-fleS
a b
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5 5.0
Friendly
c Familiar person d Group stereotypes
knowledge
Stephen Hawking Lawyers Teachers
Barack Obama
5
5.5 Mark Zuckerberg Men
Women
Kevin Bacon 4
4.5 Vladimir Putin George W. Bush Gays
Immigrants
Nancy Grace 3
3.5
Snoop Dogg Children
Justin Bieber 2 CriminaH lsomeless people
3 4 5 6 2 3 4 5
Friendly Friendly
Fig. 1 | Conceptual illustration of theoretical and analytic approach. a–d,
We theorize that conceptual trait associations (a) shape social perceptions
across domains (b–d). Thus, our analytic strategy across studies was
to evaluate whether the pairwise relationships between personality
traits across these domains are similar. For instance, we observe that
the conceptual association between two personality traits, ‘friendly’ and
‘self-disciplined’ (a), is mirrored by the correlation of ‘friendly’ and ‘self-
disciplined’ perceptions of faces (b), familiar others (c) and social groups
(d). Please note this figure is for illustrative purposes. It is also important to
note that analyses reported do not test the similarity in magnitude of trait-
pair correlations between domains, but rather whether the rank-ordering
of associated trait pairs is similar between domains (Methods). Panel a
is conceptually illustrative, whereas panels b–d depict a subset of data
from study 1, nine data points per panel. Blue lines are predicted values
via Pearson correlation of the two axis variables. Several trait spaces and
stimulus examples are provided as data points in panels b–d. Face stimuli
in panel b are adapted from ref. 50 under a Creative Commons licence
CC BY 4.0.
NaTuRE HuMaN BEHaviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NatuRe HumaN BeHavIOuR Articles
Conceptual associations Face impressions Familiar person knowledge Group stereotypes
7 7 7
6 6 6
5 5 5
4 4 4
3 3 3
2 2 2
1 1 1
–1.0 –0.5 0 0.5 1.0 –1.0 –0.5 0 0.5 1.0 –1.0 –0.5 0 0.5 1.0
Face impressions Familiar person knowledge Group stereotypes
perceptual trait space matrices, despite the use of unique items to Study 3. While studies 1 and 2 provide initial evidence that the
construct the different matrices (Supplementary Fig. 2; conceptual structure of trait inferences reflect that of conceptual associations,
matrix predicts: face trait space matrix, Spearman ρ(103) = 0.575, these high-level assessments only ask whether, on average across
ρ2(103) = 0.331, P < 0.0001, 95% CI = [0.431, 0.691]; familiar per- perceivers, traits more correlated in conceptual associations are
son trait space matrix, Spearman ρ(103) = 0.576, ρ2(103) = 0.332, more correlated in trait inferences. An important component of our
P < 0.0001, 95% CI = [0.432, 0.691]; social group trait space theoretical perspective is that conceptual trait associations may shift
matrix, Spearman ρ(103) = 0.574, ρ2(103) = 0.329, P < 0.0001, initial trait inferences, which would entail that variance between
95% CI = [0.430, 0.690]). Similar results were obtained when con- perceivers’ conceptual knowledge should uniquely shape their idio-
trolling for valence (Supplementary Results). These findings again syncratic trait inferences across domains. People who believe two
suggest that trait conceptual associations and inferences are corre- traits are more or less correlated (for example, ‘kind people are/not
lated across domains of social cognition in a similar fashion, sug- intelligent’) should make more or less tethered inferences of those
gesting that domain-general conceptual associations may be applied two traits (for example, ‘kind faces and groups are/not intelligent’).
across each domain, resulting in a common trait space. The results In study 3 (n = 162), we extended the methodology of stud-
also suggest that the commonality in trait space is due to beliefs ies 1 and 2. Focusing on face impressions, we collected both con-
about personality traits as concepts used to predict meaningful ceptual and face trait space matrices per subject along eight traits
social behaviour, rather than a mere artefact of semantic relatedness (‘adventurous’, ‘assertive’, ‘cautious’, ‘depressed’, ‘emotional’, ‘friendly’,
among trait terms. ‘self-disciplined’, ‘trustworthy’). We performed RSA within a linear
snoitaicossa
lautpecnoC
1
0
–1
b c d
ralimiS
ralimissiD
ralimiS
ralimissiD
a
Adventurous 7
Cheerful
Cooperative
Dutiful
Emotional
Friendly
Intellectual
Self-disciplined
Sympathetic
Trustworthy
Angry
Anxious
Assertive
Cautious 1
Depressed
Adventur Co Chu oes oer pf eu rl ativ D Ee ut mif otu il o F In ri n Sa tl e ee lln fl -d el dicy t s Su c yial p mli p Tn rae t ud h steti wc orth Ay n Agr ny xi Ao ssus er Cti av Dute ei po ru es ssed Adventur Co Chu oes oer pf eu rl ativ D Ee ut mif otu il o F In ri n Sa tl e ee lln fl -d el dicy t s Su c yial p mli p Tn rae t ud h steti wc orth Ay n Agr ny xi Ao ssus er Cti av Dute ei po ru es ssed Adventur Co Chu oes oer pf eu rl ativ D Ee ut mif otu il o F In ri n Sa tl e eleln fl -d el dicy t s Su ci yal pl mi pn Trae t ud h steti wc orth Ay n Agr ny xi Ao ssus er Cti av Dute ei po ru es ssed Adventur C Co h ou e os e prf erul ativ D Ee ut mif otu il o F In ri n Sa tl e ee lln fl -d el dicy t s Su c yial p mli p Tn rae t ud h steti wc orth Ay n Agr ny xi Ao ssus er Cti av Dute ei po ru es ssed
Fig. 2 | Trait inferences across social cognition mirror conceptual knowledge. a, All trait space similarity matrices from study 1, each made of the
pairwise similarity values between each trait pair (plotted from dissimilar (blue) to similar (red)). Each matrix is sorted by the k-means cluster solution
of the conceptual trait space matrix, to most intuitively depict their similar structure. Each matrix was collected from a distinct task, set of stimuli and
set of participants. b–d, The results show that conceptual trait space (n = 116) is largely reflected in social perceptual trait spaces across domains (face
impressions (b), n = 484, Spearman ρ(103) = 0.796, ρ2(103) = 0.634, P < 0.0001, 95% CI = [0.713, 0.857]; person knowledge (c), n = 503, Spearman
ρ(103) = 0.739, ρ2(103) = 0.545, P < 0.0001, 95% CI = [0.637, 0.815]; group stereotypes (d), n = 488, Spearman ρ(103) = 0.779, ρ2(103) = 0.606,
P < 0.0001, 95% CI = [0.690, 0.844]). Error ribbons show the standard error of the estimate, and there are 105 trait pairs as data points per panel.
Distributions of data points along each variable are plotted along each variable’s axis as both a histogram and density plot. While Pearson correlations of
original similarity data points are plotted for ease of interpretation, statistical analyses were of rank-ordered data points. In each plot (b–d), trait space
matrices (a) are flattened into their unique pairwise similarity values and plotted against one another (conceptual on the y axis, left-most matrix; social
perceptual matrices along the x axes, right three matrices). Each data point is a trait pair (for example, ‘friendly’–‘self-disciplined’). In each comparison,
as two traits become more associated in conceptual knowledge (y axis), they become more correlated in trait inferences across domains (x axes). This
pattern is found in study 1, in which trait terms were used in each task (for example, ‘friendly’, ‘self-disciplined’), and in study 2, in which different trait
descriptors were used in each task (for example, ‘friendly’ in the conceptual task, ‘likely’ to agree with others’ in the face task; see study 2 results and
Supplementary Fig. 2).
NaTuRE HuMaN BEHaviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NatuRe HumaN BeHavIOuR
0.03 0.06 0.09 0.12
Data density
2
1
0
–1
–2
–1 0 1
Perceiver face trait space
Perceiver face impression association
Perceiver familiar person knowledge association Perceiver group stereotype association
mixed-effects model (Methods), predicting participants’ face trait differences in conceptual trait associations correspond to individual
space matrices via their subjective conceptual trait space matrices. differences in specific trait inferences in each domain: face impres-
Importantly, we allowed for random effects of subject and controlled sions (n = 167), familiar person knowledge (n = 155) and social
for the group-average conceptual trait space matrix, therefore test- groups stereotypes (n = 162). In this task, each participant first
ing whether there is a unique contribution of subjective conceptual rated target stimuli along a pair of two randomly assigned traits,
knowledge to face impressions. Subjective conceptual trait space then reported their conceptual association between the assigned
significantly predicted subjective face trait space over and above trait pair. We then tested whether individual differences in con-
group-average conceptual trait space (Fig. 3a; standardized beta ceptual associations correlated with individual differences in trait
(b) = 0.145, s.e. = 0.020, t(141.5) = 7.432, P < 0.0001, 95% CI = [0.11, inference associations. In support of our account, we found a con-
0.19]; similar results were obtained when controlling for valence; sistent relationship between perceiver conceptual and trait infer-
Supplementary Results). ence associations. The more perceivers conceptually associated trait
pairs the more they saw those traits similarly in targets (Fig. 3b–d;
Study 4. To further explore the role of perceiver’s idiosyncratic con- conceptual associations correlate with: face impressions, Spearman
ceptual structure and individual differences, as well as survey each ρ(165) = 0.331, ρ2(165) = 0.110, P < 0.0001, 95% CI = [0.189,
domain of trait inferences, in study 4 we tested whether individual 0.460]; familiar person knowledge, Spearman ρ(153) = 0.308,
ecaps
tiart
lautpecnoc
reviecreP
noitaicossa
lautpecnoc
reviecreP
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
noitaicossa
lautpecnoc
reviecreP
–1.0 –0.5 0 0.5 1.0
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
–1.0 –0.5 0 0.5 1.0
noitaicossa
lautpecnoc
reviecreP
a b
c d
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
–1.0 –0.5 0 0.5 1.0
Fig. 3 | individual differences in conceptual knowledge predict social perception. a, Study 3 tested whether the subjective conceptual trait space of
a perceiver uniquely predicts their face trait space. A linear mixed-effects model was fit to effectively perform RSA clustered per subject (Methods),
and participant subjective conceptual trait space matrices (y axis) predicted their face trait space matrices (x axis), over and above the group-average
conceptual trait space matrix (to isolate the effect of subjective associations; estimate of this fixed effect is plotted; b = 0.145, s.e. = 0.020, t(141.5) = 7.432,
P < 0.0001, 95% CI = [0.11, 0.19]). Each data point is a trait pair (28 pairs), unique to each subject (n = 162; total of 4,563 data points; a contour plot is
provided due to the quantity of data, where the colour lightness of the density function represents the probability of each value given the range of values,
and the red line is predicted values estimated through multiple regression). b–d, In study 4, we see that, across domains, perceivers who believe two traits
are more correlated (y axis) also see those traits more similarly in targets (x axes; face impressions (b), n = 167, Spearman ρ(165) = 0.331, ρ2(165) = 0.110,
P < 0.0001, 95% CI = [0.189, 0.460]; familiar person knowledge (c), n = 155, Spearman ρ(153) = 0.308, ρ2(153) = 0.095, P < 0.0001, 95% CI = [0.158,
0.444]; group stereotypes (d), n = 162, Spearman ρ(160) = 0.435, ρ2(160) = 0.189, P < 0.0001, 95% CI = [0.301, 0.552]). Error ribbons display standard
error of the estimate and data points are each participant per study. While Pearson correlations are plotted for ease of interpretation, statistical analyses
were of rank-ordered data points. These results suggest that subjects’ idiosyncratic conceptual knowledge and trait inferences are related.
NaTuRE HuMaN BEHaviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NatuRe HumaN BeHavIOuR Articles
ρ2(153) = 0.095, P < 0.0001, 95% CI = [0.158, 0.444]; social group Conceptual association condition
stereotypes, Spearman ρ(160) = 0.435, ρ2(160) = 0.189, P < 0.0001,
95% CI = [0.301, 0.552]). In addition to study 3, these results dem- Negative
onstrate that perceivers’ subjective trait inferences reflect their
5 Positive
unique conceptual associations. Importantly, these results suggest a
common trait space is observed within perceivers in line with their
own subjective conceptual knowledge, and a common yet divergent
structure of trait space between perceivers may emerge to the extent
4
perceivers share or diverge in their conceptual trait knowledge.
Study 5. A key premise of our perspective is that conceptual asso-
ciations between traits are used in the trait inference process, shap- 3
ing their initial formation and consequently their intercorrelations,
from which emerges a conceptually bound trait space across social
perception. So far, while we have found evidence for the relation-
ship between conceptual associations and trait inferences, this evi-
dence has been correlational in nature. In study 5, we manipulated
perceiver conceptual associations to more directly examine their
directional influence on trait inferences. Participants (n = 141) were
randomly assigned to one of two between-subjects conditions, in
which they were led to believe two traits were either positively or
negatively correlated. At the beginning of the study, participants
were randomly allocated a trait pair from the six unique pairings
of ‘friendly’, ‘depressed’, ‘intellectual’. To manipulate the direction
of conceptual associations, participants read a faux science article
about personality, which described research finding that the two
traits assigned to that participant were either positively or negatively
correlated (Methods). Participants then completed a face rating task.
Our analysis tested whether the associations of participants’
face impressions were affected by their assigned conceptual asso-
ciation. For instance, we predicted that participants led to believe
‘friendly’ people are more versus less often ‘depressed’ would rate
friendly appearing faces as more versus less ‘depressed’. As repeated
face ratings were nested within participant, we examined our
hypothesis in a multilevel model. We regressed average ratings of
the faces along one trait dimension (for example, ‘friendly’; average
ratings taken from independent raters) on our participants’ rat-
ings of the faces along the other trait dimension (for example,
‘intellectual’), their assigned association condition and interac-
tion of these two variables (Methods and Supplementary Methods
for details). Participant ratings were group centred. In the model,
intercepts were random and slopes were fixed. Consistent with our
hypothesis, the strength of association between the two trait dimen- correlated positively or negatively depending on their between-
sions varied by association condition (Fig. 4; unstandardized beta subjects condition. Participants were tasked with assessing the ‘cau-
(B) = 0.023, s.e. = 0.003, P < 0.0001, 95% CI = [0.017, 0.030]). Simple tiousness’ of different individuals via their faces. After they rated
slopes revealed a more negative trait-pair association in the negative each face, they were given feedback after the trial as to whether they
condition (B = −0.084, s.e. = 0.005, P < 0.0001, 95% CI = [−0.094, were correct or incorrect regarding the face’s ‘cautiousness’. These
−0.074]) than the positive condition (B = −0.037, s.e. = 0.003, faces varied in how friendly they appeared. Friendliness judgements
P < 0.0001, 95% CI = [−0.047, −0.029]). Note that in both condi- are highly consistent across perceivers22, and we used faces rated low
tions, the trait-pair association should reflect not only the effect of versus high in perceived friendliness from study 1 for the present
the manipulation but also priors or a ‘baseline’ level of association study. In the ‘positive association’ condition, faces above average in
between the particular traits. Thus, although the regression coef- how ‘friendly’ they looked were labelled as ‘more cautious’ and faces
ficient is negative in both conditions, what is critical is whether its below average in how ‘friendly’ they looked were labelled as ‘less
magnitude differs across conditions. These results provide causal cautious’. In the ‘negative association’ condition, this pattern was
evidence in support of our theoretical account that conceptual trait reversed. Therefore, as participants judged the ‘cautiousness’ of dif-
associations structure initial inferences and their correlations, from ferent faces, they received feedback that reinforced either the posi-
which trait space emerges. tive or negative association of targets’ ‘cautiousness’ with the targets’
‘friendliness’. Afterwards, participants reported their conceptual
Study 6. While conceptual associations may guide trait inferences, associations between the two traits as in previous studies.
it is also certainly plausible that this influence is bidirectional: the As predicted, we found that perceivers manipulated to believe
origins of conceptual trait associations may derive from inferences friendliness and cautiousness were positively associated conceptu-
about the social world. Study 6 provided an initial test of this pos- ally associated the two traits to a stronger degree (mean, M = 4.508,
sibility. Rather than manipulate a conceptual trait association and s.d. = 1.593) than perceivers led to believe the traits were negatively
measure its effect on the correlation of face judgements (as in associated (M = 4.019, s.d. = 1.416; mean difference = 0.4888, inde-
study 5), here we test whether the reverse also holds true. In study pendent t-test, t(144) = 2.127, P = 0.035, r2 = 0.03, mean differ-
6, participants learned that two traits (‘friendly’ and ‘cautious’) were ence 95% CI = [0.035, 0.943]; Fig. 5a). These findings support the
)2
tiart(
lla
ta
toN
Not at all (trait 1)
)2
tiart(
yreV
–2.5 0 2.5 Very (trait 1)
Trait 1 participant rating
gnitar
egareva
2
tiarT
Fig. 4 | Conceptual associations directly shape trait inferences and
space. In study 5, we manipulated perceiver conceptual associations with
faux science articles and found that perceivers in the negative conceptual
association condition see traits less similarly in targets compared with
participants in the positive association condition (n = 141, 90 faces rated,
with 12,690 data points plotted; B = 0.023, s.e. = 0.003, P < 0.0001,
95% CI = [0.017, 0.030]. Red versus blue data points and lines distinguish
the negative versus positive association conditions. Error ribbons display
standard error of the estimates. Participant ratings of faces (each data
point is a face) along one trait (x axis; ‘trait 1’) correlated with average
ratings of the face (from study 1) along another trait (y axis; ‘trait 2’) more
negatively in the negative association condition (B = −0.084, s.e. = 0.005,
P < 0.0001, 95% CI = [−0.094, −0.074]) than the positive association
condition (B = −0.037, s.e. = 0.003, P < 0.0001, 95% CI = [−0.047,
−0.029]). (Note that in both conditions, priors likely set baseline
associations between traits and tether the manipulation down. Therefore,
the magnitude and direction of a slope is not relevant to the effects. What
is critical is whether its magnitude differs between conditions.) These
findings demonstrate that conceptual associations may directly influence
the initial trait inference process, from which the structure of trait space
may emerge.
NaTuRE HuMaN BEHaviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NatuRe HumaN BeHavIOuR
5
4
3
2
1
0
Negative Positive Learning trait association
condition
hypothesis that perceivers not only apply conceptual knowledge to our NEOPI trait space matrix could reflect perceivers’ social cogni-
social perception but also learn about trait concepts from social per- tive trait spaces merely due to semantic similarities in measurement
ception. However, an important limitation of these experiments is (for example, reporting of ‘warmth’ trait in self and in others). The
the strong priors that individuals hold through a lifetime of learn- Big Five factor model of personality is composed of a larger set of
ing that would precede this experiment. More critically, while these personality traits underlying each of the Big Five factors, known
findings demonstrate learning of conceptual associations are pos- as its ‘facets’, which were the trait adjectives used in our research
sible, the results are agnostic to the actual source of the associations above taken from the facet subscales of the NEOPI19,27. Therefore,
that perceivers bring to the table in trait inference (such as those we were able to calculate a NEOPI trait space matrix comparable
found in studies 1–4). to the social cognition trait space matrices used in studies 1 and 2,
as the same 15 traits are measured in all domains. The NEOPI trait
Study 7. One of the candidate sources of conceptual trait space is space (Fig. 5b) was calculated via data acquired from a large open
learning of the actual structure of others’ personality traits. Much source dataset (n = 307,313 participants; retrieved from https://osf.
like conceptual trait space, people’s actual personality traits are io/tbmh5)27. This allowed us to effectively test whether trait pairs
highly correlated along a relatively small set of dimensions (for associated in conceptual knowledge are also associated in a ground-
example, the Big Five factors of personality23,24). If actual personal- truth model of personality.
ity traits were in fact correlated, a simple strategy to optimize trait Strikingly, perceiver social conceptual knowledge (via study 1)
inference for perceivers would be to learn this structure and make closely tracked the NEOPI trait structure, where trait pairs that
predictions accordingly. Not all of our personality traits are worn perceivers conceptually relate are also more correlated in person-
on our sleeve25, so perceivers may take trait information at hand to ality as measured in the NEOPI (Fig. 5c; Spearman ρ(103) = 0.77,
surmise the whole of a target. For example, perceivers may use ‘talk- ρ2(103) = 0.60, P < 0.0001; 95% CI = [0.684, 0.841]). Supplementary
ativeness’, a more visible trait, to infer a target’s ‘anxiety’, a less visible analyses confirmed that social perceptual trait spaces also strongly
trait, based on their conceptual association between ‘talkative’ and resembled NEOPI trait space, as would be expected through transi-
‘anxious’25. If perceivers learn the actual structure of personality, tivity given our hypothesis that social perceptual trait spaces reflect
traits they believe are more similar conceptually would also be more conceptual trait space (Supplementary Fig. 3 and Supplementary
similar in actual human personality structure. This, of course, would Results). These findings show that perceiver trait conceptual knowl-
be only one among many candidate sources for trait knowledge26. edge reflects actual personality structure, suggesting the possibility
To test this possibility, we compared conceptual trait space that its structure may be learned through some mechanism, such as
(as measured in study 1) to an estimate of actual personality trait cultural transmission or accurate observation.
space via the NEO personality inventory (henceforth referred to
as ‘NEOPI trait space’19,24). The NEOPI is a canonical and empiri- Discussion
cally validated model of personality structure, ideal for the current Taken together, our results broadly demonstrate that conceptual
research as participants whose personality traits are measured do trait knowledge shapes trait inferences across distinct domains
not explicitly evaluate whether they possess the traits of ‘trustwor- of social perception, including face impressions, familiar person
thiness’ or ‘anxiety’. This greatly reduces the potential confound that knowledge and group stereotypes. The similarity structures of social
gninrael-tsoP
snoitaicossa
lautpecnoc
NEOPI
trait associations
Adventurous
Cheerful 1
Cooperative
Dutiful
Emotional
Friendly
Intellectual
Self-disciplined 0
Sympathetic Trustworthy
Angry
Anxious
Assertive
Cautious
Depressed –1
In St ee ll fl -e dict su c Sia yl pli mn pe Ta rtd uh se tti wc orthy Ang Ar ny xi Ao su ss erti Cv ae ut Di eo pu rs essed
NEOPI trait correlations
ralimiS
ralimissiD
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
–1.0 –0.5 0 0.5 1.0
snoitaicossa
lautpecnoC
a b c
Adventuro Cu h Cs e oe or pf eul rative D Euti mf oul tio Fn rial endly
Fig. 5 | Social perception and trait inferences influence conceptual trait space. In studies 6 and 7, we tested whether the relationship between conceptual
knowledge and trait inferences is bidirectional. a, In study 6 (n = 146), we found that conceptual associations between two traits (‘cautious’, ‘friendly’;
y axis) were stronger for participants assigned to observe those two traits positively correlating in target faces (M = 4.508, s.d. = 1.593), compared with
participants assigned to perceive their negative correlation (M = 4.019, s.d. = 1.416; mean difference = 0.4888, independent t-test, t(144) = 2.127, P = 0.035,
r2 = 0.03, mean difference 95% CI = [0.035, 0.943]). Mean (bar height) and standard error (error bars) of participants’ conceptual associations are plotted
(negative association condition in pink, positive in blue). b,c, In study 7, we tested whether perceivers’ conceptual knowledge is learned to some extent
from the actual structure of human personality. b, We collected a trait space matrix of actual personality trait correlations of those traits used in previous
studies (via the NEOPI, n = 307,313; personality trait correlations plotted from negative (blue) to positive (red)). c, RSA found that the NEOPI trait space
matrix and conceptual trait space matrices explain a sizeable proportion of variance in one another (105 trait pairs as data points, Spearman ρ(103) = 0.77,
ρ2(103) = 0.60, P < 0.0001; 95% CI = [0.684, 0.841]). Error ribbons display standard error of the estimate, and there are 105 trait pairs as data points
per panel. While Pearson correlations are plotted for ease of interpretation, statistical analyses were of rank-ordered data points. These findings suggest
conceptual trait space is also shaped through social perception and that one potential source is direct observational or indirect social learning of the actual
correlation of personality traits in others.
NaTuRE HuMaN BEHaviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NatuRe HumaN BeHavIOuR Articles
perceptual trait inferences were all highly correlated with that of learning of the social environment40, or indirect sources, such as
conceptual trait space (studies 1 and 2). Participants’ idiosyncratic cultural learning and gossip41. Such knowledge is also probably
conceptual knowledge was reflected in their inferences and social shaped and biased by the host of processes and biases long known to
perceptual trait spaces (studies 3 and 4), and manipulation of per- influence trait inferences26. One interesting question is the relative
ceiver conceptual associations influenced trait inferences accord- degree that semantic knowledge compared with cognitive biases
ingly (study 5). To probe the source of trait concept knowledge, contributes to trait space structure. Furthermore, our findings do
we found evidence suggesting that conceptual knowledge may be not speak to which domains of social perception provide informa-
learned through social perception, demonstrating the bidirectional tion about actual personality. We would speculate different domains
nature of this process, through direct observation (study 6) or learn- must contribute differently. For instance, perception of more or less
ing about the actual structure of personality traits (study 7). familiar individuals may provide more or less signal towards actual
These findings provide quantitative evidence for a common trait trait correlations25,42, yet perceived trait correlations in faces and ste-
space across social cognition2, which may emerge as trait infer- reotypes may suffer from limited signal as these sources are often
ences are similarly shaped by learned conceptual trait space across biased43–45 (cf. ref. 46) and thus contribute less significantly to such
the many domains of social perception. A prominent perspective accurate trait correlation learning. This line of research may there-
is that a common trait space arises due to the adaptive utility of its fore be of interest to the accuracy literature more broadly47, and join
core dimensions—namely that, across social domains, perceivers other recent findings exploring accuracy through the perspective
track those traits significant to our function and survival (inten- of trait space models15. Future research should quantify the contri-
tions and capabilities; for example, ‘competence’ and ‘warmth’2,6). butions of different information sources to the development of
Evidence suggests that this is the case, as traits with adaptive utility conceptual trait knowledge.
play a central role in dimensions of social cognition. Yet there is It is crucial to note that, although trait space structure may be
much additional covariation in the true expanse of trait space that learned from actual personality structure, this should not imply
is less easily explained by this functional perspective, such as the perceivers’ persistent accuracy in trait inferences themselves across
perceived relationships between humour, sociability, risk aversion domains, especially when perceivers begin with inaccurate and
or neuroticism. The findings reported here support a parsimoni- biased inferences (for example, in the case of face impressions44).
ous explanation by a more proximal mechanism to perceptions, that Rather, an accurately learned trait space may just as often lead
perceivers’ conceptual knowledge about how traits correlate in oth- to broad inaccuracies. Humans often begin with inaccurate and
ers shape how correlated they are in social perceptions regardless of biased trait inferences. When initial inferences are inaccurate, other
their domain10,13. This perspective provides a unifying framework trait inferences made through what are accurate associations may
through which we may understand trait space as part of a dynamic increase in likely inaccuracy. For instance, if friendliness and socia-
cognitive process, from which we may generate broad and general bility personality traits are in fact correlated, and perceivers under-
hypotheses about social perception based on context-varying mod- stand this, an erroneous ‘unfriendly’ inference of a friendly target
els of social conceptual structure. This perspective also fits trait would lead to an ‘unsociable’ inference, although the genuinely
inferences generally, especially outside of face perception, into an friendly target is more likely to be sociable. Thus, an accurate trait
emerging picture of the conceptual nature of social perception28,29. space structure is easily misapplied by inaccurate inference content,
This flexible account may be indispensable for accommodat- and the structure of trait space can be an accurate reflection of real-
ing emerging findings of dynamic shifts in social cognitive models. ity while the content of inferences is far from it. It will be important
Variation in social trait spaces has been increasingly well docu- for future work to identify when trait space may lead to accuracy or
mented, suggesting trait space may in fact be dynamic rather than error in judgement.
fixed in its structure, both shifting in its core dimensions and their We believe our perspective and findings here suggest a reori-
relations depending on social factors18,30–35. While trait space gene- enting in the study of trait space is needed. These and other recent
rally tends to be consistent across perceivers, various perceiver findings14,17 suggest trait space as a key process in forming initial
factors (for example, stereotypes, motivations, emotions) and social perceptions7, in which trait space as measured in the context of tar-
context may shape trait space (for a review, see ref. 9), as much of get evaluations is merely an emergent property of this process. Some
the variance in trait inferences is due to perceiver characteristics22. of the most interesting questions may be how and when conceptual
A trait space shaped by perceiver conceptual knowledge could, in trait space is used, for better or worse, and what unique predictions
theory, underlie these various findings. For instance, competence this framework affords models of social perception. One salient pre-
and warmth inferences come to correlate positively towards liked diction, much like in the case of individuation in stereotyping48, is
groups36 and negatively towards disliked groups or groups with spe- that trait space is most used when other trait information is scarce.
cific stereotypes (for example, outgroups and women30,37). Perhaps This is akin to saying perceivers may have ‘trait stereotypes’, or make
conceptual associations between personality traits vary across these further trait generalizations based on those they initially infer. In
contexts in systematic ways. Future research should investigate how recent years, a resurgence in the study of social perceptual dimen-
conceptual associations shift across social contexts, and whether sions has occurred, with scientific interest in what dimensions best
these shifts are reliably reflected in different social trait spaces. describe trait or mental-state space9,15. Should trait space be dynamic
An important question concerns the origins of perceivers’ con- and context dependent, attempts to identify and refine any ‘true’
ceptual trait associations, which we argue may lie at the foundation universal dimensions may be misguided, as trait space is destined
of a common social trait space. Human personality traits are in fact to vary when its conceptual basis and its application does. Future
intercorrelated23,24, and this similarity structure is tied to patterns research might benefit from explicating the precise role and shape
of behaviour38. Thus, it is possible people may come to learn actual of trait space in the context at hand, from which we may develop
personality structure to predict others’ behaviour10. Here we found nuanced models that predict the structure of trait inferences in par-
that conceptual trait space reflects that of actual personality traits. ticular domains.
Previous research has found similar associations13, and that perceiv- There are several limitations of this work. First, although we
ers can use accurate knowledge of one personality trait to accurately manipulate conceptual associations or face trait covariations
predict other traits of which they are not explicitly informed39. While in studies 5 and 6, more thorough designs should be developed
our findings suggest perceivers learn actual personality structure, to test the bidirectional and mutually causal relationship between
this is an area ripe for future research. Trait knowledge may be conceptual trait associations and social perception. Another limi-
acquired through direct observation, such as social and statistical tation is the use of verbal stimuli to measure trait space, as it may
NaTuRE HuMaN BEHaviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NatuRe HumaN BeHavIOuR
influence participant responses to conform across these tasks, Stimuli. Personality trait stimuli. We chose personality trait stimuli that
especially between actual and perceived trait spaces (for a review corresponded with many of the facet subscales of the NEOPI19,27. We chose 15
facet subscale traits, including three from each of the Big Five personality factors
of related research, see ref. 10). Lastly, studies 6 and 7 are demonstra-
to maintain a balance with the comparison of actual personality trait space. These
tions of possible sources of information shaping conceptual associa- were subtraits of the primary five factors: ‘agreeableness’, ‘conscientiousness’,
tions and should not be taken to present an exhaustive argument for ‘extroversion’, ‘neuroticism’ and ‘openness’. The three chosen per primary factor
the origins of conceptual trait knowledge. were selected to most easily translate into adjectives participants could engage
In short, the present research provides evidence of a common comfortably in each task. These traits included: ‘adventurous’, ‘angry’, ‘anxious’,
‘assertive’, ‘cautious’, ‘cheerful’, ‘cooperative’, ‘depressed’, ‘dutiful’, ‘emotional’,
trait space across social cognition, structured by perceivers’ learned
‘friendly’, ‘intellectual’, ‘self-disciplined’, ‘sympathetic’ and ‘trustworthy’.
conceptions of how personality traits correlate. This account of trait
space not only explains its homogeneity across social cognition, but Face stimuli. All stimuli were taken from the Chicago Face Database50. Face stimuli
also highlights that trait space may be dynamic rather than fixed in included 90 portrait photographs of young White male individuals with neutral
facial expressions. Exact stimulus identification numbers are provided on the OSF
its architecture to the extent perceiver conceptual knowledge about
page (https://osf.io/2uzsx/). Example stimuli are presented in Fig. 1b.
personality shifts due to myriad social and contextual factors. We
hope this work provides a parsimonious framework to understand Familiar person stimuli. All familiar person stimuli were chosen from recent work
trait space, and importantly, allows us to move beyond its measure- that used data-driven methods to identify individuals highest in familiarity to a
ment to questions of its foundational role in social perception. similar online sample demographic, and maximize diversity in traits of the stimuli
to guarantee a wide and generalizable sampling of trait space51. We used all 60
familiar person stimuli identified in Thornton and Mitchell51. Stimuli are provided
Methods
in the OSF page (https://osf.io/2uzsx/). Example stimuli are presented in Fig. 1c.
All the studies conducted comply with ethical regulations for research on
human subjects and all participants gave informed consent, as approved by the Group stimuli. To obtain a diverse set of social group stimuli, we chose the 80 most
University Committee on Activities Involving Human Subjects at New York frequently named social groups in the United States, as named in recent work by an
University. Participants were financially compensated US$0.10 per minute for their online participant demographic similar to our own33. Stimuli are provided in the
participation. Statistical tests are two-tailed. Data distributions were assumed to OSF page (https://osf.io/2uzsx/). Example stimuli are presented in Fig. 1d.
be normal but this was not formally tested. No statistical methods were used to
pre-determine sample sizes but our sample sizes are similar to those reported in Protocol. Conceptual trait task. Participants were informed that they would partake
previous publications17,29. Randomization was applied where possible in all studies, in a study on how different personality traits correlate in the world. After several
and is described explicitly in each study methods section. Data collection and examples and practice trials, participants began the task. Each trial item asked,
analysis were not performed blind to the conditions of the experiments. “Given that an individual possesses one trait, how likely is it that they possess the
All data, stimuli names, and data preparation and analysis code are available other?”, then presented the two trait stimuli for that trial separated by a hyphen
on the OSF (https://osf.io/2uzsx/). Analyses were performed in Python and R. (for example, ‘friendly–self-disciplined’). Participants evaluated the conceptual
Additional details on task instructions and approach to data preparation and relationship of each trait pair in the 15 trait stimuli (1–7 Likert-type scale, 1—‘Not
analysis are provided in the Supplementary Methods. at all likely’ to 7—‘Very likely’), presented in both orders given the wording of
the item question (for example, ‘friendly–self-disciplined’ and ‘self-disciplined–
Study 1. Participants. We aimed to recruit ample raters (participants) to acquire friendly’). Therefore, there were a total of 210 trials for each participant (total
stable and reliable estimates of the trait ratings per each exemplar. Our target possible permutations from all pairs of 15 trait stimuli). Participants then
sample was 30 participants per trait rated in each of the social perception rating completed a general demographics survey.
tasks below (face, familiar person and social group trait tasks), as trait ratings
across traits stabilize at approximately this number of participant raters49. Across Face trait task. Participants were informed they would partake in a study
traits and tasks, this totalled a target sample of n = 450 per social perception model. examining how people perceive others. Each participant was randomly assigned
For the conceptual trait space model, involving conceptual ratings of traits with to evaluate only one of the 15 personality trait stimuli in faces. In the task,
other traits, we based target sample size on previous work estimating a similar participants rated each of the 90 face stimuli on the personality trait they were
model29, seeking a target sample of n = 100. assigned (1–7 Likert-type scale; for example, 1—‘Not at all friendly’, 4—‘neutral’,
7—‘Very friendly’). Following the face trait rating task, participants completed a
Conceptual trait task. We collected conceptual trait association data from 116 general demographics survey.
participants via Amazon Mechanical Turk (demographic data missing for 1 subject;
all US residents; all primary English speakers; M age = 35.4 yr, s.d. age = 10.5 yr; 58 Familiar person trait task. Participants were informed they would partake in a study
female, 55 male, 2 other; 113 White, 2 other). examining how people perceive famous people. Each participant was randomly
assigned to evaluate only one of the 15 personality trait stimuli in familiar person
Face trait task. We collected face impression data from 484 participants via Amazon stimuli. In the task, participants rated each of the 60 familiar person stimuli on the
Mechanical Turk (demographic data missing for 2 subjects; all US residents; all personality trait they were assigned (1–7 Likert-type scale; for example, 1—‘Not
primary English speakers; M age = 35.5 yr, s.d. age = 12.3 yr; 281 female, 199 male, at all friendly’, 4—‘neutral’, 7—‘Very friendly’). Following the familiar person trait
2 other; 372 White, 44 Black, 31 Asian, 37 other). Participants were randomly rating task, participants completed a general demographics survey.
assigned to evaluate one personality trait in all face stimuli, and were therefore
divided roughly equally between all 15 personality trait conditions (32 participants Group trait task. Participants were informed they would partake in a study
per trait condition on average). examining common societal inferences, rather than their own, towards common
social groups. Instructions were intended to reduce the influence of social
Familiar person trait task. We collected familiar person knowledge data from desirability on responses5,33. Each participant was randomly assigned to evaluate
503 participants via Amazon Mechanical Turk (demographic data missing only one of the 15 personality trait stimuli in the social group stimuli. In the task,
for 4 subjects; all US residents; all primary English speakers; M age = 30.7 yr, participants rated each of the 80 social group stimuli on the personality trait
s.d. age = 7.1 yr; 308 female, 175 male, 16 other; 368 White, 44 Black, 42 Asian, 49 they were assigned (1–7 Likert-type scale; for example, 1—‘Not at all friendly’
other). Participants were randomly assigned to evaluate one personality trait in all to 7—‘Very friendly’). Following the social group trait rating task, participants
familiar person stimuli, and were therefore divided roughly equally between all 15 completed a general demographics survey.
personality trait conditions (~34 participants per trait condition).
Valence task. Participants were instructed to rate personality traits on their valence,
Group trait task. We collected group stereotype content data from 488 participants or how negative to positive each trait is. Participants then rated one stimulus
via Amazon Mechanical Turk (demographic data missing for 3 subjects; all US at a time (1–7 Likert-type scale; for example, 1—‘Very negative’ to 7—‘Very
residents; all primary English speakers; M age = 30.4 yr, s.d. age = 6.9 yr; 297 female, positive’). Trials were randomized per subject. Participants responded to a basic
183 male, 5 other; 368 White, 44 Black, 39 Asian, 37 other). Participants were demographics survey after the task.
randomly assigned to evaluate one personality trait in all group stimuli, and were
therefore divided roughly equally between all 15 personality trait conditions (~33 Study 2. Participants. Face trait task. We collected face impression data from 496
participants per trait condition). partic ipants via Amazon Mechanical Turk (all US residents; all primary English
speakers; M age = 30.3 yr, s.d. age = 6.3 yr; 257 female, 237 male, 2 other; 320 White, 101
Valence task. We collected valence ratings of each personality trait adjective used in Asian, 30 Black, 45 other). Participants were randomly assigned to evaluate one perso-
the above tasks from 69 subjects via Amazon Mechanical Turk (n = 69; M age = 31.4 yr, nality trait in all face stimuli, and were therefore divided roughly equally between all
s.d. age = 6.6 yr; 28 female, 40 male, 1 other; 52 White, 11 Black, 4 Asian, 2 other). 15 personality trait conditions (~33 participants per trait condition on average).
NaTuRE HuMaN BEHaviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NatuRe HumaN BeHavIOuR Articles
Familiar person trait task. We collected familiar person knowledge data from Social group trait task. We collected group stereotype content data from 162
478 participants via Amazon Mechanical Turk (demographic data missing for participants via Amazon Mechanical Turk (original n = 168; 6 subjects dropped due
2 subjects; all US residents; all primary English speakers; M age = 29.8 yr, to task incompletion; all US residents; all primary English speakers; M age = 31.45 yr,
s.d. age = 6.3 yr; 239 female, 237 male, 2 other; 309 White, 89 Asian, 40 Black, 40 s.d. age = 5.53 yr; 72 female, 90 male; 126 White, 20 Black, 8 Asian, 8 other).
other). Participants were randomly assigned to evaluate one personality trait in all
familiar person stimuli, and were therefore divided roughly equally between all Stimuli. Personality trait stimuli. We chose a diverse set of trait stimuli somewhat
15 personality trait conditions (~32 participants per trait condition). deviating from those in study 1 to assess generalizability. Trait stimuli included:
‘creative, ‘dishonest’, ‘friendly, ‘intelligent, ‘sociable’ and ‘stubborn’. We used all
Group trait task. We collected group stereotype content data from 489 participants pairwise combinations of these trait pairs (for a total of 15 unique possible trait
via Amazon Mechanical Turk (all US residents; all primary English speakers; pairs). Participants were randomly assigned to one of the 15 total trait-pair
M age = 30.4 yr, s.d. age = 6.7 yr; 263 female, 223 male, 3 other; 315 White, combinations.
89 Asian, 43 Black, 42 other). Participants were randomly assigned to evaluate
one personality trait in all group stimuli, and were therefore divided roughly Target stimuli. For face, familiar person and social group target stimuli, study 4
equally between all 15 personality trait conditions (~33 participants per used the same stimuli as study 1.
trait condition).
Protocol. Both social perception trait and conceptual trait tasks were largely
Stimuli. Personality trait stimuli. We replaced each of the original 15 trait items identical in design within themselves to those in previous studies (see study 1
from study 1 with items that asked about the likely behaviour of the target. A methods). A major distinction is that in this study, each participant both provided
different item for each trait was used in each domain (that is, for a given trait, target trait and conceptual trait data. Each participant was randomly assigned
item A would only be used in the face task, item B in the familiar person task and to one of 15 trait pairs (the unique combinations of 6 trait stimuli: ‘creative,
item C in the social group task). We chose the new trait stimuli to replace trait ‘dishonest’, ‘friendly, ‘intelligent, ‘sociable’ and ‘stubborn’). First, participants
terms with from the NEOPI facet items. In the NEOPI, to measure personality, evaluated all stimuli on both assigned traits (either face, familiar person or group
participants are not asked directly whether they are ‘kind’, but asked multiple items stimuli depending on the task). They evaluated all stimuli on one trait first,
that describe behavioural tendencies that have been found to relate to kindness. followed by the other, the order of which trait came first was randomized. The
Given the long history of validation of these items and their correspondence to order of which trait was first evaluated was randomly determined per subject. In
behaviours that relate to underlying personality traits, we chose our new trait total, participants therefore completed: 180 trials of face impressions, 120 trials
stimuli from these items. Specifically, for each of the 15 traits in our similarity of familiar person impressions, 160 trials of group inferences. From this data, we
matrices, we chose three NEOPI items, so that one unique item per trait could were able to measure the correlation of inferences within each subject. Second,
be used in each of the three social perception tasks (face, familiar person, social participants provided conceptual trait association ratings for their assigned trait
group). Specific items may be viewed via the OSF (https://osf.io/2uzsx/). pair. As participants only evaluated the similarity of two traits to one another
(compared with the many trait pairs in study 1), there were only two trials in
Target stimuli. For face, familiar person and social group target stimuli, study 2 the conceptual trait task, randomly ordered. Following these tasks, participants
used the same stimuli as study 1. completed a general demographics survey.
Protocol. Study 2 used an identical task design for each of the three tasks as study 1, Study 5. Participants. We collected face impression data from 141 participants
where only the items were replaced (see above). via Amazon Mechanical Turk (original n = 192; 51 subjects dropped due to
insensitivity to experiment manipulation; all US residents; all primary English
Study 3. Participants. All data and tasks were performed by and within each speakers; M age = 32.69 yr, s.d. age = 6.44 yr; 64 female, 77 male; 102 White, 18 Black,
participant. We collected face impression and conceptual association data from 162 9 Asian, 12 other).
participants via Amazon Mechanical Turk (original n = 168; 6 subjects dropped
due to failure to follow task instructions; all US residents; all primary English Stimuli. Personality trait stimuli. We chose three trait terms from the facets of the
speakers; M age = 31.9 yr, s.d. age = 5.9 yr; 54 female, 108 male; 113 White, 33 Black, Big Five factors of personality, corresponding to the ‘agreeableness’, ‘neuroticism’
9 Asian, 7 other). and ‘openness’ factors: ‘friendly’, ‘depressed’ and ‘intellectual’ (for three
combinations of trait pairs). These traits were chosen given their correspondence
Stimuli. As each subject completed multiple face rating tasks and a conceptual to both relatively independent trait concepts, and to traditional dimensions of
association task (compared with studies 1 and 2, in which participants completed social perception (‘friendly’ to ‘warmth’, ‘intellectual’ to ‘competence’)2 and core
a task for only one trait), a subset of trait adjective and face stimuli were used in personality traits (‘friendly’ to ‘agreeable’, ‘intellectual’ to ‘openness’, and ‘depressed’
study 3 in consideration of time constraints and participant fatigue. to ‘neuroticism’)19. Further, we chose traits whose conceptual associations could
be realistically manipulated in perceivers (for example, given likely strong priors
Personality trait stimuli. We chose a subset of trait stimuli from those used for associations of traits that load along the same factors, such as ‘warmth’ and
in studies 1 and 2. Trait stimuli included: ‘adventurous’, ‘assertive’, ‘cautious’, ‘sociability’).
‘depressed’, ‘emotional’, ‘friendly’, ‘self-disciplined’ and ‘trustworthy’. We used each
trait in its own single block face rating task, and each pairwise combination of Trait association manipulation article. To manipulate participant conceptual
these traits in the conceptual association task. associations between traits, participants read a fake scientific article about the
actual correlation of personality traits. Participants read an adapted article from
Face stimuli. For face stimuli, each participant was assigned to a random subset of previous research that was successful in manipulating lay theories of gender52. The
25 stimuli from the face stimulus set used in studies 1 and 2. article explained a research study conducted by personality researchers, who find
that on average individuals with one personality trait (for example, friendliness) are
Protocol. Participants first completed one block of face ratings for each personality more or less likely to have another personality trait (for example, depression). Each
trait stimulus, with the trait block order randomized (one trait within each block, participant was randomly assigned to one trait pair at the beginning of the study,
for a total of eight blocks). The same 25 face stimuli were rated within each block. which was inserted into the article. The manipulation articles are available on the
Following the series of face rating tasks, participants completed a conceptual OSF (https://osf.io/2uzsx/).
association task in which they rated their pairwise conceptual association of
each trait pair presented in random order. Each task otherwise had an identical Face trait stimuli. Study 5 used the same face stimuli as study 1.
design to that of study 1. Following completion of the two task sets, participants
completed a standard demographics survey. Manipulation check. After the experiment, participants completed a brief
questionnaire to assess effectiveness of the manipulation. Modelled from previous
Study 4. Participants. Face trait task. We collected face impression data from 167 research and our own measurement methods17,52, participants were asked direct
participants via Amazon Mechanical Turk (original n = 174; 5 subjects dropped due questions about their conceptual associations between their assigned trait pair to
to task incompletion; 2 subjects dropped due to failure to follow task instructions; assess manipulation effectiveness. We asked participants how likely individuals
all US residents; all primary English speakers; M age = 31.44 yr, s.d. age = 5.50 yr; 102 with the first assigned personality trait are likely to have the second trait assigned
female, 64 male, 1 decline; 128 White, 23 Black, 5 Asian, 11 other). to the participant, and vice versa (for example, ‘How likely is a friendly person to
be intellectual?’, ‘How likely is an intellectual person to be friendly?’; Likert-type
Familiar person trait task. We collected familiar person knowledge data scale, 1—Not at all likely, 2, 3, 4—Neutral, 5, 6, 7—Very likely).
from 155 participants via Amazon Mechanical Turk (original n = 167; 9 subjects
dropped due to task incompletion; 3 subjects dropped due to failure to follow Protocol. At the beginning of the study, participants were randomly assigned to one
task instructions; all US residents; all primary English speakers; M age = 32.34 yr, of two ‘association direction’ conditions, specifying whether the between-subjects
s.d. age = 6.52 yr; 70 female, 82 male, 3 decline; 120 White, 20 Black, 6 Asian, manipulation would convince them their trait pair was negatively or positively
19 other). correlated (for example, are ‘friendly’ people more likely to be ‘depressed’ or less
NaTuRE HuMaN BEHaviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NatuRe HumaN BeHavIOuR
likely to be ‘depressed’). Participants were randomly allocated one of the three 3. Oosterhof, N. N. & Todorov, A. The functional basis of face evaluation.
trait pairs. Participants were informed that they would take part in a study on how Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 105, 11087–11092 (2008).
people think of others. In the first part, we manipulated what they thought about 4. Rosenberg, S., Nelson, C. & Vivekananthan, P. A multidimensional
personality by having them read an article about personality. Once participants approach to the structure of personality impressions. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 9,
began to read the article, we did not allow them to progress past the article for 283–294 (1968).
2 min to further encourage their reading and engagement of the article given 5. Fiske, S. T., Cuddy, A. J., Glick, P. & Xu, J. A model of (often mixed)
its length. The article explained research finding the participant’s assigned trait stereotype content: competence and warmth respectively follow from
pair (for example, ‘depressed’–‘friendly’) was negatively or positively correlated, perceived status and competition. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 82, 878–902 (2002).
depending on the participant’s association direction condition. After reading 6. Cuddy, A. J., Fiske, S. T. & Glick, P. The BIAS map: behaviors from intergroup
the article, participants were given a free response form to summarize the article affect and stereotypes. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 92, 631–648 (2007).
and additionally provide their thoughts on the article and personality generally. 7. Asch, S. E. Forming impressions of personality. J. Abnorm. Soc. Psychol. 41,
Next, we informed participants that a new task would begin where they would 258–290 (1946).
make personality judgements of others based on only their face. This task and 8. Wojciszke, B. Morality and competence in person-and self-perception. Eur.
its instructions were identical to that of the face rating tasks in previous studies. Rev. Soc. Psychol. 16, 155–188 (2005).
Participants rated all 90 face stimuli on one trait to which they were assigned 9. Stolier, R. M., Hehman, E. & Freeman, J. B. A dynamic structure of social
(trait randomly chosen; Likert-type scale, for example, 1—Not at all friendly, trait space. Trends Cogn. Sci. 22, 197–200 (2018).
4—Neutral, 7—Very friendly). Lastly, participants completed the manipulation 10. Schneider, D. J. Implicit personality theory: a review. Psychological Bull. 79,
check, reporting their conceptual association for their assigned trait pair. 294–309 (1973).
Instructions and item design were identical to those used in study 3. 11. Peabody, D. & Goldberg, L. R. Some determinants of factor structures from
personality-trait descriptors. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 57, 552–567 (1989).
Study 6. Participants. We collected data from 146 participants via Amazon 12. Digman, J. M. Higher-order factors of the Big Five. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 73,
Mechanical Turk (n = 146; 6 subjects dropped due to task incompletion; all US 1246–1256 (1997).
residents; all primary English speakers; M age = 37.2 yr, s.d. age = 12.7 yr; 69 female, 77 13. Lay, C. H. & Jackson, D. N. Analysis of the generality of trait-inferential
male; 115 White, 15 Black, 9 Asian, 7 other). relationships. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 12, 12–21 (1969).
14. Thornton, M. A. & Tamir, D. I. Mental models accurately predict emotion
Stimuli. Personality trait stimuli. Participants guessed the ostensible ‘cautiousness’ transitions. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 114, 5982–5987 (2017).
of face stimuli. We next measured their conceptual association between ‘friendly’ 15. Tamir, D. I. & Thornton, M. A. Modeling the predictive social mind. Trends
and ‘cautious’. ‘Friendliness’ was chosen due to the spontaneity of ‘friendly’ face Cogn. Sci. 22, 201–212 (2018).
impressions53,54, and we chose ‘cautiousness’ because of its relatively low conceptual 16. Sutherland, C. A. et al. Facial first impressions across culture: data-driven
association with ‘friendliness’ (where in study 1 it had the lowest relationship, modeling of Chinese and British perceivers’ unconstrained facial impressions.
closest to the ‘neutral’ response option, with a value of 4.13 on the 1–7 Pers. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 44, 521–537 (2018).
Likert-type scale). 17. Stolier, R. M., Hehman, E., Keller, M. D., Walker, M. & Freeman, J. B. The
conceptual structure of face impressions. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 115,
Face stimuli. Face stimuli were a 56-face subset of those face stimuli used in 9210–9215 (2018).
previous experiments. The stimuli were split into two sets based on their above or 18. Xie, S. Y., Flake, J. K. & Hehman, E. Perceiver and target characteristics
below ‘Neutral’ ‘friendly’ ratings from study 1, allowing us to label responses to the contribute to impression formation differently across race and gender.
more or less ‘friendly’ faces as ‘more cautious’ or ‘less cautious’ depending on the J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 117, 364–385 (2018).
subjects’ experimental conditions. 19. Goldberg, L. R. A broad-bandwidth, public domain, personality inventory
measuring the lower-level facets of several five-factor models. Pers. Psychol.
Protocol. The task was a two-part task, consisting of the learning phase, in Eur. 7, 7–28 (1999).
which participants were manipulated to either positively or negatively associate 20. Kriegeskorte, N., Mur, M. & Bandettini, P. Representational similarity
‘friendliness’ with ‘cautiousness’, followed by the conceptual trait association task, analysis—connecting the branches of systems neuroscience. Front. Syst.
in which they reported their conceptual association between the personality trait Neurosci. 2, 4 (2008).
stimuli. In the learning phase, participants guessed the ostensible ‘cautiousness’ 21. Gara, M. A. & Rosenberg, S. Linguistic factors in implicit personality theory.
of the faces, making a two-choice categorization as to whether each face was ‘less J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 41, 450–457 (1981).
cautious’ or ‘more cautious’. Based on their experimental condition, feedback 22. Hehman, E., Sutherland, C. A., Flake, J. K. & Slepian, M. L. The unique
to ‘cautiousness’ judgements of low versus high ‘friendliness’ faces indicated an contributions of perceiver and target characteristics in person perception.
incorrect or correct response. These data were not analysed as the task purpose was J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 113, 513–529 (2017).
manipulation of an association, through feedback in which friendly or unfriendly 23. Goldberg, L. R. The structure of phenotypic personality traits. Am. Psychol.
faces were said to be more or less cautious. Following the feedback phase, they 48, 26–34 (1993).
completed a conceptual trait association task identical to that in previous studies 24. Digman, J. M. Personality structure: emergence of the five-factor model.
(but here it only included the ‘friendly’ and ‘cautious’ trait-pair ratings). Annu. Rev. Psychol. 41, 417–440 (1990).
25. Vazire, S. Who knows what about a person? The self–other knowledge
Study 7. Data utilized in study 7 analyses came from the study 1 conceptual asymmetry (SOKA) model. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 98, 281–300 (2010).
trait task data, and a personality measurement dataset available from previously 26. Uleman, J. S. & Kressel, L. M. in Oxford Handbook of Social Cognition
published research via the OSF27. For reporting of methods and data selection from (ed. Carlston, D. E.) 53–73 (2013).
this outside dataset, see the Supplementary Methods. 27. Johnson, J. A. Measuring thirty facets of the Five Factor Model with a
120-item public domain inventory: development of the IPIP-NEO-120.
Reporting Summary. Further information on research design is available in the J. Res. Pers. 51, 78–89 (2014).
Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article. 28. Stolier, R. M. & Freeman, J. B. Neural pattern similarity reveals the inherent
intersection of social categories. Nat. Neurosci. 19, 795–797 (2016).
Data availability 29. Brooks, J. A. & Freeman, J. B. Conceptual knowledge predicts the
representational structure of facial emotion perception. Nat. Hum. Behav. 2,
Experiment materials information and all experiment de-identified data are
581–591 (2018).
publicly available at https://osf.io/2uzsx/. The materials used in this study are
30. Cuddy, A. J. C. et al. Stereotype content model across cultures: towards
widely available.
universal similarities and some differences. Br. J. Soc. Psychol. 48,
1–33 (2009).
Code availability
31. Weisman, K., Dweck, C. S. & Markman, E. M. Rethinking people’s
Data analysis script notebooks are publicly available at https://osf.io/2uzsx/. conceptions of mental life. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 114,
11374–11379 (2017).
Received: 2 May 2019; Accepted: 27 November 2019; 32. Sutherland, C. A. et al. Social inferences from faces: ambient images generate
Published: xx xx xxxx a three-dimensional model. Cognition 127, 105–118 (2013).
33. Koch, A., Imhoff, R., Dotsch, R., Unkelbach, C. & Alves, H. The ABC of
stereotypes about groups: agency/socioeconomic success, conservative–
References progressive beliefs, and communion. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 110,
1. Leary, T. Interpersonal Diagnosis of Personality: A Functional Theory and 675–709 (2016).
Methodology for Personality Evaluation (Wiley, 1957). 34. Collova, J., Sutherland, C. & Rhodes, G. Testing the functional basis of first
2. Fiske, S. T., Cuddy, A. J. & Glick, P. Universal dimensions of social cognition: impressions: dimensions for children’s faces are not the same as for adults’
warmth and competence. Trends Cogn. Sci. 11, 77–83 (2007). faces. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 117, 900–924 (2019).
NaTuRE HuMaN BEHaviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NatuRe HumaN BeHavIOuR Articles
35. Yzerbyt, V. Y., Kervyn, N. & Judd, C. M. Compensation versus halo: the 51. Thornton, M. A. & Mitchell, J. P. Theories of person perception predict
unique relations between the fundamental dimensions of social judgment. patterns of neural activity during mentalizing. Cereb. Cortex 28,
Pers. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 34, 1110–1123 (2008). 3505–3520 (2017).
36. Kraft-Todd, G. T. et al. Empathic nonverbal behavior increases ratings of both 52. Coleman, J. M. & Hong, Y.-Y. Beyond nature and nurture: the influence of lay
warmth and competence in a medical context. PLoS One 12, e0177758 (2017). gender theories on self-stereotyping. Self Identity 7, 34–53 (2008).
37. Sutherland, C. A., Young, A. W., Mootz, C. A. & Oldmeadow, J. A. Face gender 53. Freeman, J. B., Stolier, R. M., Ingbretsen, Z. A. & Hehman, E. A. Amygdala
and stereotypicality influence facial trait evaluation: Counter‐stereotypical responsivity to high-level social information from unseen faces. J. Neurosci.
female faces are negatively evaluated. Br. J. Psychol. 106, 186–208 (2015). 34, 10573–10581 (2014).
38. Paunonen, S. V. & Ashton, M. C. Big Five factors and facets and the 54. Willis, J. & Todorov, A. First impressions: making up your mind after a
prediction of behavior. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 81, 524–539 (2001). 100-ms exposure to a face. Psychol. Sci. 17, 592–598 (2006).
39. Burron, B. F., Carlson, K. A., Getty, G. R. & Jackson, D. N. The effects of
informational characteristics on the perception of real and hypothetical target
acknowledgements
persons. Psychon. Sci. 23, 145–147 (1971).
40. Jackson, D. N. A model for inferential accuracy. Can. Psychol. 13, We thank M. B. Meshar, J. A. Chwe, B. Barnett, H. Woo and C. Cogley for assistance in
185–195 (1972). materials development and data collection. This work was supported in part by research
41. Baumeister, R. F., Zhang, L. & Vohs, K. D. Gossip as cultural learning. grants NIH-F31-MH114505 (R.M.S.) and NSF-BCS-1654731 (J.B.F.). The funders had
Rev. Gen. Psychol. 8, 111–121 (2004). no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish or preparation of
42. Paunonen, S. V. Consensus in personality judgments: moderating effects of the manuscript.
target-rater acquaintanceship and behavior observability. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol.
56, 823–833 (1989). author contributions
43. Judd, C. M. & Park, B. Definition and assessment of accuracy in social
R.M.S., E.H. and J.B.F. developed the theoretical perspective. R.M.S. developed the study
stereotypes. Psychol. Rev. 100, 109–128 (1993).
concepts. All authors contributed to the study design. Testing and data collection were
44. Todorov, A., Olivola, C. Y., Dotsch, R. & Mende-Siedlecki, P. Social
performed by R.M.S. R.M.S. and E.H. performed the data analysis and interpretation.
attributions from faces: determinants, consequences, accuracy, and functional
R.M.S. drafted the manuscript, and all authors contributed to edits and revisions. All
significance. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 66, 519–545 (2015).
authors approved the final version of the manuscript for submission.
45. Tskhay, K. O. & Rule, N. O. Accuracy in categorizing perceptually ambiguous
groups: a review and meta-analysis. Pers. Soc. Psychol. Rev. 17, 72–86 (2013).
46. Jussim, L., Crawford, J. T. & Rubinstein, R. S. Stereotype (in) accuracy Competing interests
in perceptions of groups and individuals. Curr. Dir. Psychol. Sci. 24, The authors declare no competing interests.
490–497 (2015).
47. Funder, D. C. On the accuracy of personality judgment: a realistic approach.
Psychol. Rev. 102, 652–670 (1995). additional information
48. Fiske, S. T. & Neuberg, S. L. A continuum model of impression formation Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/
from category-based to individuating processes: influences of information s41562-019-0800-6.
and moti vation on attention and interpretation. Adv. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 23,
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to R.M.S. or J.B.F.
1–74 (1990).
49. Hehman, E., Xie, S. Y., Ofosu, E. K. & Nespoli, G. A. Assessing the point at Peer review information Primary Handling Editor: Aisha Bradshaw
which averages are stable: a tool illustrated in the context of person Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
perception. Preprint at PsyArXiv https://psyarxiv.com/2n6jq (2018).
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
50. Ma, D. S., Correll, J. & Wittenbrink, B. The Chicago Face Database:
published maps and institutional affiliations.
a free stimulus set of faces and norming data. Behav. Res. Methods 47,
1122–1135 (2015). © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2020
NaTuRE HuMaN BEHaviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
1
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Corresponding author(s): Ryan M. Stolier
Last updated by author(s): Oct 21, 2019
Reporting Summary
Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency
in reporting. For further information on Nature Research policies, see Authors & Referees and the Editorial Policy Checklist.
Statistics
For all statistical analyses, confirm that the following items are present in the figure legend, table legend, main text, or Methods section.
n/a Confirmed
The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
A statement on whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided
Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.
A description of all covariates tested
A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
A full description of the statistical parameters including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient)
AND variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)
For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted
Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.
For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated
Our web collection on statistics for biologists contains articles on many of the points above.
Software and code
Policy information about availability of computer code
Data collection Data were collected using web-based surveys implemented on Mechanical Turk.
Data analysis All data analysis code are available on the manuscript's associated Open Science Framework web address (https://osf.io/2uzsx/). Analysis
were completed in Python 2.7 and R.
For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors/reviewers.
We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Research guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.
Data
Policy information about availability of data
All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable:
- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets
- A list of figures that have associated raw data
- A description of any restrictions on data availability
All stimuli, data, and analysis scripts (Python, R) are available or directed towards on the OSF (including figure source data), from which results may be reproduced
(https://osf.io/2uzsx/).
2
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Field-specific reporting
Please select the one below that is the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.
Life sciences Behavioural & social sciences Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences
For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/documents/nr-reporting-summary-flat.pdf
Behavioural & social sciences study design
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
Study description Data are quantitative. Studies 1-4, and 7 are correlational, and Studies 5 and 6 are experimental.
Research sample The research sample consisted of workers from Amazon's Mechanical Turk. While not a fully representative sample, the participants are
more diverse in age, race, and socioeconomic status than typical undergraduate research samples (Buhrmester, Kwang, & Gosling, 2011;
Perspectives on Psychological Science). See demographic information below.
Sampling strategy In studies 1 and 2, our target sample was 30 participants per trait rated in each of the social perception rating tasks below (face, familiar
person, and social group trait tasks, as trait ratings across traits stabilize at approximately this number of participant raters; see Hehman,
Xie, Ofosu, & Nespoli, 2018, retrieved from osf.io/mwtuz). Across traits and tasks, this totaled a target sample of n = 450 per social
perception model. For the conceptual trait space model, involving conceptual ratings of traits with other traits, we based target sample
size on prior work estimating a similar model (Brooks & Freeman, 2018 - Nature Human Behavior), seeking a target sample of n = 100. In
studies 3, 4, 5, and 6, we chose to target a sample size of n = 200 following the sample size of a similar task design implemented in prior
research (Stolier, Hehman, Keller, Walker, & Freeman, 2018 - PNAS). Study 7 compared our prior data (Study 1) to one new open dataset
provided by other researchers, and thus the sample size was restricted to the total number of participants in that dataset (n = 307,313;
https://osf.io/tbmh5/).
Data collection All data were collected online via Amazon Mechanical Turk via an application in the web browsers on participants personal computers,
and researchers were not present during data collection (however we cannot guarantee others were not present given the collection
method). Experimenters were blind to any assignments of stimuli or experimental conditions to subjects.
Timing Study 1 was collected between 2/20/2018 and 2/22/2018. Study 2 data between 7/19/2018 and 8/7/2018. Study 4 between 9/24/2018
and 10/10/2018. Study 5 between 2/4/2019 and 2/7/2019. Studies 3, 6, and 7 between 7/4/19 and 8/15/19.
Data exclusions Where applicable, exclusion criteria were established in before data collection. For Studies 1, 2, and 3 no data were excluded from
analyses (all data by participants who completed the task were included in analyses). In Study 4, 20 subjects were lost due to task
incompletion, and 5 subjects due to failure to follow instructions by solely hitting a single response option. In Study 5, 51 participants
who failed the manipulation check were excluded from analyses (those who did not report the conceptual association direction, positive
vs. negative, of their condition assignment).
Non-participation No participants dropped out or declined participation.
Randomization Studies 1 to 4, and 7 were not experimental. However, stimuli varied between participants, and were randomly assigned. Studies 5 and 6
was experimental, and in each participants were randomly assigned to one of two between-subjects experimental conditions through a
randomization function in the study code.
Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods
We require information from authors about some types of materials, experimental systems and methods used in many studies. Here, indicate whether each material,
system or method listed is relevant to your study. If you are not sure if a list item applies to your research, read the appropriate section before selecting a response.
Materials & experimental systems Methods
n/a Involved in the study n/a Involved in the study
Antibodies ChIP-seq
Eukaryotic cell lines Flow cytometry
Palaeontology MRI-based neuroimaging
Animals and other organisms
Human research participants
Clinical data
3
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Human research participants
Policy information about studies involving human research participants
Population characteristics Participants were all U.S. residents and primary English-speakers. Study 1 demographics were: for conceptual trait task, age
mean = 35.4 years, age standard deviation = 10.5 years; 58 Female, 55 Male, 2 other; 113 White, 2 other; for the face trait task,
age mean = 35.5 years, age standard deviation = 12.3 years; 281 Female, 199 Male, 2 other; 372 White, 44 Black, 31 Asian, 37
other; for the familiar person trait task, age mean = 30.7 years, age standard deviation = 7.1 years; 308 Female, 175 Male, 16
other; 368 White, 44 Black, 42 Asian, 49 other; for the group trait task, age mean = 30.4 years, age standard deviation = 6.9
years; 297 Female, 183 Male, 5 other; 368 White, 44 Black, 39 Asian, 37 other.
Study 2 demographics were: for face trait task, age mean = 30.3 years, age standard deviation = 6.3 years; 257 Female, 237
Male, 2 other; 320 White, 101 Asian, 30 Black, 45 other; for the familiar person trait task, age mean = 29.8 years, age standard
deviation = 6.3 years; 239 Female, 237 Male, 2 other; 309 White, 89 Asian, 40 Black, 40 other; for the group trait task, age mean
= 30.4 years, age standard deviation = 6.7 years; 263 Female, 223 Male, 3 other; 315 White, 89 Asian, 43 Black, 42 other.
Study 3 demographics were: all United States residents; all primary English-speakers; Mage = 31.9 years, SDage = 5.9 years; 54
Female, 108 Male; 113 White, 33 Black, 9 Asian, 7 other.
Study 4 demographics were: for the face trait task, age mean = 31.44 years, age standard deviation = 5.50 years; 102 Female, 64
Male, 1 decline; 128 White, 23 Black, 5 Asian, 11 other; for the familiar person trait task, age mean = 32.34 years, age standard
deviation = 6.52 years; 70 Female, 82 Male, 3 decline; 120 White, 20 Black, 6 Asian, 19 other; for the group trait task, age mean =
31.45 years, age standard deviation = 5.53 years; 72 Female, 90 Male; 126 White, 20 Black, 8 Asian, 8 other.
Study 5 demographics were: age mean = 32.69 years, age standard deviation = 6.44 years; 64 Female, 77 Male; 102 White, 18
Black, 9 Asian, 12 other.
Study 6 demographics were: all United States residents; all primary English-speakers; Mage = 37.2 years, SDage = 12.7 years; 69
Female, 77 Male; 115 White, 15 Black, 9 Asian, 7 other.
Study 7 demographics were: Mage = 25.2 years, SDage = 10.0 years; 185,149 Female, 122,164 Male; race/ethnicity data
unavailable.
Recruitment Participants were recruited from Amazon's Mechanical Turk user base. The only restrictions placed on the sample were age
(above 18), nationality (born and raised in the United States), and an "approval rate" (indicating that the participant pays
attention and follows instructions correctly in tasks) of over 90%. While all participants are self-selected due to interest and
motivation to participate in research studies, this is unlikely to introduce bias into the sample since the participants are more
diverse in age, race, and socioeconomic status than typical undergraduate research samples (Buhrmester, Kwang, & Gosling,
2011; Perspectives on Psychological Science), and studies have shown that MTurk workers provide high-quality data that
replicates many classic findings in experimental psychology (Piolacci & Chandler, 2014; Current Directions in Psychological
Science).
Ethics oversight The study protocol was approved by the University Committee on Activities Involving Human Subjects at New York University.
Note that full information on the approval of the study protocol must also be provided in the manuscript.