Articles
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-020-0885-y
Sustainable natural resource governance under
interest group competition in policy-making
Kirill Orach 1 ✉, Andreas Duit 2,3 and Maja Schlüter 1
Non-state actors play an increasingly important role in environmental policy. Lobbying by interest groups has been associated
with policy stagnation and environmental degradation as well as with sustainable governance. However, little is known about
how competition between economic and environmental interests influences the ability of governance systems to avoid undesir-
able outcomes. We investigate how competing interest group behaviour affects sustainable resource management by tracing
the policy change process in a case study of the European Union fisheries policy and analysing its dynamics with an agent-based
model. We find that formation of interest group coalitions in response to a perceived crisis can delay or prevent collapses, even
when the competing interests have unequal resources. We attribute such outcomes to the emergence and timing of a ‘tug of
war’ mechanism between competing interest group coalitions. We argue that attempts to improve sustainable resource man-
agement must account for feedbacks from environmental change to behaviours of political actors.
M
any global fish stocks are under threat of overfishing and policy-learning and adaptation and lack a more detailed represen-
collapse despite management efforts by regulatory bod- tation of political behaviour17–20. We aim to fill this gap and con-
ies at various scales. Signals about the poor state of stocks tribute to an improved understanding of policy responsiveness and
often fail to trigger timely and adequate policy responses1,2. The pol- sustainable natural resource governance by investigating how the
icy system’s lack of responsiveness to environmental change is often behaviour and interactions of competing interest groups influence
attributed to the influence of powerful interest groups3. Interest policy change in response to the ecological and socio-economic
groups take part in the policy process as organized, informal actors, consequences of resource decline. To do so, we analyse a key mecha-
with the purpose of influencing policy output in accordance with nism of interest group influence identified in an empirical study of
their preferences4. They typically respond to changes in the issue the 2013 EU CFP reform5 using an agent-based model. The policy
by lobbying for policy change or maintenance of the status quo reform is an example of policy adaptation to deteriorating resource
and, as such, can play an important role in linking social–ecologi- conditions which can, in part, be attributed to the influence of
cal change with policy dynamics. While dominant economic inter- environmental interest group coalitions. The empirical study high-
ests often prevent policy adaptation, there are cases where interest lighted coalition-building as an important interest group strategy as
group involvement has led to improved environmental policy—for well as a response to changing conditions. The agent-based model
instance, in the recent reform of the European Union Common allows us to analyse the dynamics of the policy process and its envi-
Fisheries Policy5 (EU CFP) or in the management of Southern ronmental outcomes that emerge from interest groups’ competition
Ocean toothfish fisheries6. Understanding the causal mechanisms for influence in response to changes in the economic or ecologi-
and conditions under which sustainable outcomes can emerge cal state of the resource. The simulation thus enables the study of
from policy processes that involve competing and diverse interest feedbacks between interest group adaptation, policy output and
groups with differential responses to environmental change is thus social–ecological outcomes that cannot be analysed by an empirical
of great importance. This is particularly relevant in the face of the study alone.
recent increase in the involvement of interest groups in environ- The importance of interest group behaviour in policy adaptation
mental policy7,8 and complex environmental problems that are char- is highlighted in pluralist and neo-pluralist models of politics21–23.
acterized by high uncertainty, unpredictability and the potential for Both argue that interests affected by a change in a policy issue
sudden change9–11. can organize to seek participation and influence in the political
Policy-making in democratic societies typically involves diverse decision-making process. Here we refer to influence as the ability
participants, from public officials and elected representatives to var- to cause changes in behaviour (including unintended or unwanted
ious non-state actors such as interest groups, scientists, epistemic changes). When seeking influence through lobbying, interest groups
communities and businesses12. Policy responsiveness is thus best may work alone in some cases. In others, they may join long-term
understood as the outcome of a process in which political actors strategic coalitions with other groups based on joint beliefs24, or
with diverse interests interact with each other and their political short-term alliances based on marginal utility and common pol-
and social–ecological environment. Although some studies have icy goals25. The potential benefits of coalition-building include
looked at interest group influence on policy-making in general4,13–16, resource-sharing, gaining information, augmenting skills and
few have identified causal mechanisms for environmental policy the ability to display broad support to policy-makers26. However,
change that link actor behaviour, group dynamics, policy output empirical evidence for the effectiveness of coalitions is inconsis-
and social–ecological outcomes. Studies of adaptive environmental tent and coalition-building itself involves start-up and coordination
governance often focus on the institutional structures that enable costs.27 Apart from decisions to lobby alone or in coalitions, interest
1Stockholm Resilience Centre, Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden. 2Department of Political Science, Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden.
3Department of Political Science, Stockholm University & Political Science Unit, Luleå University of Technology, Luleå, Sweden. ✉e-mail: kirill.orach@su.se
NAture HuMAN BeHAviOur | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTUrE HUmaN BEHavioUr
group success in lobbying depends on many factors, including exogenous. We go beyond this assumption by explicitly focusing on
group resources, issue characteristics and political institutions13. how the dynamics of the policy process interacts with the dynamics
Interest groups generally represent a diversity of interests, of the social–ecological system.
although their resources, influence and impact on policy outcomes The aim of the model is to serve as an experimental tool to inves-
are often unequally distributed. Economic and industry groups tigate how policy adaptation and hence sustainable outcomes may
often have privileged access to environmental policy-making pro- emerge from the struggle between competing interest coalitions
cesses28. They may be favoured by politicians due to their structural in a system that is dominated by economic interests. We acknowl-
power and investments13 or have more resources for lobbying than edge that interest group participation is not the only factor affect-
groups representing diffuse interests29. The dominance of one type ing policy adaptation, but our focus on a distinct aspect of a larger
of interest can distort the flow of information and impact processes phenomenon ensures a tractable model that allows us to unravel
of policy learning and policy adaptation30, thereby leading to unsus- complex policy dynamics. The model combines empirical insights
tainable policy responses. Groups representing economic interests from the EU CFP reform process5 with insights from theoretical and
have an incentive to maintain the status quo if it provides economic empirical work on lobbying behaviour and interest group attributes
benefits. Given the strong influence of economic interests in many (see Table 1). This allows us to carefully generalize empirical find-
natural resource management contexts, it is particularly interesting ings while maintaining a level of realism that is critical for address-
to understand how a more balanced and sustainable outcome might ing complex, real world processes. The findings of the study thus
be achieved. contribute to knowledge on relationship between policy and social–
Our study of the EU CFP reform indicated that coalition forma- ecological system (SES) processes—a coupling that is often ‘black
tion may be an important mechanism to counteract the dominance boxed’ or missing in sustainability science research. The model
of industry groups5. We used process-tracing in combination with focuses on interest group behaviour in response to change in SES,
interviews and document analysis to track the processes through although its key contribution is in uncovering the role of ‘tug of war’
which environmental interest groups managed to introduce their dynamics that emerge from interest competition in influencing pol-
key demands into the policy reform of 2013. In the past, member icy and changing state of SES. Additionally, findings of the model
states frequently favoured the domestic fishing industry, which could serve as a starting point to investigate hypotheses about the
lobbied for high fishing quotas and subsidies31. This resulted in role of interest group behaviour in policy dynamics that can lead
a vicious cycle of overfishing and growing fleet overcapacity32,33. to and secure sustainable resource use in the longer term, in future
Environmental interest groups had attempted to influence the CFP models as well as empirical studies.
before, voicing concern over the poor state of EU marine ecosys- The model represents interest group (IG) participation in a
tems and the policy failures that had led to ecosystem degradation34. stylized political decision-making process that is embedded in
In the years prior to the reform, both policy actors and the public the dynamics of a fishery (Fig. 1). For the purpose of this study
increasingly paid attention to the environmental and economic state we define interest group coalitions (IGCs) as IGs that share a
of European fisheries. The perception of crisis in the fisheries trig- common policy goal27 and pool their resources to jointly lobby
gered coalition-building activities among pro-environmental inter- policy-makers. Policy-makers represent state actors with the power
est groups5. Their sudden success as evidenced in the reform of 2013 to adopt or change policies by collectively voting on options. In the
can be attributed to this coalition-building strategy that coincided model, a number of competing industry and environmental IGs
with favourable structural conditions—particularly empowerment seek to influence the fishing quota set by policy-makers. IGs can
of the European Parliament and the growing salience of the fish- change their lobbying strategy in response to how they perceive the
eries issue. This created incentives for public officials to respond state of the fishery. If they perceive that the fishery is in crisis, IGs
to the demands of environmental interest group coalitions5. can increase their lobbying effort by forming coalitions with other
These results confirm findings that highlight the attractiveness of groups of the same type. Whether an IG perceives a crisis depends
coalition-building as a way to address critical issues that demand on its interests—an industry group is concerned about revenues
more resources for lobbying and a broader support base27. By join- derived from the fishery and an environmental group is concerned
ing coalitions, interest groups can increase their support and pool about the (stock) size of the fish population. Both individual IGs
resources in a joint effort26,35. and coalitions can attempt to change policy-makers’ voting posi-
Against this background, we hypothesize that interest group com- tion through lobbying. Each season, policy-makers take a vote on
petition, particularly coalition formation in response to perceived increasing or decreasing the quota that determines how much fish
crisis in the issue, may under some conditions serve as a mechanism is going to be taken out during the season, and the majority position
for sustainable resource use despite dominance of industry interests. among policy-makers determines the quota. The quota can change
The aim of this study is to understand the mechanisms, dynamics by a fixed amount each season. It is important to highlight that in
and conditions under which coalition-building enables environ- this study we deliberately do not model rapid, ‘destructive’ mech-
mental interest groups to overcome the opposition even under con- anisms leading to major, radical policy change and instead focus
ditions of resource disadvantage. We take a complexity perspective on mechanisms producing incremental policy change. Although
on environmental policy-making to study the emergence of policy major policy punctuations also occur, they are rare in comparison
responses from the interactions of diverse interest groups. To test to more incremental processes38 and are often driven by change in
the effectiveness of the coalition-formation mechanism and unravel the institutional structure of the policy system, major exogenous
the causal processes leading to sustainable and unsustainable out- shocks, shifts in attention to the issue at hand and policy venue
comes, we develop a stylized agent-based model (PoliSEA) of a pol- shifts, which are beyond the focus of this study. If the quota is con-
icy process that is embedded in the dynamics of a fishery. Contrary tinuously set at unsustainable levels, the fish population will decline.
to many studies in natural resource management or social–ecologi- Overharvesting slowly raises public concern with the state of the
cal systems, we thus aim to open the ‘black box’ of policy-making. stock, increasing issue salience. This in turn can increase environ-
We build on leading policy frameworks that emphasize the com- mental groups’ influence. The dynamics repeat on a seasonal basis.
plex adaptive nature of public policy36, its nonlinear dynamics, the After implementing the mechanism of IG influence based on
influence of diverse interests, beliefs and coalitions among actors30, insights from the empirical case of EU CFP reform (see Results)
and complex structures in which policy-making interactions take and building confidence in the model (see Supplementary Note 4
place37. However, these frameworks have often treated the social– for a sensitivity analysis) we conduct two simulation experiments.
ecological environment in which a policy process is situated as In experiment 1, ‘Coalitions’, we hypothesize that coalition-building
NAture HuMAN BeHAviOur | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTUrE HUmaN BEHavioUr Articles
Table 1 | Processes included in the model and assumptions behind them
Key assumptions insights from published empirical and theoretical studies of interest insights from the eu CFP reform process case
groups study
evaluation of the state of the fishery by interest groups and responses to perceived crisis
Environmental interest According to the logic of membership, an interest group is expected During the 2013 EU CFP reform process,
groups respond to changes to behave in keeping with their constituency to ensure continuous environmental interest groups most often raised
in the fish population, while funding and resources53. concerns about the state of the fish population
industry groups respond to and marine ecosystems, while industry groups
changes in income derived were focused on the employment and profitability
from the fishery. of the fishing industry5.
Interest groups respond to Reactive coalition formation between interest groups can result from During the 2013 EU CFP reform process,
a perceived critical decline perceived ‘policy failure’, a common threat or a potential change recognition of the problematic state, both
in fishery income/fish in status quo, particularly in systems with competition between economically and ecologically, of European
population by attempting to opposing sides, as a result of a ‘coalitional arms-race’27. fisheries was one of the drivers for environmental
form coalitions. Focusing events and crises are able to mobilize coalitions of interest groups’ decision to lobby in coalitions5.
groups seeking policy change54,55.
interest group coalition-building
Interest groups with Interest groups that face threats to survival due to limited funding During the 2013 EU CFP reform process, groups
insufficient funds for form coalitions more often56. which could allocate little funding to lobbying for
lobbying alone attempt to changes to fisheries policy joined coalitions to
form coalitions. mitigate the lack of resources5.
Interest groups seek to ally Interest groups engage in a coalition-building strategy with other
only with partners of the groups to pursue similar goals26.
same type. Sabatier24 describes policy coalitions as groups of political actors who
hold shared policy beliefs.
In the model, interest groups are characterized with distinct policy
positions: increasing or decreasing the quota. Although there is
empirical evidence that mixed-type coalitions can be formed57, groups
in such coalitions need to find compromise and arrive at a joint policy
position, which is not possible in the given model version due to the
binary, contrasting nature of the policy positions.
Coalition negotiations Coalition-building can be costly, and groups need to overcome
between the interest groups organizational obstacles and coordinate activities, which can be
do not always succeed. challenging27.
Coalition members may have to compromise in determining a joint
policy position, which can make coalition formation difficult57.
When joining a coalition, Interest groups often seek coalition-building as a mechanism to pool According to the empirical study of the
interest groups pool existing resources35,58. EU CFP reform in 2013, one of the interest
together their resources and groups’ motivations to join coalitions was to
influence. pool monetary and administrative resources
so as to better respond to existing lobbying
opportunities. Additionally, coalitions representing
multiple groups enjoyed increased attention of
policy-makers due to their broad representation5.
interest group lobbying
Industry interest groups Empirical research on interest groups shows that interest groups
have an advantage in composed of firms are better equipped with monetary resources13.
funding and influence over Business groups tend to possess money and expertise, as well as
environmental groups. critical strategic information, and often enjoy a privileged position in
the policy process40.
In EU policy-making, industry interest groups mobilize substantial
resources and expertise that far outweigh the capabilities of environ-
mental groups in policy areas that are of vital interest for them59.
Environmental groups represent diffuse interests and, as a result,
find it more difficult to influence policy-makers than do groups
representing concentrated interests (business or industry)60.
Interest groups always Interest groups, once mobilized, engage in lobbying as a matter of
lobby, if they have enough organizational survival. As their primary business is lobbying, they
funds and access. have a strong incentive to continue this activity. Success in securing
or blocking policy change may not always represent the final goal of
lobbying. Instead, the goal may be maintaining access and activity,
irrespective of the policy outcomes61.
continued
NAture HuMAN BeHAviOur | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTUrE HUmaN BEHavioUr
Table 1 | Processes included in the model and assumptions behind them (continued)
Key assumptions insights from published empirical and theoretical studies of interest insights from the eu CFP reform process case
groups study
When lobbying, interest Interest groups often choose to lobby uncommitted policy-makers to
groups and coalitions counteract the lobbying effort of opposing groups62,63.
approach policy-makers
with ‘moderate’ beliefs.
Policy-makers voting
Policy-makers vote Individuals formulate goals according to their beliefs and participate in
according to their beliefs, politics to turn their beliefs into policies. Interests are close to beliefs
unless influenced by and are highly causally reciprocal24.
interest groups or interest
coalitions.
SeS and public opinion change
An increasing response Environmental interest groups represent a diffuse public interest and Throughout the 2013 EU CFP reform,
in terms of shifting public often find it more difficult to convert this public interest into influence environmental interest groups enjoyed increased
opinion raises environmental from it, unless they succeed in mobilizing it (for example by focusing attention from policy-makers, citing a growing
interest groups’ and public attention on an issue)60. public concern with fish population decline and the
coalitions’ influence issue of discards5.
will be able to improve environmental groups’ ability to influence the modelled SES and implement it as a gradual increase in envi-
the policy process during the periods of environmental crisis, ronmental groups’ influence as the public becomes more aware and
which should prevent or delay the collapse of the fish population. concerned about fish population decline.
In experiment 2, ‘Funding’, our hypothesis is that the difference in Although change in institutional conditions plays a notable role
funding between industry and environmental groups can be off- in the CFP reform case, we choose not to include it in the current ver-
set by coalition-building. IG success is measured in terms of quota sion of the model. Structural interplay between the EU Parliament
change towards their respective goals, and environmental outcomes and Council is representative of EU policy-making. With this model
are measured as the size of the fish population. We evaluate the fish we do not aim to represent EU institutions specifically. Rather, we
population size relative to the size at maximum sustainable yield, focus on IG responses to environmental and economic changes,
which refers to the size of the fish stock that can continue to produce not their ability to take advantage of complex EU institutions. The
the highest ecologically sustainable yield in the long-term39. mechanisms and processes we study, such as coalition formation,
In experiment 1, we compare several structurally different model are well established beyond this case (see for example ref. 35). Their
versions: (a) with or without the ability of IGs to form coalitions interplay in shaping policy processes, which we investigate here, is,
and (b) with or without an effect of issue salience on the influ- however, much less known.
ence of environmental IGs. In all runs of experiment 1, industry
IGs have twice the funding and influence potential than environ- Model structure and processes. We model three types of agents: IGs
mental groups, which accurately reflects a common scenario in (industry and environmental), IGCs (industry and environmental)
real world fisheries governance. In experiment 2 we vary the mean and policy-makers. Each IG has an amount of funding and influ-
funding for both industry and environmental IGs to investigate its ence that is drawn from a normal distribution around a mean that
influence on environmental outcomes. Details of the experimen- is specific for each type. In the baseline model used in experiment
tal set-up, parameter values and initial conditions can be found in 1, industry groups have on average twice the funding and influence
Supplementary Note 1. than environmental groups, reflecting a common situation in fisher-
ies governance. The funding of an IG determines how many times
results per season the group can lobby. The influence affects the likelihood
PoliSEA: merging empirical and theoretical insights in a styl- of an IG or an IGC to change the policy position of the policy-maker
ized model of IG competition in fishery policy-making. We (see below). The influence of industry groups is fixed, while the
developed the agent-based model to test coalition formation as a influence of environmental groups can increase with issue salience.
mechanism for IG success and to analyse how sustainable outcomes Issue salience reflects the public’s concern about the state of the fish
may be achieved in a fishery dominated by industry interests. The population and increases when the size of the fish population falls
model is grounded in the empirical analysis of the success of envi- below maximum sustainable yield (MSY) levels. Both IG types have a
ronmental IGs in attaining their policy preferences in the EU CFP threshold of concern beyond which they perceive a crisis in the fishery
reform described above (for details see ref. 5). To design the model and seek to form coalitions. The threshold of industry IGs is crossed
we combined our empirical insights with theory about IG attri- when total catch falls below a certain value, while the threshold of
butes and lobbying behaviour, particularly from the neo-pluralism environmental IGs is crossed when the size of the fish population falls
school highlighted above22,23, literature on IGs in general and EU below a certain value (see Table 1 for the theoretical and empirical
IGs in particular4,13,14,16,27,29,35,40 (see Table 1 for an overview of key motivation of this assumption). Policy-makers have a policy position
assumptions and their justification). The empirical case of EU CFP which determines whether they want to increase or decrease the fish-
reform influenced model design in three major ways. First, we focus ing quota. We implement a distribution of policy-makers where the
on coalition-building as an IG strategy, enabling resource pooling majority (60%) is moderate in regards to their policy position, while a
and more efficient lobbying. Second, we assume that the choice of smaller share has strong pro-environmental (20%) and pro-industry
lobbying alone or joining a coalition is influenced by the percep- (20%) beliefs. This portrays a policy system with some degree of
tion of crisis and concern with environmental or economic perfor- polarization, but not completely polarized (which, for instance, could
mance. Third, we include issue salience as an important element of be said about the EU CFP41).
NAture HuMAN BeHAviOur | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTUrE HUmaN BEHavioUr Articles
Voting
Lobbying may change policy positions of PMs
PMs vote for quota in the next season
Lobbying
IGs and IGCs with sufficient funds find PMs
and attempt to lobby
Coalition-building Fishing
IGs attempt to build coalitions when crisis Quota is harvested
threshold is passed or funds are low Fish population increases/decreases
Evaluating
IGs evaluate economic/ecological state of the fishery
Public concern increases with fish population decline
Fig. 1 | Overview of the processes in the PoliSeA model. The key decision-making dynamics involving interest groups (IGs), interest group coalitions
(IGCs) and policy-makers (PMs). Credit: Icons designed by Jerker Lokrantz/Azote
Figure. 1 depicts the key processes of the model. At the begin- adjust one’s policy position to join the coalition. Lower values of this
ning of a fishing season the two types of IGs assess the state of the probability strongly affect outcomes because much fewer coalitions
fishery (Fig. 1). If they do not perceive a crisis and have enough actually form (making it similar to the no-coalition-building sce-
funding they will lobby alone. If the state of the fishery has passed nario below). Higher values do not qualitatively change the results
their threshold of concern, or if an IG lacks sufficient funding, they (Supplementary Note 4). When IGs form a coalition their funding
try to form coalitions with similar groups. Once formed, IGCs and influence are pooled. Different, more realistic assumptions
and individual IGs lobby policy-makers for as long as their fund- about the aggregation of funding and influence in a coalition have
ing allows. Policy-makers will change their beliefs about the need no strong effects on results (Supplementary Note 4, Fig. 4.3). IGs
to increase or decrease the fishing quota depending on the influ- that lobby in coalitions thus increase their influence and, in some
ence of the IG or IGC. Policy-makers then vote on a quota change. cases, can lobby more often than each member alone, because they
Fishers fish until the quota is exceeded or the fish population has pool their funding. For example, the funds available to two IGs
collapsed. The fish population is harvested according to the quota are insufficient for lobbying individually but, when combined, can
and regrows following a logistic function. If the fish population size allow a coalition of the two IGs to lobby at least once. As a result,
drops below a threshold of public concern, issue salience increases, coalitions of both types (environmental or industry) are more effec-
which enhances the influence of environmental IGs. Each time tive than individual IGs.
step represents a fishing season. The model is run over 50 seasons
to simulate realistic time horizons. However, we also test longer Lobbying and voting. IGs and IGCs prefer to lobby those
time horizons (100 seasons; see Supplementary Note 3). Below, we policy-makers who do not have a strong belief for either policy
briefly describe the key processes of coalition-building, lobbying option, as they are more likely to be susceptible to persuasion and
and voting. A description of the details of the model structure and would take less resources to sway. When lobbying, IGs will try to
parameterization using the ODD + D (Overview, Design Concepts convince the policy-maker to adjust their beliefs towards their own
and Details + Decisions) protocol, which is a standard protocol to position. The likelihood of lobbying success depends on the influ-
describe agent-based models, can be found in Supplementary Note ence of the IG or IGC in relation to the influence of other groups
1. A detailed description of all model processes including pseudo- (see Supplementary Note 2 for a formalized expression of the likeli-
code can be found in Supplementary Note 2. Sensitivity analyses hood of lobbying success). Policy-makers vote for either an increase
of key structural choices and parameter values can be found in or a decrease in the quota depending on their adjusted beliefs
Supplementary Note 4. (post-lobbying). The majority of votes determines the decision to
change the quota. If both options receive the same number of votes,
Coalition-building. IGs in the PoliSEA model always seek to lobby. the quota is not changed.
The decision whether to lobby alone or in a coalition depends on the
funding of the group and whether its concern threshold has been An increase in resources through coalition formation alone can-
crossed (Extended Data Fig. 1). If a group does not have sufficient not explain differences in environmental outcomes. In the major-
funding to lobby alone at least once per season, it will try to build a ity of runs of the no-coalition-building scenario, the fish population
coalition with a group or coalition of the same type. If the group has collapses. This confirms our initial expectations that the dominance
enough funding to lobby alone, it will only seek to ally with other of industry IGs leads to overfishing in the absence of coalition for-
groups when its crisis threshold has been passed. To join a coali- mation (Fig. 2a). In this setting, industry IGs are on average more
tion, an IG will first target the IG or IGC with the largest influence successful in lobbying for quota increases because of their advantage
(targeting the IG with the highest funding leads to similar results; in funding and influence. As a consequence, harvesting pressure
see Supplementary Note 4). There is a 60% chance that the IG can increases and the fish population cannot be sustained. We proceed
successfully join the coalition. With this probability we capture the further to test our hypothesis that allowing IGs to form coalitions
possible difficulties of coalition formation, for example the need to should then result in improved environmental outcomes.
NAture HuMAN BeHAviOur | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTUrE HUmaN BEHavioUr
a b
1,000
750
500
250
0
c d
When coalitions are allowed, the number of resource collapses We need to analyse the temporal dynamics of the runs to better
decreases greatly (Fig. 2b). The fish population is maintained at low understand the role of coalition-building behaviour in mitigat-
levels or, in some cases, even close to MSY level. If the simulation time ing industry groups’ advantage in both influence and funding. In
is extended, however, some of the low population level outcomes the following section we will review three ‘typical’ scenarios that
will turn into collapses. This indicates that, in some instances, the roughly correspond to the three outcomes of the coalition scenario.
decline of the fish population is only slowed down (Supplementary
Note 3). In other instances, however, the fish population stabilizes Exploring coalition dynamics that lead to different outcomes. We
at low or close to MSY levels. Interestingly, the coalition-building selected three representative simulation runs for in-depth analysis
scenario generates three different outcomes under the exact same (coloured lines in Fig. 3). These are ‘fast decline’, ‘slow decline’ and
initial conditions, a fact that we will scrutinize more below, along ‘balancing’. They represent individual simulations from the set of
with an analysis of the pathways of fish population decline. runs summarized in Fig. 2b, where the fish population has col-
When the issue salience mechanism is turned off, collapses lapsed, reached a low level or MSY level after 50 seasons.
become more common—as expected, because public opinion does
not support the influence of environmental IGs (Fig. 2c,d). However, Fast decline. In this run, the fish population collapsed rapidly. The
coalitions still have a major effect on outcomes, even without issue critical event that triggered the fast decline was a steep increase
salience (Fig. 2d). Inversely, adding public opinion without coali- in quotas, which peaked in year 22. By the time the quota level
tion formation does not substantially enhance environmental out- peaked it was difficult to reverse the declining trend of the fish
comes, confirming the role of issue salience as a supporting process population in time for it to recover (Fig. 4b). The quota increase
(Fig. 2a). This raises the question as to whether improved environ- occurred because industry groups repeatedly achieved success dur-
mental outcomes can be explained by environmental IGs simply ing the period with little coalitional activity (Fig. 4c,d). As shown
forming more coalitions and thus gaining more influence. While above, without coalitions the industry groups’ advantage in funding
environmental groups do tend to form more coalitions during the and influence results in better chance of success in comparison to
course of the simulation (Fig. 2f), their number does not translate environmental groups. The decrease in fish population as a result
into an increase in influence (Fig. 2h). On the contrary, the aver- of high quotas around year 22 stimulated coalition-building by
age influence increases slightly more strongly for industry IGs than environmental groups, as they became concerned. However, as the
for environmental IGs. However, the overall increase is minimal for quota can only be decreased stepwise, their pressure was not suf-
both types (Fig. 2g,h). ficient and not timely enough to reverse the fish population decline.
In summary, the differences between the no-coalition and the Moreover, the coalitional response from industry groups towards
coalition scenarios and the three different outcomes of the coalition the end of the simulation dampens the impact of the quota decrease.
scenario (collapse, low fish population, MSY) cannot be explained In this run, a period of no concern (or little concern) for both
by resource benefits derived from coalition formation alone. environmental and industry groups produced a notable quota
snur
ledom
fo
rebmuN
snur
ledom
fo
rebmuN
No coalitions Coalitions
1,000
750
500
250
0 Outcome
Collapse
Low FP
No coalitions, Coalitions,
no salience no salience MSY
1,000 1,000 High FP
750 750
500 500
250 250
0 0
e
10.0
7.5
5.0
2.5
0
snoitilaoc
fo
rebmuN
f g
No coalitions Coalitions
10.0 4,000
7.5 3,000
5.0 2,000
2.5 1,000
0 0
Environmental Industry Environmental Industry Environmental Industry
ecneulfnI
h
No coalitions Coalitions
4,000
3,000
2,000
1,000
0
Environmental Industry
Fig. 2 | results of experiment 1, exploring the effects of iGs’ coalition-building strategy on outcomes of the simulation. a–d, Plots show prevalence of
outcomes (collapse, low or high fish population (FP) and MSY) across simulations. Plots a,b represent results of the experiment under conditions of no
issue salience. Plots c,d show results with issue salience enabled. Plots e–h display the average number of coalitions and the average total influence of all
actors per interest group type engaged in lobbying under conditions of issue salience. Red dots indicate the mean, the band represents the median, black
dots are outliers, and the ends of the boxes show the upper and lower quartiles. Results are based on 1,000 runs of the simulation.
NAture HuMAN BeHAviOur | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTUrE HUmaN BEHavioUr Articles
6,000
4,000
2,000
0
0 10 20 30 40 50
Number of seasons
increase. We could argue that in cases where the fishing quota
increases too rapidly in the beginning, it is very difficult to prevent
a fast collapse of the fish population through coalitional response of
environmental groups, unless we allow for the possibility of a major
policy change towards a decrease in quota.
Slow decline. The main difference between the slow and the fast
decline is the lack of a quota ‘spike’ (Fig. 5b). During the period of
‘no concern’ for both IG types, the industry groups managed to push
the quota up, similar to the fast decline scenario. The quota increase
in this run occurred earlier than in the fast decline one, although
it did not rise too high before the fish population decreased to the
point of concern which triggered coalition-building for the environ-
mental IGs. We could argue that such an early decrease was benefi-
cial for the long-term state of the fish population, as it led to an early
coalitional response from environmental groups (Fig. 5c,d).
However, the slow decline of the fish population that followed
after the quota decrease was maintained by the coalition-building
behaviour of the opposing groups. We observed a ‘tug of war’
between the IGCs, as they struggled to bring quota and fish popu-
lation beyond their respective point of concern: industry groups As a result, the tug of war dynamic that followed stabilized the quota
engaged in ‘on and off’ coalition-building as quotas fluctuated at the level that allowed sustainability of the fish population over a
around their concern threshold, while environmental groups kept longer term. In this scenario we observe a more pronounced tug of
lobbying in coalitions most of the time, due to the fish popula- war, as both environmental and industry groups engage in ‘on and
tion being below their concern threshold. Although this interplay off’ coalition-building. This is the result of both the fish population
between sporadically allying industry groups and constantly allying and the quota remaining around the concern thresholds for both
environmental groups has kept increases to the quota somewhat at environmental and industry IGs.
bay, it has failed to bring the quota down to the level needed for The results of the three representative runs highlight the impor-
the recovery of the fish population. This occurred, in part, due to tance of the tug of war dynamic for keeping the quota from under-
the path-dependent, incremental nature of the policy change—the going large increases or decreases. The tug of war is a negative
substantial momentum for increasing the quota simply could not feedback mechanism that stabilizes the quota by counterbalanc-
be counteracted fast enough. The fish population was at a low level ing the influence of the opposing interest. However, while it was
during the last season of the simulation and, had it continued its beneficial for sustaining the fish population over the long-term in
course, we would have expected to see a collapse within the follow- the balancing scenario, it was also locking the fish population in a
ing ten seasons. degradation trend under the slow decline scenario. Even when envi-
ronmental groups received additional influence due to an increase
Balancing. In this scenario (Fig. 6) the quota increase was initi- in issue salience, they were not able to reverse the drop in the fish
ated earlier than in previous simulations, yet it did not reach a level population during the fast decline scenario (although they did ben-
as high as in the two previous scenarios. The small initial quota efit from increased influence in the slow decline scenario).
increase slowly brought the fish population to the level of concern for Finally, the key difference between the three scenarios is the tim-
environmental groups, leading to a coalitional response. However, ing of the onset of the tug of war dynamics. What occurs during
the important difference between the balancing and slow decline the early period of ‘no concern’ can drastically change the dynam-
scenario is that environmental groups managed to push the quota ics of the quota and, as a result, the collapse or recovery of the fish
back downwards just in time to stabilize the state of the fish popu- population. If a quota ‘spike’ occurs, even a coalitional response and
lation at their concern threshold level. The quota at the time cor- increasing issue salience is not sufficient to avoid a fast collapse. If
responded to the amount needed to keep the fish population stable. the quota is increased, but brought down relatively fast, the tug of
noitalupop
hsiF
a
10,000
7,500
5,000
2,500
0
0 10 20 30 40 50
b
0 10 20 30 40 50
Fig. 3 | Dynamics of fish population in 200 model runs over time,
c
under conditions of iGs’ coalition formation. The three highlighted lines
represent the three ‘typical trends’ reviewed in this section: fast decline
(red), slow decline’ (green) and balancing (blue).
0 10 20 30 40 50
d
0 10 20 30 40 50
noitalupop
hsiF
1,000
750
500
250
0
atouQ
10.0
7.5
5.0
2.5
0
snoitilaoc
fo
.oN
100
75
50
25
0
ecneulfnI
Number of seasons
IG Environmental Industry
Fig. 4 | representative run for the fast decline scenario. a–d, Plots
showing fish population (a), quotas (b), average number of interest
coalitions (c) and influence of lobbying groups (d). The dashed lines in
a and b represent the concern threshold of environmental and industry
groups, respectively. The light blue field in b represents seasonal catch that
can be taken out to maintain current fish population size (setting a quota
above this value would lead to a decrease in fish population next season).
NAture HuMAN BeHAviOur | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTUrE HUmaN BEHavioUr
a
10,000
7,500
5,000
2,500
0
0 10 20 30 40 50
b
0 10 20 30 40 50
c
0 10 20 30 40 50
d
0 10 20 30 40 50
war could ‘lock’ an unsustainable quota, leading to a slow collapse. Better outcomes for sustainability of the fisheries in experiments
However, if the initial quota increase is mild and slow, the fish pop- with less well-off environmental groups, such as in the 40/10 sce-
ulation can be maintained due to the opposing interest coalitions’ nario, result from the coalitional activities through which environ-
dynamic. It is highly important to note here that, although concern mental groups were able to maintain constant lobbying pressure
thresholds play an important role in the stabilizing effect of the tug (see Extended Data Fig. 2). Less well-off environmental groups
of war, the scenarios resulting from coalition-building behaviour needed to build coalitions to be able to lobby, no matter their
are not simply the result of the chosen default threshold values. For concern threshold. This early coalition-building reduced the
instance, sensitivity analysis shows that MSY outcomes are much likelihood of high quota increases while the fish population is below
more common at a higher threshold for environmental IGs, while a concern threshold. As we observed in previous scenarios, high
a higher diversity of outcomes is maintained at ‘low-moderate’ IG quotas can create a path dependence that is impossible to break later
concern threshold values (Supplementary Note 4, Fig. 4.7). on, leading to a collapse of the fish population. Coalition-building
of poor IGs influences outcomes particularly strongly in sce-
Funding: exploring the implications of differences in fund- narios where one of the two IG types has very low mean funding.
ing and the role of ‘poor’ groups in the tug of war mechanism. For the settings used in experiment 1, the assumption that poor
Funding and influence are important determinants of IG success, groups form coalitions because of lack of funding does not strongly
particularly when IGs choose to lobby alone. We now seek to test alter results (see Supplementary Note 4 for sensitivity analysis to
our second hypothesis that, when there is the ability to join coali- this assumption).
tions, the effect of difference in funding between IG types should In the case of the 40/10 scenario, the early dynamics of compe-
be mitigated. The fishery is at its most sustainable (highest mean tition between interests were different from other examples (see
and median, lowest variance of outcomes) at intermediate values of Extended Data Fig. 2c), particularly due to the early presence of
funding for industry groups, particularly when environmental IG strong coalitional pressure from environmental IGs. ‘Poor’ environ-
funding is higher than that of industry IGs (Fig. 7a–c). The fishery mental groups formed alliances all the time, which allowed them to
is at its least sustainable (and indeed can be subject to fish popula- prevent the early onset of quota ‘spikes’. However, environmental
tion collapse) when industry IG funding is high and the difference groups were not able to lower the quota to a level that crossed over
in funding with respect to the environmental groups is large (that the industry groups’ concern threshold. As a result, both environ-
is, a difference of 20). Interestingly, outcomes for the fisheries are mental and industry groups were ‘satisfied’ (that is, the quota was
also more sustainable when environmental groups have low fund- set around but not exceeding their respective concern thresholds)
ing (10) with a slight advantage for industry groups (40/10 scenario; most of the time, while the fish population was harvested at levels
Fig. 7d, grey box). close to MSY. Although such scenarios do not always occur, even
noitalupop
hsiF
1,000
750
500
250
0
atouQ
10.0
7.5
5.0
2.5
0
snoitilaoc
fo
.oN
100
75
50
25
0
ecneulfnI
a
10,000
7,500
5,000
2,500
0
0 10 20 30 40 50
b
0 10 20 30 40 50
c
0 10 20 30 40 50
d
0 10 20 30 40 50
Number of seasons
IG Environment Industry
Fig. 5 | representative run for the slow decline scenario. a–d, Plots show
fish population (a), quotas (b), average number of interest coalitions (c)
and influence of lobbying groups (d). The dashed lines in a and b and light
blue field in b are as in Fig. 4.
noitalupop
hsiF
1,000
750
500
250
0
atouQ
10.0
7.5
5.0
2.5
0
snoitilaoc
fo
.oN
100
75
50
25
0
Number of seasons
ecneulfnI
IG Environment Industry
Fig. 6 | representative run for the balancing scenario. a–d, Plots show fish
population (a), quotas (b), average number of interest coalitions (c) and
influence of lobbying groups (d). The dashed lines in a and b and the light
blue field in b are as in Fig. 4.
NAture HuMAN BeHAviOur | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTUrE HUmaN BEHavioUr Articles
a b c d
Industry_funding: 10 Industry_funding: 20 Industry_funding: 30 Industry_funding: 40
10,000
7,500
5,000
2,500
0
10 20 30 40 10 20 30 40 10 20 30 40 10 20 30 40
Environmental IG funding
under conditions of ‘poor’ environmental groups, they are possible change will be too slow to reverse a declining ecological trend.
only due to early lobbying pressure by environmental IG coalitions. While the consequences of a late policy response for preventing
resource collapse have been shown before45, our study investigated
Discussion and revealed the complex social dynamics that may cause the slow
Environmental policy processes are not always responsive to response and path dependence in the first place. Policies most often
changes in the state of the environment, and inefficient natural change incrementally and it takes a substantial amount of politi-
resource use policies can be maintained for a long period of time, cal pressure and public attention and, in some cases, even a shift in
leading to resource overexploitation42,43. The presence of diverse policy venue, to produce a major change or policy punctuation44.
IGs with different problem perceptions and lobbying responses is Path-dependent, incremental policy dynamics signify the impor-
often referred to as a possible cause for unsustainable outcomes. tance of a timely policy response. It is thus important for under-
The dominance of industry interests can constrain the ability of the standing the feedbacks between environmental change and policy
policy-making system to respond to changes in the ecosystem, par- adaptation to account for the slowness of policy change and the rela-
ticularly when environmental signals are drowned out or diluted2. tionship between a given quota level and the underlying ecological
While confirming this general pattern, our study has shed light on state of the resource. Empirical evidence shows that policy stability
how, and under what conditions, the competition of IGs can lead is indeed a common occurrence46, and our model demonstrates how
to sustainable natural resource use. In particular, we show that it arises from the activities of IGCs. The policy stability generated by
resource collapse can be slowed down or prevented in the face of the tug of war dynamic between competing coalitions can, however,
political pressure for exploitation, if the competition between differ- lead to either resource collapse or healthy stock levels, depending
ent interests creates a tug of war dynamic that balances harvesting on how the dynamics of the IGCs plays out. These findings high-
with conservation. This mechanism, however, is only successful if it light the importance of understanding the dynamics of the policy
occurs before resource exploitation has increased to levels that can- process, not only its factors and conditions, as the same settings can
not be reversed in time to prevent collapse. With this stylized but lead to vastly different outcomes.
empirically realistic model, we have been able to show that the inter- Second, in our model less well-funded environmental IGs can
play of different interests with the actions and resources of diverse play a pivotal role because their coalition-building activities (and
IGs and issue salience determines the extent to which the political hence their increased influence) can mitigate exploitation pressures
system can respond to a decline in the natural resource and thus early on. This does not mean that less environmental funding equals
prevent its collapse, or not. more IG success. It indicates that early mobilization of environmen-
Our study has revealed several insights specifically related to the tal groups, even under conditions of funding disadvantage, can help
feedbacks between IG competition for influence and their environ- avoid early ‘spikes’ of high quotas and the locking-in of an undesir-
mental consequences. First, the tug of war that arises when IG suc- able pathway. What may seem to be a disadvantage at first sight,
cess creates a situation perceived as a crisis by the opposing groups could in fact be able to create favourable dynamics that supports
can stabilize the environmental dynamics and substantially delay or sustainable outcomes. This conclusion once again contributes yet
even prevent a resource collapse. Such dynamics are usually trig- more evidence for the compelling argument that, for understand-
gered by early quota increases resulting from the dominance of ing complex, path-dependent policy processes, paying attention to
industry IGs. This aligns well with empirical findings drawing on timing is crucial47.
real world policy processes which are frequently driven by this tug Coalition-building in itself is not a silver bullet. By itself, it is
of war mechanism of change, during which one coalition is respond- not sufficient for sustainable outcomes, particularly in settings
ing to changes in an issue caused by the other opposing coalition44. where industry interests have an advantage. This advantage can
However, the timing of a coalitional response can be critical, as a be a determining factor in winning the tug of war27. Additionally,
late response to an emerging crisis may be ineffective as the policy coalition-building between groups is frequently unsuccessful16,25,27
noitalupop
hsiF
Fig. 7 | results of experiment 2, exploring the role of iG funding in the performance of the fishery under conditions of iG coalitions. a–d, Plots display
results of the experiment under different conditions of mean industry interest group funding. The blue punctured line indicates MSY level for the fish
population. Red dots indicate the mean, the band shows the median, black dots are outliers, and the ends of the boxes are the upper and lower quartiles.
The grey box in d shows results of the 40/10 scenario discussed in this section.
NAture HuMAN BeHAviOur | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTUrE HUmaN BEHavioUr
and environmental coalitions may not be able to overcome powerful complexity that surrounds environmental issues. This paper takes
industry group opposition. Finally, a policy course is strongly influ- a first step towards understanding the policy dynamics that emerge
enced by the belief structure of the political system. In extremely from competition between environmental and economic interests
polarized political systems, which seem to increasingly be the case, in a dynamic social–ecological system. IGs constitute an important
IGs may not be able to challenge even a small majority of the oppos- link between social or environmental change and policy-making.
ing beliefs. This is a reflection on the point raised in the introduction They relay information about the state of an issue to the political
about the importance of the presence of a large group of ‘moderate’ system which, through its policies, in turn influences the state of
policy-makers in the policy system, who are willing to be swayed by an issue. The outcomes of these feedbacks are shaped by the par-
the arguments of opposing IGs and IGCs. ticipating political actors who have different motivations, percep-
The PoliSEA model is a model of an adaptive policy process in tions and aims which influence their perception of, and response to,
coupled social–ecological systems that accounts for the emergence economic or ecological signals from the system. Mechanisms such
of a policy from the competition of diverse IGs. The combination of as coalition-building that enable weaker interests to be heard and
process-tracing of an empirical case with agent-based modelling has therefore balance policies towards more sustainable trajectories may
many advantages48–50. First, it has allowed us to establish empirical thus be critical for sustainability. The effectiveness of these mecha-
evidence for key mechanisms and processes that determine envi- nisms, however, depends on the interplay of several factors inherent
ronmental groups’ success. The model has allowed us to unravel the to the participants in the process, the process itself and the context
underlying causal processes, particularly the tug of war dynamic and in which it is embedded. Models such as the one presented here can
its effects on the resource stock. These processes are difficult or even enhance understanding of this interplay and thus support the devel-
impossible to assess in an empirical study alone. Second, through opment of more sustainable natural resource governance.
systematic experimentation with the model, we were able to iden-
tify the conditions under which coalition-building could prevent or Methods
slow down resource collapse. This contributes to a more nuanced This section provides an overview of key components of the PoliSEA model.
understanding of key processes that is also able to take important
Agents and social and biophysical environments. There are three types of agents:
contextual factors and/or scoping conditions into account.
IGs, IGCs and policy-makers. IGs and IGCs represent two archetypes of interests:
While the model builds on a particular case, the mechanisms industry and environmental. In the model, the number of IGs per type is fixed
such as coalition formation and issue salience, as well as the set- at 100, while the number of coalitions can change during each policy cycle. The
tings of IG competition it explores, are common to many political number of actors is chosen so as to loosely reflect a scenario where a large number
systems. Our insights on the policy dynamics at play are thus rel- of lobbyists with normally distributed funding and influence are present. Interest
groups, according to their type, can pursue one of the two opposing policy options
evant beyond the particularities of this specific study and serve as an
(increasing or decreasing the quota). Although in reality the diversity of aims and
interesting starting point to further explore mechanisms and condi- interests is much more nuanced, for the sake of interpretability of results we focused
tions that enable balancing dynamics that can lead to and secure on implementing simple behavioural options available to the groups. There is no
sustainable resource use in the longer term. Moreover, we hope that possibility to form mixed coalitions between IGs of different types (see Table 1 for
a justification of this assumption). IGs and IGCs are characterized by their funding,
such insights can further inform qualitative inquiries and result in
influence and concern threshold. Policy-makers have different policy beliefs, from
more in-depth knowledge on the relationship between policy pro-
pro-industry to pro-environment. A policy-maker’s position determines their initial
cesses and SES processes which is often missing from sustainability policy preference. It may change through the influence of IGs or IGCs and affects
science literature. whether the policy-maker will vote for a quota increase or a decrease.
It is important to note, however, that the simplified represen- The social environment is represented through a public that becomes
concerned when the state of the fish population deteriorates. An increase in
tation of IG interactions and policy-making in PoliSEA also has
public concern increases issue salience. By ‘public’ we mean the general human
its limitations. For instance, we do not explicitly model lobbying
population, not specifically those inhabiting the fishing communities or towns, and
strategies around issue-framing or provision of different types of not specifically concerned with or dependent on fishing activity. This wider public
information to policy-makers. We also do not consider mixed coali- is concerned when the size of the fish population drops below MSY. It is important
tions composed of IGs of multiple types or outsider lobbying strate- to note here that, while MSY may reflect a combination of ecological, economic
and social objectives, issue salience, as defined in the model, is considered to be
gies that are frequently used by environmental IGs51. Information
driven by the status of the fish population: an environmental objective. Hence,
provision and issue-framing may change the likelihood of policy
as an environmental objective, this is what is determined to matter to the general
change—for instance, by influencing which dimension of the population in this model. We nonetheless acknowledge that there can be other
issue is prioritized. Creating mixed coalitions can be an effective objectives identified as important for the public—for example, employment,
mechanism for transitioning towards a more sustainable policy (for production of food or maintenance of a fishing community52.
The biophysical environment is represented by a fish population that is fished
example, see ref. 6). It is also important to note that the model does
according to the fishing quota that is set and regrows according to a logistic
not account for IG perception biases regarding the state of the fish growth function.
stock and income that can be derived from the fishery, or imper-
fect information. This means that IG concern in practice may not Attributes of IGs. Funding: an IG needs funding to be able to lobby. Funding
always correspond to the actual state of a SES, while in the model of IGs follows a normal distribution around a mean that is different for the two
this uncertainty is not implemented. The model focuses on under- types of IG. In the baseline scenario, the mean of industry IGs is twice the mean of
environmental IG funding. Funding is replenished every year by the same amount,
standing incremental, path-dependent processes of policy change,
independent of performance. IGs get a different amount of funding based on a
while IGs can also contribute to rapid, major changes or punctua-
normal distribution. This is a simplifying assumption as we lack knowledge about
tions in policy that could result from bursts of attention to an issue the feedback from performance to IG funding. Theoretically, lack of IG success
coupled with a corresponding change in policy venue. Finally, we do could go both ways: it could lead to an increase in funding for the IG so as to
not model political processes beyond the fisheries policy subsystem, increase their influence or the funding could decrease due to, for example, financial
difficulties in the industry.
and as a result do not take into account effects that, for example,
Likelihood of lobbying success: the likelihood that an IG or an IGC manages
elections or related policy subsystems could have on the outcomes. to change the belief of a policy-maker is calculated as a probability which increases
Exploring their role in the dynamics uncovered in this study could with the influence possessed by a given IG, as a fraction of the total influence
be an interesting extension to the current model. possessed by all IGs of the same type. The likelihood is thus dynamic and changes
Modern environmental governance systems have long been shift- with the composition of currently lobbying IGs and IGCs.
Concern threshold: the concern threshold represents the sensitivity of an
ing towards participation of multiple and diverse non-state actors.
industry or environmental IG to economic or ecological change in the fisheries,
The presence of a diversity of interests with unequal power is thus respectively. Industry IGs perceive a crisis when the derived income from the
increasingly an integral and indispensable component of political fisheries drops below a fixed threshold. Environmental groups perceive a crisis when
NAture HuMAN BeHAviOur | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTUrE HUmaN BEHavioUr Articles
the size of the fish population drops below a fixed threshold. The concern threshold 2. Crona, B. I. et al. Masked, diluted and drowned out: how global seafood trade
influences whether an IG seeks to form coalitions or not (Extended Data Fig. 1). The weakens signals from marine ecosystems. Fish Fish. 17, 1175–1182 (2016).
threshold for industry groups (480) is set at a catch level that can be sustained if the 3. Gunderson, L. H. & Holling, C. S. Panarchy: Understanding Transformations
fish population is kept at 4,000 (which is the concern threshold for environmental in Human and Natural Systems (Island Press, 2002).
groups). As fishing quotas change after lobbying, environmental or industry group 4. Beyers, J., Eising, R. & Maloney, W. Researching interest group politics in
concern thresholds can be crossed. We explore the importance of the values of Europe and elsewhere: much we study, little we know? West Eur. Polit. 31,
the two thresholds in a sensitivity analysis. The analysis shows that our choice of 1103–1128 (2008).
default threshold values produces diverse results, where both collapses and optimal 5. Orach, K., Schlüter, M. & Österblom, H. Tracing a pathway to success: how
outcomes are possible, but not dominant, while an unstable, low population outcome competing interest groups influenced the 2013 EU Common Fisheries Policy
is that which most commonly occurs (see Supplementary Note 4, Fig. 4.7). reform. Environ. Sci. Policy 76, 90–102 (2017).
6. Österblom, H. & Sumaila, U. R. Toothfish crises, actor diversity and the
Unique attributes of IGCs. Funding and influence: in a coalition, IGs pool their emergence of compliance mechanisms in the Southern Ocean. Glob. Environ.
funding and influence—that is, each IG that joins adds its funding and influence Change 21, 972–982 (2011).
to the overall funding and influence of the IGC. We have tested other forms 7. Raustiala, K. States, NGOs, and international environmental institutions.
of aggregating the influence of new members, for example a version where the Int. Stud. Q. 41, 719–740 (1997).
influence of an IGC levels off when more IGs join (see Supplementary Note 4). 8. Ingold, K. Network structures within policy processes: coalitions, power, and
The specific function for aggregating influence in coalitions does not affect model brokerage in Swiss climate policy. Policy Stud. J. 39, 435–459 (2011).
results in a major way. 9. Folke, C., Hahn, T., Olsson, P. & Norberg, J. Adaptive governance of
social-ecological systems. Annu. Rev. Environ. Resour. 30, 441–473 (2005).
Attributes of policy-makers. Beliefs: policy-makers are assigned a belief value 10. Chaffin, B. C., Gosnell, H. & Cosens, B. A. A decade of adaptive governance
between 1 and 10, with 1 representing a strongly pro-industry and 10 a strongly scholarship: synthesis and future directions. Ecol. Soc. 19, 56 (2014).
pro-environmental belief. They can be grouped into three groups based on 11. Karpouzoglou, T., Dewulf, A. & Clark, J. Advancing adaptive governance of
their beliefs: extreme pro-industry or pro-environmental (with 1–3 and 8–10 social-ecological systems through theoretical multiplicity. Environ. Sci. Policy
on the belief scale) and moderate (4–7). ‘Undecided’ policy-makers, are those 57, 1–9 (2016).
policy-makers whose beliefs are closest to the middle of the belief scale (5–6). 12. Lemos, M. C. & Agrawal, A. Environmental governance. Annu. Rev. Environ.
Beliefs are the key determinant of policy-maker decisions. Although a number Resour. 31, 297–325 (2006).
of factors can change the belief composition of policy-makers, such as election 13. Dür, A. Interest groups in the European Union: how powerful are they?
results, we do not take them into account in this model (as elections are also rarely West Eur. Polit. 31, 1212–1230 (2008).
influenced by fisheries issues). 14. Mahoney, C. Brussels Versus the Beltway: Advocacy in the United States and
the European Union (Georgetown Univ. Press, 2008).
Key processes. Lobbying: IGs and IGCs can lobby as many times as their funding 15. Hojnacki, M., Kimball, D. C., Baumgartner, F. R., Berry, J. M. & Leech, B. L.
allows. One lobbying attempt costs one unit of funding. A successful lobbying Studying organizational advocacy and influence: reexamining interest group
attempt will change the belief of a policy-maker by one unit towards the interest of research. Annu. Rev. Polit. Sci. (Palo Alto) 15, 379–399 (2012).
the respective lobbyist. 16. Klüver, H. Lobbying in the European Union: Interest Groups, Lobbying
Voting: pro-industry policy-makers (1–5 on the belief scale) vote for a quota Coalitions, and Policy Change (OUP, 2013).
increase, while pro-environmental policy-makers (6–10 on the belief scale) vote for 17. Voß, J.-P. & Bornemann, B. The politics of reflexive governance:
a decrease. challenges for designing adaptive management and transition management.
Assessment of the state of the fisheries: industry groups assess the income of Ecol. Soc. 16, 9 (2011).
the fishers in the past season. The income is calculated according to a fixed price 18. Cote, M. & Nightingale, A. J. Resilience thinking meets social theory situating
per unit of fish. The environmental groups assess the size of the fish population in social change in socio-ecological systems (SES) research. Prog. Hum. Geogr.
the past season. 36, 475–489 (2012).
Issue salience: issue salience depends on the public’s perception of the state 19. Duit, A. Resilience thinking: lessons for public administration. Public Adm.
of the fish population. Once the fish population drops below MSY, issue salience 94, 364–380 (2015).
grows exponentially, reaching its peak when the fish population is nearing collapse. 20. Sjöstedt, M. Resilience revisited: taking institutional theory seriously.
Fish population growth: the growth of the fish population follows a logistic Ecol. Soc. 20, 23 (2015).
function with an intrinsic growth rate and a harvesting term. 21. Dahl, R. A. Who Governs? Democracy and Power in an American City
(Yale Univ. Press, 1989).
Experimental set-up. Initial conditions (baseline). Distribution of influence and 22. Lowery, D. & Gray, V. A neopluralist perspective on research on organized
funding of IG: distribution of policy-makers’ beliefs—the number of extreme and interests. Political Res. Q. 57, 164–175 (2004).
moderate policy-makers in the baseline version of the model is 20 agents for each 23. McFarland, A. S. Neopluralism. Annu. Rev. Politi. Sci. (Palo Alto) 10,
of the extremes and 60 moderates. 45–66 (2007).
State of the fish population: each combination was repeated 200 times for a period 24. Sabatier, P. A. Knowledge, policy-oriented learning, and policy change: an
of 50 seasons. To compare the effects of the coalition-building strategy with individual advocacy coalition framework. Sci. Commun. 8, 649–692 (1987).
lobbying, as well as to test the effect of issue salience, we repeated each combination 25. Warleigh, A. The hustle: citizenship practice, NGOs and ‘policy coalitions’ in
1,000 times. To explore dynamics over a longer term, we also ran selected experiments the European Union—the cases of Auto Oil, drinking water and unit pricing.
for an extended number of seasons (100; see Supplementary Note 3). J. Eur. Public Policy 7, 229–243 (2000).
26. Hojnacki, M. Interest groups’ decisions to join alliances or work alone. Am. J.
Reporting Summary. Further information on research design is available in the Pol. Sci. 41, 61–87 (1997).
Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article. 27. Mahoney, C. & Baumgartner, F. R. The determinants and effects of
interest-group coalitions. In Annual Meeting of the American Political Science
Data availability Association, Chicago (2004).
28. Bulkeley, H. & Mol, A. Participation and environmental governance:
The experiment output data that support the findings of this study are available
consensus, ambivalence and debate. Environ. Values 12, 143–154 (2003).
from the corresponding author upon request. ODD + D protocol model
29. Dür, A. & De Bièvre, D. The question of interest group influence. J. Public
documentation is included in Supplementary Note 1.
Policy 27, 1–12 (2007).
30. Weible, C. M., Pattison, A. & Sabatier, P. A. Harnessing expert-based
Code availability
information for learning and the sustainable management of complex
The NetLogo code for the PoliSEA model is available for download from the socio-ecological systems. Environ. Sci. Policy 13, 522–534 (2010).
OpenABM library: 31. Khalilian, S., Froese, R., Proelss, A. & Requate, T. Designed for failure: a
https://www.comses.net/codebases/14c54b41-7fd6-4165-a15f-f76eec53af78/ critique of the Common Fisheries Policy of the European Union. Mar. Policy
releases/1.1.0/. 34, 1178–1182 (2010).
32. Symes, D. The European Community’s Common Fisheries Policy. Ocean
Received: 2 November 2018; Accepted: 12 April 2020; Coast. Manage. 35, 137–155 (1997).
Published: xx xx xxxx 33. Princen, S. Venue shifts and policy change in EU fisheries policy. Mar. Policy
34, 36–41 (2010).
34. Todd, E. & Ritchie, E. Environmental non-governmental organizations and
references the Common Fisheries Policy. Aquat. Conserv. 10, 141–149 (2000).
1. Hanna, S. S. Strengthening governance of ocean fishery resources. Ecol. Econ. 35. Junk, W. M. Co-operation as currency: how active coalitions affect lobbying
31, 275–286 (1999). success. J. Eur. Public Policy 0, 1–20 (2019).
NAture HuMAN BeHAviOur | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTUrE HUmaN BEHavioUr
36. Kingdon, J. W. Agendas, Alternatives, and Public Policies (Longman, 1995). 56. Hanegraaff, M. & Pritoni, A. United in fear: interest group coalition
37. Ostrom, E. Background on the institutional analysis and development formation as a weapon of the weak? Eur. Union Polit. 20, 198–218 (2019).
framework. Policy Stud. J. 39, 7–27 (2011). 57. Holyoke, T. T. Interest group competition and coalition formation. Am. J. Pol.
38. Thelen, K. Historical institutionalism in comparative politics. Annu. Rev. Sci. 53, 360–375 (2009).
Political Sci. 2, 369–404 (1999). 58. Heaney, M. T. & Lorenz, G. M. Coalition portfolios and interest group
39. Fisheries management. 2: The ecosystem approach to fisheries. (Food and influence over the policy process. Interest Groups Advocacy 2, 251–277 (2013).
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2003). 59. Mazey, S. & Richardson, J. Environmental groups and the EC: challenges and
40. Dür, A., Bernhagen, P. & Marshall, D. Interest group success in the opportunities. Env. Polit. 1, 109–128 (1992).
European Union: when (and why) does business lose? Comp. Political Stud. 60. Dür, A. & De Bièvre, D. Inclusion without Influence? NGOs in European
48, 951–983 (2015). trade policy. J. Public Policy 27, 79 (2007).
41. Zimmermann, H. The European Parliament and the layered politicization 61. Lowery, D. Why do organized interests lobby? A multi-goal, multi-context
of the external dimension of the Common Fisheries Policy. Politics Gov. 7, theory of lobbying. Polity 39, 29–54 (2007).
237 (2019). 62. Austen-Smith, D. & Wright, J. R. Counteractive lobbying. Am. J. Pol. Sci. 38,
42. Döring, R. & Egelkraut, T. M. Investing in natural capital as management 25–44 (1994).
strategy in fisheries: the case of the Baltic Sea cod fishery. Ecol. Econ. 64, 63. Rothenberg, L. S. Linking Citizens to Government: Interest Group Politics at
634–642 (2008). Common Cause (Cambridge Univ. Press, 1992).
43. Aps, R. & Lassen, H. Recovery of depleted Baltic Sea fish stocks: a review.
ICES J. Mar. Sci. 67, 1856–1860 (2010). Acknowledgements
44. Baumgartner, F. R. & Jones, B. D. in Policy Dynamics (eds Baumgartner, F. R.
This research was made possible by the support of the European Research Council (ERC)
& Jones, B. D.) 3–28 (Univ. of Chicago Press, 2002).
under the European Union’s Seventh Framework Programme (FP/2007-2013/ERC grant
45. Biggs, R., Carpenter, S. R. & Brock, W. A. Turning back from the brink:
agreement no. 283950 SES-LINK), the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and
detecting an impending regime shift in time to avert it. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci.
innovation programme (ERC grant agreement no. 682472—MUSES; to K.O. and M.S.)
USA 106, 826–831 (2009).
and Marcus and Marianne Wallenberg Foundation (Grant no. 2017.0087 to A.D.). The
46. Ley, A. J. Vested Interests, venue shopping, and policy stability: the long road
funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish
to improving air quality in Oregon’s Willamette Valley. Rev. Policy Res. 33,
or preparation of the manuscript. We would also like to thank E. Sundström for data
506–525 (2016).
analysis assistance.
47. Pierson, P. Not just what, but when: timing and sequence in political
processes. Stud. Am. Political Dev. 14, 72–92 (2000).
Author contributions
48. Manson, S. M. & Evans, T. Agent-based modeling of deforestation in
Southern Yucatán, Mexico, and reforestation in the Midwest United States. K.O., A.D. and M.S. conceived the study and designed the experiments. K.O. led
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 104, 20678–20683 (2007). development and implementation of the model, conducted experiments and analysed
49. Lustick, I. S. & Miodownik, D. Abstractions, ensembles, and virtualizations the data with expertise and feedback from A.D. and M.S. K.O., M.S and A.D. wrote the
simplicity and complexity in agent-based modeling. Comp. Polit. 41, manuscript.
223–244 (2009).
50. Schlüter, M. et al. Capturing emergent phenomena in social-ecological Competing interests
systems—an analytical framework. Ecol. Soc. 24, https://doi.org/10.5751/ The authors declare no competing interests.
ES-11012-240311 (2019).
51. Maloney, W. A., Jordan, G. & McLaughlin, A. M. Interest groups
and public policy: the insider/outsider model revisited. J. Public Policy 14, Additional information
17–38 (1994). Extended data is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-020-0885-y.
52. Hilborn, R. Managing fisheries is managing people: what has been learned? Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/
Fish Fish. 8, 285–296 (2007). s41562-020-0885-y.
53. Klüver, H., Mahoney, C. & Opper, M. Framing in context: how interest
groups employ framing to lobby the European Commission. J. Eur. Public Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to K.O.
Policy 22, 481–498 (2015). Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
54. Nohrstedt, D. & Weible, C. M. The logic of policy change after crisis: Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
proximity and subsystem interaction. Risk Hazards Crisis Public Policy 1, published maps and institutional affiliations.
1–32 (2010).
Editor recognition statement Primary handling editor: Stavroula Kousta
55. Birkland, T. A. Focusing events, mobilization, and agenda setting. J. Public
Policy 18, 53–74 (1998). © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2020
NAture HuMAN BeHAviOur | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NNaaTTUUrrEE HHUUmmaaNN BBEEHHaavviiooUUrr AArrttiicclleess
Extended Data Fig. 1 | interest group coalition-building decision. Interest groups’ decision to join or form coalition(s) or lobby alone.
NAture HuMAN BeHAviOur | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
AArrttiicclleess NNaaTTUUrrEE HHUUmmaaNN BBEEHHaavviiooUUrr
Extended Data Fig. 2 | 40/10 scenario of experiment 2. a, Fish population, b, quota, c, average number of interest coalitions and d, influence of lobbying
groups during the 40/10 scenario. The dashed line in (a) and (b) represents the concern threshold of environmental (a) and industry (b) groups. The light
blue field in (b) represents seasonal catch that can be taken out to maintain current fish population size (setting a quota above this value would lead to a
decrease in the fish population next season).
NAture HuMAN BeHAviOur | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
1
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Corresponding author(s): Kirill Orach
Last updated by author(s): Mar 26, 2020
Reporting Summary
Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency
in reporting. For further information on Nature Research policies, see Authors & Referees and the Editorial Policy Checklist.
Statistics
For all statistical analyses, confirm that the following items are present in the figure legend, table legend, main text, or Methods section.
n/a Confirmed
The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
A statement on whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided
Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.
A description of all covariates tested
A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
A full description of the statistical parameters including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient)
AND variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)
For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted
Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.
For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated
Our web collection on statistics for biologists contains articles on many of the points above.
Software and code
Policy information about availability of computer code
Data collection Data was produced through simulation experiments, using NetLogo 6.0.1
Data analysis We used NetLogo 6.0.1 for model implementation and experiments and R 3.4.4 for analysis of simulated data.
For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors/reviewers.
We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Research guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.
Data
Policy information about availability of data
All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable:
- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets
- A list of figures that have associated raw data
- A description of any restrictions on data availability
The experiment data is available from the corresponding author upon request
Field-specific reporting
Please select the one below that is the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.
Life sciences Behavioural & social sciences Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences
For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/documents/nr-reporting-summary-flat.pdf
2
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Behavioural & social sciences study design
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
Study description The study represents an agent-based model which is designed, in part, based on a process-tracing case study published in: Orach, K., M.
Schlüter, and H. Österblom. 2017. Tracing a pathway to success: How competing interest groups influenced the 2013 EU Common
Fisheries Policy reform. Environmental Science & Policy 76:90–102.
Research sample Data produced through simulation modeling. For model design we use qualitative data from a case study published in: Orach, K., M.
Schlüter, and H. Österblom. 2017. Tracing a pathway to success: How competing interest groups influenced the 2013 EU Common
Fisheries Policy reform. Environmental Science & Policy 76:90–102.
The published study interviewed interest group representatives (11 interviews), policy experts and decision-makers (5 interviews).
Sampling strategy Data produced through simulation modeling. For model design we use qualitative data from a case study published in: Orach, K., M.
Schlüter, and H. Österblom. 2017. Tracing a pathway to success: How competing interest groups influenced the 2013 EU Common
Fisheries Policy reform. Environmental Science & Policy 76:90–102.
The participants for the published study were selected based on snowball sampling (based on initial set of interviews with policy experts)
and convenience sampling.
Data collection Data used in the analysis is generated with the help of a simulation model.
Timing Experiments were run in January-February 2018 and November 2019
Data exclusions No data excluded from analysis
Non-participation No participants dropped out
Randomization Participants not allocated in experimental groups
Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods
We require information from authors about some types of materials, experimental systems and methods used in many studies. Here, indicate whether each material,
system or method listed is relevant to your study. If you are not sure if a list item applies to your research, read the appropriate section before selecting a response.
Materials & experimental systems Methods
n/a Involved in the study n/a Involved in the study
Antibodies ChIP-seq
Eukaryotic cell lines Flow cytometry
Palaeontology MRI-based neuroimaging
Animals and other organisms
Human research participants
Clinical data