Articles
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-019-0808-y
Exploitation and utilization of tropical rainforests
indicated in dental calculus of ancient Oceanic
Lapita culture colonists
Monica Tromp 1,2,3*, Elizabeth Matisoo-Smith 2, Rebecca Kinaston 2, Stuart Bedford 4,5,
Matthew Spriggs 6 and Hallie Buckley 2
Remote Oceania, which largely consists of islands covered in tropical forests, was the last region on earth to be success-
fully colonized by humans, beginning 3,000 years ago. We examined human dental calculus from burials in an ancient Lapita
culture cemetery to gain insight into the early settlement of this previously untouched tropical environment, specifically on
the island of Efate in Vanuatu. Dental calculus is an ideal material to analyse questions of human and plant interactions due to
the ingestion of plant-derived microparticles that become incorporated into the calculus as it forms throughout a person’s life.
Most of the microparticles identified here are from tree and shrub resources, including a ~2,900 calibrated (cal) bp example of
banana in Remote Oceania, providing direct evidence for the importance of forests and arboriculture during the settlement of
Remote Oceania.
T
ropical rainforests have been thought of as barriers to popu- The Lapita cultural complex is associated with the Austronesian
lation movement and as undesirable settlement locations for expansion through Island Southeast Asia beginning ~4,000 cal bp19.
both foraging and farming populations in the past1,2. For exam- Sites associated with this archaeological culture have been found
ple, it has been argued that the tropical forests of central Africa hin- stretching from the Bismarck Archipelago (3,350/3,150 cal bp14)
dered the rapid expansion of the Bantu into Southern Africa partly through to Samoa (2,700 cal bp20). A major component of the Lapita
due to the presumed lack of subsistence resources2. However, over the culture was a ‘transported landscape’ of domesticated plants and
past three decades evidence from the rainforests of South America3,4, animals that accompanied colonists. An earlier model for Lapita
Africa5,6, South Asia7,8, Island Southeast Asia9 and Near Oceania10 subsistence characterized the settlers as so-called Strandloopers
has shown this to be largely false and probably driven by European who exploited the wild, largely marine, resources and moved
colonialist perceptions and modern hunter-gatherer–farmer rela- through the maritime landscape without engaging in sedentary
tionships11,12. Archaeologists continue to demonstrate the protracted farming-type practices21. Today, Lapita peoples are generally con-
human agency behind ‘virgin’ rainforest structure worldwide13. The sidered horticultural-foragers who opportunistically exploited wild
oldest evidence for rainforest use in the Western Pacific can be found resources while establishing more permanent horticulture and ani-
in New Guinea, ~45,000 years ago, where rainforests were continu- mal husbandry practices19,22,23.
ally in use, reshaped and occupied throughout the history of human Characterizing subsistence practices and the components of the
occupation10. Use of these resources continued as the Austronesian transported landscape of colonizing groups is integral to under-
or Lapita peoples migrated into and through Near Oceania around standing both the initial and continued success of these communities
3,350–3,150 calibrated (cal) bp14,15 (Fig. 1). The importance of for- and so is a key part of colonization models in the Pacific. Evidence of
ests did not diminish as the previously untouched islands of south- the plant portion of the Lapita subsistence strategy is poorly under-
ern Remote Oceania began to be settled around 3,000 years ago16,17. stood; partly due to the scarcity of plant macroremains and the
Tropical rainforest ecosystems are still an integral part of subsistence inability to identify specific plant products or proportions of plants
regimes across the Pacific Islands today. Because this region was from the stable isotope analyses of archaeological bone and teeth.
colonized fairly recently, there is a unique potential to examine how Ethnobotany, linguistics and archaeobotany have provided some
humans interacted with and altered truly virgin landscapes. This evidence that roots and tubers (underground storage organs) and
study documents the importance of tropical rainforest resources to domesticated bananas were carried into Remote Oceania19,24–27. The
the initial colonists of Remote Oceania by extracting microparticles sparse archaeobotanical evidence that does exist of tropical forest use
from Lapita and immediately Post-Lapita human dental calculus from by the Lapita peoples has primarily come from Near Oceanic sites.
the archaeological cemetery site of Teouma, on Efate Island, Vanuatu This evidence is in the form of anaerobically preserved tree mac-
(Lapita, 3,000–2,800 cal bp; and Post-Lapita, 2,400 cal bp). Teouma is rofossils28–31 and microparticles26,31. The trees identified from these
the earliest and largest Lapita cemetery site in the Pacific islands18. remains are generally native to Near Oceania. Archaeobotanical
1Department of Archaeology, Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History, Jena, Germany. 2Department of Anatomy, School of Biomedical
Sciences, University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand. 3Southern Pacific Archaeological Research, Archaeology Programme, School of Social Sciences,
University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand. 4School of Culture, History and Language, College of Asia and the Pacific, The Australian National University,
Canberra, Australian Capital Territory, Australia. 5Department of Linguistic and Cultural Evolution, Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History,
Jena, Germany. 6CBAP, School of Archaeology and Anthropology, College of Arts and Social Sciences, The Australian National University, Canberra,
Australian Capital Territory, Australia. *e-mail: monica.tromp@otago.ac.nz
NaTuRE HuMaN BEHaviOuR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles Nature HumaN BeHaviour
20° S
evidence from Remote Oceania has been restricted to starch gran- phytoliths (n = 726). Higher concentrations of palm phytoliths
ules from underground storage organs25,32,33 and palm, Heliconia and (>100) were found in burials 2 and 3, recovered from site 7C, which
banana leaf phytoliths27 that have been extracted from sedimentary is dated to the Post-Lapita occupation of the site. The second most
samples and Late and Post-Lapita human dental calculus34—all pri- common overall were tree or shrub type phytoliths from both bark/
marily transported and domesticated crop foods. Zooarchaeological leaves (n = 234) and wood/leaves (n = 64) (Fig. 2). Tree-type phyto-
evidence shows that the protein and fat portion of Lapita subsistence liths recovered were non-diagnostic. Within the reference species we
included commensal species such as pigs, rats and chickens19,35 but examined (n = 4 of 11; Supplementary Table 3), and in general, wood
also wild species such as fruit bats, turtles, birds, cuscus (Phalanger rarely contains diagnostic phytoliths, but the spheroid psilate mor-
sp.), native rodents, lizards, frogs, snakes and crocodiles19,30. photype is sometimes found at low levels, although is not unique
Due to the focus on the domesticated root crop and commensal to wood and can also be found in bark, leaves, seeds and fruits39,40.
components of the ‘transported landscape’ by many researchers of Bark phytoliths are more common but are still comparatively rare
the Lapita cultural complex, tropical rainforest resources, including and generally take on the form of the cells of the tissue they are from
flora and fauna, were initially thought to be only minor components such as fibres, sclereids, parenchyma/cork and cork aerenchyma39.
of early colonizing diets in Remote Oceania19. However, recent Grass-type phytoliths were also common (n = 147), most of
stable isotope studies22,23,36 and zooarchaeological research37,38 have which were bilobates (n = 118); well over half of these were recov-
shown the importance of native fauna to early colonizer subsistence ered from the teeth of three females (n = 87). Other classes of
at Teouma. Here we report data that document the importance of phytoliths found at low levels include the cavate (volcaniform) mor-
rainforest plant resources and show that the diet of early settlers of photype which is diagnostic of Musaceae leaves or stems41,42 (n = 9),
Teouma was heavily supplemented by, if not reliant on, tropical for- diagnostic blocky Musaceae seed morphotypes26,43 (n = 2) (Fig. 3),
est arboricultural products during this initial phase of settlement. polygonal scrobiculate or sedge morphotype (n = 4) and unknown
phytoliths (n = 71).
Results
A total of 1,360 microparticles (biogenic silica, pollen, unknown Discussion
organic material) and fungus particles were recovered from the den- Perhaps one of the clearest examples of the horticultural-foraging
tal calculus of 28 Lapita-associated human burials and four immedi- strategy that incorporated Near Oceanic plants and ideas and the
ately Post-Lapita burials from the Teouma site on the island of Efate, transported landscape model, can be seen in the presence of Musa-
Vanuatu (Supplementary Tables 1 and 2). Biogenic silica-based type phytoliths in the Teouma dental calculus (Fig. 3). Banana seed
microparticles were the most abundant, with 1,257 phytoliths, 57 phytoliths have not previously been found in direct association with
sponge spicules and 20 diatoms recovered (Supplementary Table 1). human consumption in Remote Oceania. Finding seed phytoliths
Other microparticles include unknown plant tissues (n = 24), two this far south, out of the proposed centre for banana diversity (New
Pinus sp. pollen grains, several instances of fungal spores or mycelia Guinea/Island Southeast Asia), is important as it provides evidence
(Supplementary Table 2) and other, as yet unidentifiable, organic for the human-mediated transportation of ‘cultiwild’ varieties that
microremains. Biogenic silica was observed in the calculus of all but were not yet fully domesticated44. It has long been assumed that
four individuals (Supplementary Table 1). domesticated varieties of banana would have been transported
As expected from a tropical Pacific island context, most of with people, as the vegetative reproduction of domesticated banana
the biogenic silica was in the form of spheroid echinate or palm thrives in disturbed, wet tropical environments. Vegetative stock
Latitude
Kuk Swamp
Near Remote
Bismarcks Oceania Oceania
Papua New Solomon Islands
Watom
Guinea
Santa
Cruz
Samoa
Futuna
Vao & Uripiv
Vanuatu
Teouma Tonga
New Fiji
Caledonia
Australia
0 500
km
160° E
Longitude
Fig. 1 | Map of the region of Lapita expansion showing archaeological sites mentioned in the text. Near and Remote Oceania are separated by the dotted
line. The area of Lapita expansion is enclosed within the green line.
NaTuRE HuMaN BEHaviOuR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Nature HumaN BeHaviour Articles
a b f
c
d
e
Fig. 2 | Examples of archaeological tree or shrub phytoliths from several Teouma burials. a, A spheroid psilate wood-type phytolith. b, An elipsoid
psilate wood-type phytolith. c, A spheroid plicate wood-type phytolith. d, An elongate facetate bark or leaf phytolith. e, A blocky bark-type phytolith. f, An
irregular elongate facetate bark or leaf phytolith. The black scale bar applies to all light microscope images (all except the scanning electron microscope
image, f); both scale bars are 10 μm.
a b c
d
Fig. 3 | archaeological banana phytoliths. a,b, Musa (banana) seed phytoliths from burial 29W (a) and burial 19 (b) consistent with previously found
blocky Eumusa seed-type phytoliths at Watom26. c,d, Banana stem or leaf or (volcaniform) phytoliths from burial 16 (c) and 29W (d). The scale bar is
10 µm and applies to all images.
would have allowed early Oceanic colonists to carry bananas able beginning around the same time as the Austronesian expansion,
to produce flowers and fruit within six months to a year after plant- ~4,000–3,000 years ago44,49,50. The Musa seed-type phytoliths identi-
ing44. As well as being a major staple food crop in most tropical fied at Teouma are similar to those identified from archaeological
environments today, bananas have a myriad of uses besides human paleosols on Watom Island in the Bismarck Archipelago26,43. This
consumption45. Therefore, finding both seed and leaf phytoliths at is especially interesting considering the recent genetic analysis of
Teouma is just as likely to be evidence of banana being used for several modern banana varieties which identified the edible Musa
other purposes, such as building material, jewellery, textiles, food species M. acuminata ssp. banksii in Vanuatu—a rare occurrence
wrappings and plates, cordage, ceremonial use or medicine45. outside of Near Oceania even today51. This species does not adapt
Bananas have a deep history in Oceania, with the earliest evi- easily and was previously not known to have spread beyond New
dence of cultivation at the Kuk Swamp site in New Guinea by at Britain and the Solomons and was probably established by an
least 7,000 bp46–48. Wild banana populations are found from east archaeological population51. More recently, low levels of Musa leaf
India, Taiwan, Island Southeast Asia, New Guinea and the Solomon phytoliths have been reported from a range of sites in Vanuatu. They
Islands44. Domesticated parthenocarpic (seedless) varieties, thought were identified in late deposits on Vao, Lapita-associated sediments
to originate in the Island Southeast Asia and New Guinea region, from Uripiv and immediately Post-Lapita (~2,500 bp) deposits on
spread out as far as West Africa and East Polynesia, probably Epi Island in central Vanuatu27. The Teouma calculus evidence
NaTuRE HuMaN BEHaviOuR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles Nature HumaN BeHaviour
confirms the early introduction of Musa to Vanuatu and stretches its the Pacific to produce this morphotype. However, it is not possible to
date of arrival, and its importance to human subsistence in Oceania, tell the difference between sugarcane and non-dietary tropical grass
back to the initial colonization of the Vanuatu archipelago. The phytoliths such as Heteropogon contortus (pili grass) and Saccharum
appearance of non-native, seeded banana at Teouma provides sup- maximum (sugarcane reed) with any reliability when they are found
port for the concept of a transported landscape but perhaps a more as separate, individual phytoliths (as opposed to instances where
nuanced one than previously described for Remote Oceania. they are found still within epidermal or cuticle tissue61).
Although not all microparticles could be identified to genus The calculus recovered from Teouma burial 16, an old adult
or species, it is clear that forest resources were an integral part of female, had the most grass-type phytoliths found at the site. This
the successful colonization of Vanuatu by Lapita colonists, as the burial did not have a skull and only three teeth were recovered (the
dental calculus of the Teouma individuals contained mostly tree- right maxillary first molar and both right maxillary premolars) and
or shrub-derived phytoliths. Today Vanuatu, and specifically Efate therefore did not have an in situ dentition with which to assess tooth
Island, is mostly covered in evergreen and some deciduous rainfor- wear. However, it is possible that this individual may have used their
ests52. There is a perceived lack of ecological diversity in the region, mouth as a ‘third hand’ to help in processing grass fibres, as the
perhaps due to an under-reporting of plant diversity in Vanuatu second premolar had extreme asymmetrical wear on the mesial or
(reports are generally limited to known economic/staple crops), distal side of the cusp and chipping on either the lingual or buccal
limited palaeobotanical research in the region and some loss of aspect. The pattern of tooth wear for this type of activity is gener-
traditional knowledge with the passing of each generation of how ally seen in the anterior dentition62 and the calculus examined in
many plants in Vanuatu are useful today. Our data add to the recent this study was from a molar with minimal tooth wear. This might
body of evidence that identifies the importance of forest resources suggest that microparticle evidence of such processing can also be
to human subsistence practices worldwide, from as far back as the found in the posterior dentition.
Pleistocene12, through to the more recent movement of people into Two burials from Teouma site 7C also contained high levels of
the southwest Pacific 3,000 years ago. grass phytoliths: burial 2, an adult of unknown sex and burial 3, an
The most abundant representation within the dental calculus adult female. So far, there is not a published assessment of the dental
comes from palm trees—an important resource throughout most wear of the individuals from Teouma site 7C but a brief examina-
of the Pacific. Indeed, palm trees (coconut and others) are common tion while sampling the dental calculus does not show any major
today and were in the past in Vanuatu, with the earliest evidence on or asymmetrical wear such as that observed in burial 16. The gen-
Aneityum dating to 5,000 bp from pre-human levels53. Today there eral pattern from all of the Teouma Lapita and Post-Lapita burials
are at least 21 species of palm found in Vanuatu, including 14 spe- seems to be that grass phytoliths are found only in adult or older
cies and one genus that is endemic to the islands54. Archaeological adult female dental calculus and may be evidence of them using
macroremains of coconut are often found and preferentially used their teeth for fibre processing. While this grass phytolith evidence
for dating sites in Vanuatu and elsewhere in the Pacific. In addition of possible fibre processing is intriguing, this cemetery sample, par-
to this study, sedimentary microparticle studies from elsewhere in ticularly the Lapita dentition, is skewed due to the unique burial
the Pacific25,26 show globular echinate or palm to be the most abun- rituals of these people. The burial practices at Teouma are highly
dant morphotypes observed. Like banana, almost all parts of the variable with several different types of burial position and evidence
palm are useful. Palm phytoliths are found in all parts of the plant of both primary and secondary burial63,64. All of the burials appear
and could have become incorporated in the Teouma dental calculus to have been complete at the time of initial interment, as evidenced
either through eating the coconut, using teeth to strip the coconut by the remaining few loose teeth being found where the skull should
leaves to make fibre or indirectly via sediment adhering to edible have been or in the thoracic region. In all adult cases, the skulls were
underground storage organs, as demonstrated in calculus from later removed, sometimes replaced with a Conus sp. shell ring or
Rapa Nui individuals55. In addition to the palm phytoliths, many a flat coral slab18,63–65. In most cases, other skeletal elements were
non-diagnostic tree or shrub phytoliths were found, which indicates also removed from the adult burials63,64. Out of more than 70 buri-
that this class of plants was important to the subsistence of this colo- als recovered from Teouma, only seven skulls were present, with
nizing population. Of the reference trees collected for this study, as an eighth skull found in a disturbed context; three of these (burials
many as 20 species may be represented by the non-diagnostic tree B10A, B10B and B10C) were found on the chest of an adult male
or shrub phytoliths (Supplementary Table 3). It is also possible that (B10E), one enclosed within two pots (B17) and three (B30A, B30B
the leaves and bark were used for medicinal purposes, as is seen in and B30C) were placed within the lower limbs of another old male
Vanuatu today56. Additionally, some varieties of tree leaves are regu- (B44). Only burial 17 has a matching mandible63,64 but there were
larly eaten with meals or as snacks57. several other mandibles found in the site. Because of this complex
Analyses of the health of the Teouma people have revealed evi- funerary practice of skull removal after burial63, the number of indi-
dence of metabolic disease (scurvy) caused by dietary insufficiency viduals with teeth available for this study is much smaller than the
of vitamin C58 particularly affecting young infants, which is a reflec- total number of individuals recovered from the Teouma site58. None
tion of maternal ill-health. A lower protein intake in females23,59 had full dentitions present, making it impossible to assess dental
probably affected fetal and infant survival in this colonizing popu- wear patterns at the site.
lation. However, available plant foods at Teouma are more varied Bioarchaeology has a unique contribution to make in directly
than previously thought, suggesting a complex interplay between addressing questions of the human experience in the past. As
cultural, biosocial and ecological factors (for example, cyclones microbioarchaeological methods have become more common and
destroying food sources) relating to how food preparation, allo- increasingly refined over the past two decades, it has become clear
cation and consumption affected the health and survival of the that broad-spectrum foraging and horticulture were the primary
people59 rather than simply a lack of available dietary sources. subsistence strategies used for much of the history of the Pacific.
Low levels of grass-type phytoliths were also discovered in the It is also becoming clearer that the Lapita subsistence strategy that
calculus of both Lapita and Post-Lapita individuals from Teouma. enabled the successful migration through and settlement of western
Most Poaceae or grass family phytoliths recovered were the bilo- Remote Oceania seems to be based on knowledge and adaptation
bate morphotype associated with several of the subfamilies within gained in the mixed land and sea strategies used in the archipelagos
the Poaceae family, including Panicoideae (includes sugarcane), of Island Southeast Asia and Near Oceania. At least for Teouma,
Bambusoideae (bamboos) and Oryzoideae (rices)60. Sugarcane the Lapita subsistence pattern does not appear to be one solely
(Saccharum officinarum) is the most common economic Panicoid in of a group of farmers coming into a landscape using only their
NaTuRE HuMaN BEHaviOuR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Nature HumaN BeHaviour Articles
domesticated transported resources, nor is it one of a people living was placed in a different container and left to dry in a laminar flow hood under
exclusively off the wild resources of the land and sea. At Teouma, ultraviolet light overnight. All subsequent work was done in a laminar flow hood
in the Department of Anatomy dedicated ancient DNA facility at the University
where the burials span a 600-year period (200 years of cemetery use,
of Otago. Nine of the 17 samples were large enough to weigh (a microbalance was
followed by a 400-year gap before the site 7C burials)16, there is little not available to weigh all samples) and larger chunks of calculus were broken up
difference in the overall microparticle content of their teeth. This mechanically with a sterile mortar and pestle while wrapped in multiple layers
suggests that arboriculture, horticulture and foraging were all part of autoclaved foil. All samples were then left in 1 ml of 0.5 M EDTA for 30 min to
of the subsistence strategy at some level, from initial colonization solubilize any potential DNA contamination. The sample was then pelleted and
the EDTA placed in a different tube. Another 1 ml of 0.5 M EDTA was added and
through to at least 2,400 bp. The Lapita peoples were both horticul-
the samples were left in a 4 ˚C fridge for 48–72 h, until decalcified. At this stage the
turalists and foragers who adapted to and modified their environ- EDTA was placed into a new sterile tube for future ancient DNA extraction and the
ments depending on the local ecology and their subsistence needs. pelleted sample was rinsed for optical light microscopy analysis.
This strategy enabled the successful settlement of most of the varied
Microparticle analysis. Scanning electron microscopy coupled with electron
island environments from the Bismarck Archipelago to Western
dispersive spectroscopy analysis was performed on an FEI Quanta 200 FEG
Polynesia within a few hundred years.
with a Bruker Quantax 200 SDD-EDS X-ray detector at the Applied Microscopy
Today there is an increasing call for scholars and the general Laboratory, Centre for Archaeology, Materials and Applied Spectroscopy, at Idaho
public to acknowledge and celebrate the incredible voyaging and State University. Calculus samples were prepared for scanning electron microscopy
navigation skills of the indigenous ancestors of Pacific people, who by placing a small aliquot (20–30 µl) on a plastic slide to maximize the atomic weight
differential between phytolith (SiO) and substrate (a carbon-based material),
rapidly settled the small, geographically isolated islands across the 2
creating high-contrast images for automated analysis using the backscattered
vast Pacific Ocean, thousands of years before European explorers
electron detector. This aliquot volume was found to be ideal in a previous study as it
entered the region66–68. The evidence presented here adds to the does not affect the average number of microparticles counted but does decrease the
burgeoning story of Lapita culture and biology that is being written spacing between microparticles and consequently decreased the analysis time55.
from bioarchaeological enquiry and speaks to our increasing recog- Optical light microscopy was done with a Zeiss Axioscope (located in the
Anthropology and Archaeology Department at the University of Otago). For each
nition of the ingenuity and adaptability of the Lapita descendants
sample a drop of 20–30 µl was placed on a standard glass slide, dried and mounted
living in the ever-changing and challenging Oceanic world.
in one drop of type A immersion oil and covered with a glass coverslip secured
with clear nail polish at two corners. Each slide was examined in its entirety in
Methods vertical transects using cross-polarized and transmitted light to identify and
Materials. Teouma is an archaeological site located on the south coast of the photograph all microparticles. Once the analysis was complete, the edges of the
island of Efate in Vanuatu. The site was first discovered as a result of the recovery coverslip were sealed with two coats of clear nail polish and placed in a slide holder
of a dentate-stamped pot sherd found during soil quarrying for the construction for long-term storage and future analysis.
of a prawn farm in 200318. At the time of use of the site, starting approximately All microparticles were counted using images taken during the analysis of each
3,000 cal bp and ending by 2,400 cal bp16, it was located on a beach terrace in sample, separating them first into plant or animal types and then by morphotype.
Teouma Bay, near to a stream and limestone cliffs. However, due to a combination Counting all microparticles found in each sample is important as there is usually
of uplift and alluvial infilling of the bay from the Teouma River, the site is now not enough of any one type to reach the same sort of counting redundancy used
~800 m inland18. The constant uplift which moved the site further away from in sediment analyses. The International Code for Phytolith Nomenclature 2.0 (ref.
the sea is thought to have contributed to its abandonment by 2,400 cal bp18. 79) was used to name and describe all phytoliths. Identification of microparticles
Multiple field seasons from 2004 to 2010 uncovered a large cemetery dating to was done using published material as well as the reference collection developed
3,000–2,800 cal bp69. A total of 68 burial features were recorded within the coral for this project by one of the authors (M.T.; Supplementary Table 3). Banana
rubble beach and reef containing the remains of around 100 human individuals, seed phytoliths were identified using size, descriptions (such as the central ridge)
as well as other human bone material scattered throughout the site58,63. There and images26,43. Starch granules were recovered during these analyses and are the
were also five, Post-Lapita human burials found at site 7C, 75 m south of the main subject of a future paper.
cemetery dating to ~2,400 cal bp70. In addition to the burials, there have been other
highly important discoveries including complete Lapita pots18,71,72, midden deposits Reporting Summary. Further information on research design is available in the
containing now extinct-animals37,73 and exotic obsidian74–76. Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Dental calculus recording and removal. Methods have been previously published Data availability
in Tromp et al.77. The following is a summary. Images of photographed microparticles are available from the corresponding
Calculus removal took place at the Australian National University (ANU) in author on request.
Canberra, Australia, and the Vanuatu Cultural Centre (VCC) in Port Vila, Vanuatu.
At the ANU, sampling was done in a quarantine laboratory on a bleach- and Received: 13 July 2019; Accepted: 6 December 2019;
ethanol-cleaned bench over aluminium foil. At the VCC, sampling was done on
Published: xx xx xxxx
a bleach- and isopropanol-cleaned table over aluminium foil. Photographs were
taken of calculus deposits in situ and the extent of calculus was described using
established protocols78. Any adhering sediment was gently removed with a clean References
(boiled for at least 20 min), soft toothbrush purchased from a local supermarket. 1. Bailey, R. C. et al. Hunting and gathering in tropical rain forest: is it possible?
Calculus was removed using dental picks that had been sonicated (except in Am. Anthropol. 91, 59–82 (1989).
Vanuatu) and sterilized with ethanol before use. Calculus was gently scraped onto 2. Grollemund, R. et al. Bantu expansion shows that habitat alters the route and
pieces of aluminium foil and then transferred into a 1.5- or 2-ml sterile centrifuge pace of human dispersals. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 112, 13296–13301 (2015).
tube. Samples were not weighed, as a microbalance was not available at the 3. Roosevelt, A. C. The Amazon and the Anthropocene: 13,000 years of human
sampling locations. influence in a tropical rainforest. Anthropocene 4, 69–87 (2013).
Several tests were done to identify potential contamination. Calculus samples 4. Caetano Andrade, V. L. et al. Growth rings of Brazil nut trees (Bertholletia
were all rinsed for 10–30 min with HCl or EDTA (depending on the protocol excelsa) as a living record of historical human disturbance in Central
used) to remove any surface contamination. Experimental blanks were created for Amazonia. PLoS One 14, e0214128 (2019).
each method during decalcification. No microparticles were recovered from the 5. Bahuchet, S., McKey, D. & de Garine, I. Wild yams revisited: is independence
experimental blanks. Surfaces of two pig bones from the Lapita midden adjacent from agriculture possible for rain forest hunter-gatherers? Hum. Ecol. 19,
to the burials on the edge of the Teouma cemetery were tested for potential 213–243 (1991).
background microparticle contamination from the site or post-excavation 6. Mercader, J. Forest people: the role of African rainforests in human evolution
handling, one of which had no microparticles and the other had one diatom and dispersal. Evol. Anthropol. Issues News Rev. 11, 117–124 (2002).
fragment and two unknown phytoliths that did not match any of those recovered 7. Wedage, O. et al. Specialized rainforest hunting by Homo sapiens ~45,000
from the dental calculus. years ago. Nat. Commun. 10, 739 (2019).
Two different demineralization protocols were used. For samples that were 8. Roberts, P. et al. Direct evidence for human reliance on rainforest resources
analysed using the scanning electron microscope, a cold and weak HCl method in late Pleistocene Sri Lanka. Science 347, 1246–1249 (2015).
was used55. The second method was used for 17 subsamples that had been put 9. Barker, G. et al. The ‘cultured rainforests’ of Borneo. Quat. Int. 448,
aside for ancient DNA analysis. These samples were generally larger than the 44–61 (2016).
previously analysed samples to maximize potential ancient DNA recovery. The 10. Summerhayes, G. R. et al. Human adaptation and plant use in Highland New
samples were vortexed in ultrapure water to remove any loose material that Guinea 49,000 to 44,000 years ago. Science 330, 78–81 (2010).
NaTuRE HuMaN BEHaviOuR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles Nature HumaN BeHaviour
11. Barton, H., Denham, T., Neumann, K. & Arroyo-Kalin, M. Long-term 41. Vrydaghs, L. et al. Differentiating the volcaniform phytoliths of bananas:
perspectives on human occupation of tropical rainforests: an introductory Musa acuminata. Ethnobot. Res. Appl. 7, 239–246 (2009).
overview. Quat. Int. 249, 1–3 (2012). 42. Ball, T., Vrydaghs, L., Van Den Hauwe, I., Manwaring, J. & De Langhe, E.
12. Roberts, P. & Petraglia, M. Pleistocene rainforests: barriers or attractive Differentiating banana phytoliths: wild and edible Musa acuminata and Musa
environments for early human foragers? World Archaeol. 47, 718–739 (2015). balbisiana. J. Archaeol. Sci. 33, 1228–1236 (2006).
13. Roberts, P., Hunt, C., Arroyo-Kalin, M., Evans, D. & Boivin, N. The deep 43. Lentfer, C. J. Tracing domestication and cultivation of banana phytoliths from
human prehistory of global tropical forests and its relevance for modern phytoliths: an update from Papua New Guinea. Ethnobot. Res. Appl. 7,
conservation. Nat. Plants 3, 17093 (2017). 247–270 (2009).
14. Summerhayes, G. R. et al. Tamuarawai (EQS): an early Lapita site on Emirau, 44. Castillo, C. & Fuller, D. Q. in The Oxford Handbook of the Archaeology of Diet
New Ireland, PNG. J. Pac. Archaeol. 1, 62–75 (2010). (eds Lee-Thorp, J. & Katzenberg, M. A.) Chapter 10 (Oxford University
15. Rieth, T. M. & Athens, J. S. Late Holocene human expansion into Near and Press, 2015).
Remote Oceania: a Bayesian Model of the chronologies of the Mariana 45. Kennedy, J. Bananas and people in the homeland of genus Musa: not just
Islands and Bismarck Archipelago. J. Island Coast. Archaeol. 14, 5–16 (2017). pretty fruit. Ethnobot. Res. Appl. 7, 179–197 (2009).
16. Petchey, F., Spriggs, M., Bedford, S. & Valentin, F. The chronology of 46. Haberle, S. G., Lentfer, C., O’Donnell, S. & Denham, T. The
occupation at Teouma, Vanuatu: use of a modified chronometric hygiene palaeoenvironments of Kuk Swamp from the beginnings of agriculture in the
protocol and Bayesian modeling to evaluate midden remains. J. Archaeol. Sci. highlands of Papua New Guinea. Quat. Int. 249, 129–139 (2012).
Rep. 4, 95–105 (2015). 47. Fullagar, R., Field, J., Denham, T. & Lentfer, C. Early and mid Holocene
17. Sheppard, P. J., Chiu, S. & Walter, R. Re-dating Lapita movement into Remote tool-use and processing of taro (Colocasia esculenta), yam (Dioscorea sp.) and
Oceania. J. Pac. Archaeol. 6, 26–36 (2015). other plants at Kuk Swamp in the highlands of Papua New Guinea. J.
18. Bedford, S., Spriggs, M. & Regenvanu, R. The Teouma Lapita site and the Archaeol. Sci. 33, 595–614 (2006).
early human settlement of the Pacific Islands. Antiquity 80, 812–828 (2006). 48. Denham, T. P. et al. Origins of agriculture at Kuk Swamp in the Highlands of
19. Kirch, P. V. On the Road of the Winds: An Archaeological History of the Pacific New Guinea. Science 301, 189–193 (2003).
Islands before European Contact (Univ. California Press, 2017). 49. Vrydaghs, L. et al. in Phytolith and Starch Research in the Australian–Pacific–
20. Rieth, T. & Cochrane, E. in The Oxford Handbook of Prehistoric Oceania (eds Asian Regions: The State of the Art (eds Hart, D. M. & Wallis, L. A.) 177–185
Cochrane, E. & Hunt, T.) 133–161 (Oxford Univ. Press, 2015). (Pandanus Books, Research School of Pacific and Asian Studies, The
21. Groube, L. M. Tonga, Lapita pottery, and Polynesian origins. J. Polyn. Soc. 80, Australian National University, 2003).
278–316 (1971). 50. Perrier, X. et al. Multidisciplinary perspectives on banana (Musa spp.)
22. Kinaston, R. L., Bedford, S., Spriggs, M., Anson, D. & Buckley, H. in The domestication. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 108, 11311–11318 (2011).
Routledge Handbook of Bioarchaeology in Southeast Asia and the Pacific 51. Kagy, V. et al. Traditional banana diversity in Oceania: an endangered
Islands (eds Oxenham, M. & Buckley, H.) 427–461 (Routledge, 2016). heritage. PLoS One 11, e0151208 (2016).
23. Kinaston, R. et al. Lapita diet in Remote Oceania: new stable isotope evidence 52. Combettes, C. Les environnements du Vanuatu de l’Holocène à nos jours: un
from the 3000-year-old Teouma site, Efate Island, Vanuatu. PLoS One 9, état des lieux des connaissances. Anthropologie 120, 175–208 (2016).
e90376 (2014). 53. Spriggs, M. Early coconut remains from the South Pacific. J. Polynesian Soc.
24. Crowther, A. Starch residues on undecorated Lapita pottery from Anir, New 93, 71–76 (1984).
Ireland. Archaeol. Ocean. 40, 62–66 (2005). 54. Dowe, J. L. & Cabalion, P. A taxonomic account of Arecaceae in Vanuatu,
25. Horrocks, M. & Bedford, S. Microfossil analysis of Lapita deposits in Vanuatu with descriptions of three new species. Aust. Syst. Bot. 9, 1–60 (1996).
reveals introduced Araceae (aroids). Archaeol. Ocean. 40, 67–74 (2005). 55. Tromp, M. & Dudgeon, J. V. Differentiating dietary and non-dietary
26. Lentfer, C. J. & Green, R. Phytoliths and the evidence for banana cultivation microfossils extracted from human dental calculus: the importance of sweet
at the Lapita Reber-Rakival site on Watom Island, Papua New Guinea. potato to ancient diet on Rapa Nui. J. Archaeol. Sci. 54, 54–63 (2015).
Records of the Australian Museum, Supplement vol. 29, 75–88 (2004). 56. Bourdy, G. & Walter, A. in Science of Pacific Peoples: Fauna, Flora, Food and
27. Horrocks, M., Bedford, S. & Spriggs, M. A short note on banana (Musa) Medicine (eds Morrison, J. et al.) 7–34 (Institute of Pacific Studies, 1994).
phytoliths in Lapita, immediately post-Lapita and modern period 57. Walter, A. & Sam, C. Fruits of Oceania (Australian Centre for International
archaeological deposits from Vanuatu. J. Archaeol. Sci. 36, 2048–2054 (2009). Agricultural Research, 2010).
28. Kirch, P. V. Second millennium BC arboriculture in Melanesia: archaeological 58. Buckley, H. R. et al. Scurvy in a tropical paradise? Evaluating the possibility
evidence from the Massau Islands. Econ. Bot. 43, 225–240 (1989). of infant and adult vitamin C deficiency in the Lapita skeletal sample of
29. Matthews, P. J. & Gosden, C. Plant remains from waterlogged sites in the Teouma, Vanuatu, Pacific islands. Int. J. Paleopathol. 5, 72–85 (2014).
Arawe Islands, West New Britain Province, Papua New Guinea: implications 59. Kinaston, R. L. et al. Investigating foetal and perinatal mortality in prehistoric
for the history of plant use and domestication. Econ. Bot. 51, 121–133 (1997). skeletal samples: a case study from a 3000-year-old Pacific Island cemetery
30. Gosden, C. et al. Lapita sites of the Bismarck Archipelago. Antiquity 63, site. J. Archaeol. Sci. 36, 2780–2787 (2009).
561–586 (1989). 60. Rudall, P. J., Prychid, C. J. & Gregory, T. Epidermal patterning and silica
31. Lentfer, C. J., Matthews, P. J., Gosden, C., Lindsay, S. & Specht, J. Prehistory phytoliths in grasses: an evolutionary history. Bot. Rev. 80, 59–71 (2014).
in a nutshell: a Lapita-age nut-cracking stone from the Arawe Islands, Papua 61. Prasad, V. et al. Late Cretaceous origin of the rice tribe provides evidence
New Guinea. Archaeol. Ocean. 48, 121–129 (2013). for early diversification in Poaceae. Nat. Commun. 2, 480 (2011).
32. Horrocks, M. & Nunn, P. D. Evidence for introduced taro (Colocasia 62. Minozzi, S., Manzi, G., Ricci, F., di Lernia, S. & Borgognini Tarli, S. M.
esculenta) and lesser yam (Dioscorea esculenta) in Lapita-era (c. 3050–2500 Nonalimentary tooth use in prehistory: an example from early Holocene in
cal. yr BP) deposits from Bourewa, southwest Viti Levu Island, Fiji. J. Central Sahara (Uan Muhuggiag, Tadrart Acacus, Libya). Am. J. Phys.
Archaeol. Sci. 34, 739–748 (2007). Anthropol. 120, 225–232 (2003).
33. Horrocks, M. & Bedford, S. Introduced Dioscorea spp. starch in Lapita and 63. Buckley, H. R., Tayles, N. G. & SpriggsM. J. T.. & Bedford, S. A preliminary
later deposits, Vao Island, Vanuatu. NZ J. Bot. 48, 179–183 (2010). report on health and disease in early Lapita skeletons, Vanuatu: possible
34. Horrocks, M., Nieuwoudt, M. K., Kinaston, R., Buckley, H. & Bedford, S. biological costs of island colonization J. Island Coast. Archaeol 7,
Microfossil and Fourier Transform InfraRed analyses of Lapita and 87–1 (14 2008).
post-Lapita human dental calculus from Vanuatu, Southwest Pacific. J. R. Soc. 64. Valentin, F., Bedford, S., Buckley, H. R. & Spriggs, M. Lapita burial practices:
NZ 44, 17–33 (2014). evidence for complex body and bone treatment at the Teouma Cemetery,
35. Matisoo-Smith, E. The commensal model for human settlement of the Pacific Vanuatu, Southwest Pacific. J. Island Coast. Archaeol. 5, 212–235 (2010).
10 years on—what can we say and where to now? J. Island Coast. Archaeol. 4, 65. Bedford, S., Spriggs, M., Buckley, H., Valentin, F. & Regenvanu, R. in Lapita:
151–163 (2009). Ancestors and Descendants (eds Sheppard, P. J., Thomas, T. & Summerhayes,
36. Valentin, F., Herrscher, E., Bedford, S., Spriggs, M. & Buckley, H. Evidence G. R.) 215–234 (New Zealand Archaeological Association, 2009).
for social and cultural change in Central Vanuatu between 3000 and 2000 BP: 66. Irwin, G. Pacific seascapes, canoe performance, and a review of Lapita
comparing funerary and dietary patterns of the first and later generations at voyaging with regard to theories of migration. Asian Perspect. 47,
Teouma, Efate. J. Island Coast. Archaeol. 9, 381–399 (2014). 12–27 (2008).
37. Worthy, T. H., Hawkins, S., Bedford, S. & Spriggs, M. Avifauna from the 67. Finney, B. The other one-third of the globe. J. World Hist. 5, 273–297 (1994).
Teouma Lapita Site, Efate Island, Vanuatu, including a new genus and species 68. Finney, B. R. Voyaging canoes and the settlement of Polynesia. Science 196,
of megapode. Pac. Sci. 69, 205–254 (2015). 1277–1285 (1977).
38. Hawkins, S., O’Connor, S. & Kealy, S. Late Quaternary hominin-bat 69. Petchey, F., Spriggs, M., Bedford, S., Valentin, F. & Buckley, H. Radiocarbon
(Chiroptera) interactions in the Asia-Pacific. Archaeol. Ocean. 51, 7–17 (2016). dating of burials from the Teouma Lapita cemetery, Efate, Vanuatu.
39. Collura, L. V. & Neumann, K. Wood and bark phytoliths of West African J. Archaeol. Sci. 50, 227–242 (2014).
woody plants. Quat. Int. 434, 142–159 (2017). 70. Valentin, F., Spriggs, M., Bedford, S. & Buckley, H. Vanuatu mortuary
40. Piperno, D. R. Phytoliths: A Comprehensive Guide for Archaeologists and practices over three millennia: Lapita to the early European contact period.
Paleoecologists (AltaMira Press, 2006). J. Pac. Archaeol. 2, 49–65 (2011).
NaTuRE HuMaN BEHaviOuR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Nature HumaN BeHaviour Articles
71. Bedford, S. et al. in Oceanic Explorations: Lapita and Western Pacific M. Abong of the Vanuatu Cultural Centre (VCC) for their assistance during calculus
Settlement, Terra Australis Vol. 26 (eds Bedford, S. et al.) 223–240 (Australian sampling. Sampling was done through a research agreement with the Vanuatu National
National Univ. Press, 2007). Cultural Council. The Teouma Archaeological Project is a joint initiative of the Vanuatu
72. Bedford, S. & Spriggs, M. Birds on the rim: a unique carinated vessel in its National Museum and the Australian National University (ANU), directed by M.S. and
wider context. Archaeol. Ocean. 42, 12–21 (2007). S.B. and at different times R. Regenvanu and M. Abong, both former Directors of the
73. White, A. W., Worthy, T. H., Hawkins, S., Bedford, S. & Spriggs, M. Megafaunal VCC. Funding of the project was provided by the Australian Research Council (grant
meiolaniid horned turtles survived until early human settlement in Vanuatu, no. DP 0556874), the National Geographic Society (grant no. SRC 8038–06), the Pacific
Southwest Pacific. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 107, 15512–15516 (2010). Biological Foundation, the Department of Archaeology and Natural History and School
74. Constantine, A., Reepmeyer, C., Bedford, S., Spriggs, M. & Ravn, M. Obsidian of Archaeology and Anthropology at the ANU, the Snowy Mountains Engineering
distribution from a Lapita cemetery sheds light on its value to past societies. Corporation Foundation and B. Powell. The laboratory research and travel for excavation
Archaeol. Ocean. 50, 111–116 (2015). of the skeletal remains were funded by The Royal Society of New Zealand Marsden
75. Galipaud, J.-C., Reepmeyer, C., Torrence, R., Kelloway, S. & White, P. Fund (grant nos. UOO0407 and 09-UOO-106) and a University of Otago Research
Long-distance connections in Vanuatu: new obsidian characterisations Grant awarded to H.B. The support of the leaseholder M. R. Monvoisin and family
for the Makué site, Aore Island: Makué obsidian. Archaeol. Ocean. 49, is acknowledged, as is the support and assistance of the traditional landowners and
110–116 (2014). population of Eratap Village. The funders had no role in study design, data collection
76. Reepmeyer, C., Spriggs, M., Bedford, S. & Ambrose, W. Provenance and and analysis, decision to publish or preparation of the manuscript.
technology of lithic artifacts from the Teouma Lapita Site, Vanuatu. Asian
Perspectives 49, 205–225 (2011). author contributions
77. Tromp, M., Buckley, H., Geber, J. & Matisoo-Smith, E. EDTA decalcification
M.T. wrote the paper, designed the study, performed the analyses and analysed the
of dental calculus as an alternate means of microparticle extraction from
results. L.M.-S. edited the paper and was involved in project planning. R.K. conducted
archaeological samples. J. Archaeol. Sci. Rep. 14, 461–466 (2017).
the field work, wrote the paper and provided reference material. S.B. and M.S. conducted
78. Dobney, K. & Brothwell, D. A method for evaluating the amount of dental
the field work, provided the samples and edited the paper. H.B. conducted the field work,
calculus on teeth from archaeological sites. J. Archaeol. Sci. 14, 343–351 (1987).
wrote the paper, designed the study and was involved in project planning.
79. ICPT. International Code for Phytolith Nomenclature (ICPN) 2.0. Ann. Bot.
124, 189–199 (2019).
Competing interests
acknowledgements The authors declare no competing interests.
The research presented here was funded by a University of Otago Doctoral Scholarship,
a Royal Society of New Zealand Skinner Fund grant and an Otago Centre for Electron additional information
Microscopy Student Research Award awarded to M.T. We thank J. Dudgeon for giving Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/
M.T. access to the scanning electron microscope at Idaho State University and the s41562-019-0808-y.
Department of Anthropology and Archaeology at the University of Otago for providing
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to M.T.
access to their light microscopes. Further work on the manuscript was supported by
the Max Planck Society. We thank P. Roberts and N. Boivin for their comments on a Peer review information Primary Handling Editor: Stavroula Kousta
previous manuscript. We thank J. Maxwell for creating the map and J. Hurford for help Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
creating all other figures. We thank C. Sam and F. Alo from the Department of Forestry
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
in Port Vila, K. Allen and S. Alben and numerous chiefs and villagers from Efate Island
published maps and institutional affiliations.
and northeast Malakula who helped to collect the reference material, as well as C. Stantis
who collected additional material from Atiu, Cook Islands. We also thank R. Shing and © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2020
NaTuRE HuMaN BEHaviOuR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
1
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Corresponding author(s): Monica Tromp
Last updated by author(s): Nov 2, 2019
Reporting Summary
Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency
in reporting. For further information on Nature Research policies, see Authors & Referees and the Editorial Policy Checklist.
Statistics
For all statistical analyses, confirm that the following items are present in the figure legend, table legend, main text, or Methods section.
n/a Confirmed
The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
A statement on whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided
Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.
A description of all covariates tested
A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
A full description of the statistical parameters including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient)
AND variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)
For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted
Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.
For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated
Our web collection on statistics for biologists contains articles on many of the points above.
Software and code
Policy information about availability of computer code
Data collection No software was used.
Data analysis No software was used.
For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors/reviewers.
We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Research guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.
Data
Policy information about availability of data
All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable:
- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets
- A list of figures that have associated raw data
- A description of any restrictions on data availability
Images of photographed microparticles are available from the corresponding author (MT) upon request.
Field-specific reporting
Please select the one below that is the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.
Life sciences Behavioural & social sciences Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences
For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/documents/nr-reporting-summary-flat.pdf
2
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences study design
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
Study description An examination of microparticles recovered from human archaeological dental calculus from Vanuatu to better understand human
and environment interactions in the past.
Research sample Dental calculus was collected from 32 archaeological adult human teeth at both the Australian National University (ANU) in Canberra,
Australia and the Vanuatu Cultural Centre (VCC) in Port Vila, Vanuatu under a research permit granted by the VCC, a copy of which is
available upon request. These samples were chosen for the study as they represent the oldest known cemetery population in the
Pacific. Twenty-eight of the samples are associated with the Lapita archaeological culture and date to 3000 - 2800 BP, four of the
samples are from Post-Lapita individuals that date to 2400 BP.
Sampling strategy No sample-size calculation was performed as is common practice in bioarchaeological research where there is no control over how
many skeletons will be available for analysis.
Data collection Data were collected by the corresponding author, Monica Tromp. Images were taken of all microparticles found in the dental
caclulus and these were then compared with a reference collection created for this project as well as published images from other
researchers.
Timing and spatial scale Data were collected during the course of Monica Tromp's PhD tenure, from May 2013 until June 2016.
Data exclusions Starch granule data that was initially collected as part of this study has not been included in this manuscript as it is currently not
possible to know if starch granules were introduced from laboratory consumables during sample processing. Recent research has
shown that unless sample processing for microparticle extraction has been done in a starch-clean lab the resulting data will likely
contain high levels of contamination due to many consumables testing positive for starch; even starch free gloves, which were worn
throughout the data collection, contain extremely high levels of starch. This is not the case for the microparticles reported within this
study (biogenic silica, sponge spicules and fungus). Another publication that examines, in detail, both the starch data from this study
and the potential for contamination in Pacific starch granule studies will be published separately.
Reproducibility Dental calculus, both modern and archaeological, is a non-homogeneous material and it is therefore not possible to exactly
reproduce this study. However, there are remaining subsamples of dental calculus from a few individuals remaining for future
research which may include another examination of microparticles.
Randomization This is not relevant to a study of archaeological human remains.
Blinding This is not relevant to a study of archaeological human remains.
Did the study involve field work? Yes No
Field work, collection and transport
Field conditions While no archaeological fieldwork was done for this specific study, the archaeological remains were recovered over several
seasons of fieldwork from 2004 - 2010, Hallie Buckley, Rebecca Kinaston, Stuart Bedford and Matthew Spriggs were all involved
in this initial fieldwork, Monica Tromp, the corresponding author, was not.
Location The site is located located on the northeastern side of Teouma Bay, on the south coast of Efate Island, Central Vanuatu:
longitude :168° 23' 0.286" E and latitude : 17° 48' 32.071" S, 8 meters above sea level.
Access and import/export All permits for collection, import and export of samples were obtained from Vanuatu, Australia and New Zealand throughout the
project and can be obtained upon request for inspection.
Disturbance None to my knowledge.
Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods
We require information from authors about some types of materials, experimental systems and methods used in many studies. Here, indicate whether each material,
system or method listed is relevant to your study. If you are not sure if a list item applies to your research, read the appropriate section before selecting a response.
3
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Materials & experimental systems Methods
n/a Involved in the study n/a Involved in the study
Antibodies ChIP-seq
Eukaryotic cell lines Flow cytometry
Palaeontology MRI-based neuroimaging
Animals and other organisms
Human research participants
Clinical data