Articles
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-019-0533-6
The primacy of categories in the recognition of 12
emotions in speech prosody across two cultures
Alan S. Cowen 1*, Petri Laukka 2, Hillary Anger Elfenbein3, Runjing Liu4 and Dacher Keltner1
Central to emotion science is the degree to which categories, such as Awe, or broader affective features, such as Valence,
underlie the recognition of emotional expression. To explore the processes by which people recognize emotion from prosody,
US and Indian participants were asked to judge the emotion categories or affective features communicated by 2,519 speech
samples produced by 100 actors from 5 cultures. With large-scale statistical inference methods, we find that prosody can com-
municate at least 12 distinct kinds of emotion that are preserved across the 2 cultures. Analyses of the semantic and acoustic
structure of the recognition of emotions reveal that emotion categories drive the recognition of emotions more so than affec-
tive features, including Valence. In contrast to discrete emotion theories, however, emotion categories are bridged by gradients
representing blends of emotions. Our findings, visualized within an interactive map, reveal a complex, high-dimensional space
of emotional states recognized cross-culturally in speech prosody.
The recognition of emotions is fundamental to human social conveys more than 12 emotion categories as well as broader affective
interactions. Brief emotional displays in the face and voice features, such as Valence and Arousal33,34 and that these signals are
by nearby adults guide the responses of infants and children to some degree understood by listeners from different cultures32–36.
to their environment, and are important for the ways in which In this emerging science, what is not well-understood is how
adults negotiate rank and status, establish trust, discern affection people recognize emotion in the voice. We therefore sought to anal-
and commitment, and forgive each other1–6. Given the centrality of yse, first, how the variations in emotional prosody that people hear
emotional expression to social life, it is not surprising that the rec- are mapped into the complex network of words and phrases that
ognition of facial expression and emotion-related vocalization are people (including scientists) rely on to represent emotion. Second,
processed in specific brain regions7–11, are preserved to a consider- we investigated how many distinct emotions are recognized by peo-
able extent across many cultures12–16 and have evolutionary homolo- ple in the complex array of variations in prosody that they hear in
gies in a wide range of primate species and even other mammals17–20. their daily lives. Third, we analysed what drives the recognition of
Early in the study of emotion recognition, empirical studies emotion, emotion categories (for example, Awe or Fear) or broader
focused on prototypical facial expressions of six to eight categories scales that capture core affect appraisals (Valence and Arousal).
of emotions13,21,22. More recently, scientists have begun to docu- Finally, we investigated the structure of the emotions inferred from
ment the varied ways in which humans communicate emotions speech prosody, including whether they are discrete or bridged by
using their voice. With short bursts of sound, known as vocal gradients of meaning.
bursts, humans can communicate more than 15 emotions, a find- To investigate the above objectives, we examined how the
ing now replicated in over a dozen cultures, including two remote cross-cultural recognition of prosodic modulations of the voice is
cultures with minimal contact with the West16,23; but see a previous explained by their organization within a semantic space of emo-
study24 for findings of greater cultural relativity. With fleeting emo- tion recognition. A semantic space consists of the set of dimensions
tional vocalizations, parents communicate to infants what is worth that capture how emotional states are perceived in relation to one
approaching or what warrants avoidance25, adults infer a person’s another7. Such a space is characterized by three properties. The
rank within a social hierarchy and singers convey specific emotions first is the conceptualization of emotional states in terms of emo-
in song26 (reviewed in a previous study27). By the age of two, chil- tion concepts and more general affective features, and how people
dren can readily identify at least five positive emotions from brief use these concepts to represent emotions37. This property, a central
emotion-related vocalizations28. focus in this investigation, informs theoretical claims about whether
In the present study, we focus on emotional prosody—the non- distinct emotion categories or affective features, such as Valence and
lexical patterns of tune, rhythm and timbre in speech, modulated Arousal, organize the recognition of emotions (see Supplementary
by the implements of human vocal control: air pressure from the Discussion 2 for definitions). The second is the dimensionality of
lungs, tension in the vocal cords and filtration through the throat, the semantic space—or the number of independent directions in
tongue, palate, cheeks, lips and nasal passages29. (Some definitions the space—the study of which yields answers to questions about
of prosody exclude timbre, but we include it here for simplicity, as the number of distinct emotions that can be signalled by expres-
described in Supplementary Discussion 1.) Prosody interacts with sive behaviour. And the third is the distribution of emotional states
spoken words to convey emotional feelings and attitudes, includ- along these dimensions, which is germane to questions concerning
ing dispositions felt toward the objects and ideas described in the nature of the boundaries between emotion categories (for exam-
speech30–32. Work in this area suggests that prosodic modulation ple, are they discrete or not).
1Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA. 2Department of Psychology, Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden.
3Olin School of Business, Washington University, Saint Louis, MO, USA. 4Department of Statistics, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA.
*e-mail: alan.cowen@berkeley.edu
NATuRE HumAN BEHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles Nature HumaN BeHaviour
To capture a semantic space of any modality of emotion, empiri- interpret speech samples that richly vary only in their prosodic fea-
cal work should be guided by several principles. First, it is critical tures, we can ascertain how the meaning of emotional prosody may
to study a vast array of stimuli to allow for the emergence a full be preserved across two very distinct English-speaking cultures58,59
dimensionality of that space, which potentially might include doz- within a shared semantic space, including the relative primacy of
ens of distinct emotions increasingly of interest in the field12,14,33,38. emotion categories and affective features.
Most studies of emotional expression have focused on a narrow In the study of semantic space of emotion recognition, a number
array of emotions, most typically six (Anger, Disgust, Fear, Sadness, of questions of central theoretical importance remain unanswered.
Surprise and Happiness). Second, large-scale stimulus collection First, it is important to analyse how emotional expressions are best
approaches should more reliably capture natural, within-category conceptualized and to what extent they convey specific categories of
variation in how each emotion can be elicited or expressed7,39; this is emotion, such as Awe and Fear40,60–63, and information about affec-
in contrast to a traditional focus in the literature on the recognition tive features, such as Valence and Arousal43,44,46,64,65 (and whether one
of prototypical expressions or visual morphs between them12,40–42. of these methods of conceptualizing expression can account for the
A focus simply on emotion prototypes risks overestimating the other). Second, the number of distinct varieties of emotion that are
degree of discreteness of emotion categories. Third, to capture the conveyed by emotional expressions and map to separate semantic
conceptualization of emotion, it is important to gather indepen- dimensions should be investigated. Third, we should distinguish
dent ratings in terms of emotion categories and affective features whether emotional expressions occupy discrete clusters—families
of the behaviour of interest—such as experience or expression. In of states, such as Awe, Interest and Surprise40,65–70—or whether they
doing so, studies need to move beyond foundational work that sug- are distributed along continuous gradients7,39,41,43,49,71. And finally,
gested emotions may be organized within a space43 that is defined it remains unclear to what extent the aforementioned properties
by its two to three broadest dimensions to include the affective of emotional expressions are preserved across cultures12–16,72. To
features of cognitive appraisal theory34,44,45 and componential theo- address these issues and derive a cross-cultural semantic space of
rizing46. Such theories describe how affective features other than the recognition of emotion from prosody, we collected judgments
Valence and Arousal are needed to account for the wide array of from participants in the United States and India of a stimulus set
emotions that are studied today. Fourth, multidimensional reliabil- of emotional prosody that includes an extensive number of emo-
ity analysis techniques (techniques that extract dimensions on the tions and diverse cultural origins of the speakers, which are ideal for
basis of reliability across raters, rather than, for example, variance) deriving a semantic space of emotion recognition for the reasons
can be used to investigate the extent to which judgments of dis- that we outlined above.
tinct expressions can reliably be mapped into a high-dimensional The 2,345 participants from the United States and India were
space7 (see also Supplementary Discussion 3). This large-scale recruited on Amazon Mechanical Turk. Each participant was asked
statistical inference approach contrasts with the reliance of typi- to judge at least 30 randomly selected speech samples from the
cal emotion-recognition research on either univariate recognition VENEC corpus of 2,519 speech samples33,73. The VENEC corpus
accuracy (reliability)12,13,16,21,42 or factor analysis44,47,48. With these consists of two sentences (“Let me tell you something” and “That’s
methodological advances, researchers can document how many exactly what happened”) that were spoken by 100 actors from five
distinct varieties of emotion are recognized and how these different different English-speaking cultures (United States, India, Australia,
varieties of emotion may simultaneously be organized by affective Kenya and Singapore) in tones targeting 18 categories of emo-
features, emotion categories and gradients of relatedness between tion derived from past studies of emotion-related vocalization33.
emotion categories across different cultures (see Supplementary Participants judged the speech samples in one of two randomly
Discussion 4 for further details regarding methodological limita- assigned response formats. One group of participants was asked to
tions of past studies). select a term, from 30 emotion categories, that best matched the
A recent analysis of the semantic space of reported emotional emotion expressed in each speech sample. The emotion catego-
experience7 validated these methodological approaches, suggest- ries used for judgment were derived from recent studies of emo-
ing that they can be extended to understand the semantic space of tion-related prosody and vocal bursts and included: Adoration*,
emotion recognition. In this previous study, participants reported Amusement*, Anger*, Awe, Confusion, Contempt*, Contentment,
emotional responses to over 2,000 videos in terms of a wide array Desire*, Disappointment, Disgust*, Distress*, Ecstasy, Elation*,
of emotion categories and in terms of 14 affective features that were Embarrassment, Fear*, Guilt*, Interest*, Pain, Pride*, Realization,
derived from appraisal and componential theories of emotion43–49. Relief*, Romantic love, Sadness*, Serenity*, Shame*, Surprise
These responses were analysed to derive a semantic space of (negative)*, Surprise (positive)*, Sympathy, Triumph and Neutral
reported emotional experience7. This previous study documented (categories indicated with an asterisk parallel those targeted with
that (1) at least 27 distinct dimensions, or what one might think scenarios presented during the recording of the speech samples (see
of as distinct kinds of emotion, were reliably elicited by different Supplementary Note 1)).
videos; (2) categorical labels were more powerful organizers of self- A second group of participants rated each of the 30 different
reported experiences than reports along well-studied scales of affect speech samples that they judged in terms of 23 different affec-
such as Valence; and (3) reported experiences fell along gradients tive features. These features were taken from dimensional and
that blurred the boundaries between categories of emotion. componential theoretical accounts of the appraisal processes that
Here, with further large-scale statistical inference advances, we have been proposed to underlie emotion recognition and experi-
derive a semantic space of the recognition of emotional prosody. We ence43,44,46,65,74,75, and included Abruptness, Adjustability, Approach,
do so based on judgements obtained from US and Indian partici- Arousal, Attention, Certainty, Commitment, Control, Dominance,
pants of prosodically modulated, lexically identical speech samples Effort, Expectedness, Fairness, Goal relevancy, Identity,
produced by actors from five different cultures who imagined them- Improvement, Normativity to the agent, Normativity to society,
selves to be in an array of emotional scenarios. Samples of vocal Novelty, Obstruction, Probability, Safety, Urgency and Valence.
prosody produced in this fashion have been found to resemble the (Note that we use these labels only as shorthand for the more
spontaneous emotional modulations that occur in roughly 2% of colloquial, literature-derived questions to which raters actually
everyday speech50–52 and as much as a quarter of speech in emo- responded. See Supplementary Note 2 and Supplementary Tables
tional contexts53, differing modestly from naturalistic vocaliza- 1, 2 for specific wording of each of these appraisal dimensions
tions in terms of their average perceptual and acoustic features54–57. and their sources in the theoretical literature.) Participants judged
By comparing how participants from India and the United States each speech sample on nine-point Likert scales (1 = negative levels
NATuRE HumAN BEHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Nature HumaN BeHaviour Articles
or none of the feature, 5 = neutral or moderate levels, 9 = extreme Confusion, Distress, Pain and Relief—were recognized in some
levels of the feature). speech samples by at least 1/3 of raters.
On the basis of past estimates of reliability in observer judg-
ment7, for each speech sample we collected 10–15 judgments from The preservation of emotion categories and broader affective
separate participants in each of the two response formats in each features across cultures. Next, we compared how emotions were
culture. Thus, we gathered a total of 1,270,736 individual judgments recognized from prosody across cultures. In doing so, we sought
of all speech samples (75,461 forced-choice categorical judgments to ascertain whether judgments of emotion categories or affective
and 1,195,275 nine-point scale judgments; see also Supplementary features were better preserved across two cultures in the recogni-
Note 2). The categories used for judgment included the emotions tion of emotion—to address whether the conceptualization of emo-
the actors were instructed to target33 as well as emotions that were tional prosody is driven more by categories or affective features. In
previously found to be conveyed by the voice22,76,77. The collection past studies, cross-cultural similarity has typically been ascertained
of a wide range of judgments for a rich array of lexically identical by comparing the rates with which members of different cultures
speech samples allows us to apply large-scale statistical inference label expressive behaviours with the same emotion terms12,16,23,24,38.
techniques to examine the conceptualization, dimensionality and This approach does not capture how members of different cultures
distribution of emotion recognized in prosody across two cultures. also use emotion concepts (either emotion categories or affective
features) to label non-target expressions in a similar manner, data
Results critical to understanding cultural similarities in how individuals
Overview. Guided by our semantic space analysis of emotion recognize emotion in expressive behaviour. Given this concern,
recognition, past validated methods7 and a central design fea- for each emotion category and affective feature, we correlated the
ture of this investigation—data gathered from two cultures—our mean judgments of US raters with those of Indian raters across all
data analysis proceeds as follows. First, to explore issues of con- 2,519 samples of emotional prosody. This analysis reveals the extent
ceptualization, we examine what is better preserved across the to which US and Indian participants use the emotion categories
two cultures, emotion categories or affective features, and which and affective features in a similar manner when labelling the mean-
explains the variance in the other variable better across judgments ing of the 2,519 samples of emotional prosody. To control for error,
of Indian and US participants. Then, to address the dimension- or noise, in the use of the emotion categories and scales of affect,
ality of the space, we rely on statistical techniques that uncover we then divided this value by the within-culture explainable vari-
how many distinct varieties of emotion are required to account for ances78 of these mean judgments (see Supplementary Notes 4, 5 for
cross-cultural similarities in the recognition of emotional pros- further rationale and details). Dividing by the explainable variances
ody. Finally, with recently developed visualization techniques, we results in an estimate of what the correlation would be if we aver-
explore the distribution of emotions signalled by prosody within aged an infinite number of ratings in each culture. We refer to this
a high-dimensional space. We conclude by looking at the acous- estimate as a signal correlation: it captures the degree of similar-
tic correlates of the emotions conveyed in prosody and address ity between cultures in the recognition of each emotion category
whether these acoustic features better track emotion categories or and scale of affect from prosody while correcting for the sampling
affective features across the two cultures. error arising from inconsistent judgments within each culture (see
Supplementary Fig. 2 for a demonstration that these methods are
Verifying the recognition of emotion categories. Past studies effective using simulated data). The cross-cultural signal correla-
have often relied on accuracy rates that are derived from whether tions in emotion judgments of each emotion category and affective
the judgements of the participants matched the expectations of feature are shown in Fig. 1.
the experimenters to ascertain the cross-cultural similarity in If categories of emotion (for example, Amusement) are psy-
emotion recognition12,13,16,23,24,38. For reasons that we outline in chologically constructed from more basic appraisals of core affect
Supplementary Discussion 5, we operationalized emotion recogni- (Valence and Arousal), one would expect the recognition of emo-
tion in terms of interrater agreement, a more data-driven approach tion in prosody along scales such as Valence and Arousal to be
to observer consensus in emotion recognition. Guided by this con- better preserved across cultures than the recognition of emotion
ceptual approach, we first analyse the combined data from Indian categories. That is, there should be greater convergence across cul-
and US participants to verify that we had obtained reliable judg- tures in how affective features are recognized in emotional prosody
ments of emotion, in order to determine how many emotions than emotion categories, which are presumably constructed out of
were recognized in the 2,519 speech samples. In this analysis, we more basic affective appraisals43,60,79. As shown in Fig. 1, our results
found that raters were able to recognize a wide variety of emotion diverge from this prediction. We find that the recognition of a num-
categories with a moderate degree of reliability. Twenty-two differ- ber of emotion categories from prosody is better preserved across
ent emotion categories were recognized with significant interrater cultures than that of any of the 23 affective scales that we considered,
agreement from at least one speech sample (q < 0.05, Monte Carlo including Valence and Arousal. With cross-cultural signal correla-
simulation using empirical base rates; see Supplementary Fig. 1 for tions (r) exceeding 0.7, the recognition of Adoration, Amusement,
the distribution of interrater agreement rates and Supplementary Anger, Awe, Contentment, Desire, Fear, Interest, Pain, Realization,
Note 3). Out of the 2,519 speech samples, 56% elicited significant Romantic love, Sadness, Surprise (negative) and Surprise (positive)
rates of interrater agreement for at least one category. On average, was better preserved across India and the United States than that of
25% of raters chose the most agreed-upon category of emotion for Valence (r = 0.67; 90% confidence interval: 0.55 < r < 0.78). In addi-
each speech sample (chance level = 14%, Monte Carlo simulation tion, cross-cultural signal correlations were significantly greater for
of all category judgments matching the same overall proportions Anger (r = 0.94; 0.83 < r < 1; P = 0.001, two-tailed bootstrap test;
of categories that were selected by the real participants). These lev- q < 0.05, Benjamini–Hochberg false-discovery rate (FDR) correc-
els of interrater agreement are comparable to those documented in tion80; see Supplementary Note 5) than for Valence. Furthermore,
previous studies of emotion prosody33. Although interrater agree- many emotion categories were significantly better preserved across
ment rates varied across the different speech samples, highly recog- cultures than the recognition of Arousal (r = 0.39; 0.20 < r < 0.58),
nized examples were found for a number of emotion categories. For including Amusement, Anger, Contentment, Desire, Fear, Pain,
instance, five emotion categories—Amusement, Anger, Desire, Fear Sadness and Surprise (positive) (r = 0.92, 0.94, 0.94, 0.87, 0.88, 0.77,
and Sadness—were recognized in some speech samples by more 0.96, and 0.90; 90% confidence intervals: 0.72, 0.83, 0.63, 0.63, 0.71,
than half of raters. Another five emotion categories—Adoration, 0.62, 0.75, 0.61 < r < 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 0.90, 1, 1; all P < 0.01, q < 0.05,
NATuRE HumAN BEHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles Nature HumaN BeHaviour
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
S Ca od nn te es nts m Pe A oAnt m sn itug ise vr e e m se urnt prise Fe Nar eutra Dl esire Ef Af dor ot ration NP Ur eai g gn e atI in n vc ty ee r se us rt pris De RoA omiw mne aa nn tic c e lo Nv Roe ev ae ll i At zy djat ui so t Pn a rb oil bit ay bilit Sy afet Cy Co ont nr fo ul si V Ao al bn re un pc te ne Dis ss tr ICe e ms r pts rai on vt ey Exm S pe er ent e ctni et dy nes GRs oe Fl ai a li e r rf n ele es vs Na ornc my aP tir Ai t vt i Dd itee syn t a(i pa No pg on roe in mnt t) atim vIe itdn yt e (nt sit oy cie Tt riy) u Com np th Se ym mpt pa Ct A orhy o mus mital m Ee Ocnt s bt sta rs uy Act pi po rn oach Guil Et lati Eo Din ms bg au S rs h rt a asm se ment
two-tailed bootstrap test). The finding that the recognition of cer- Fig. 2. Notably, emotion categories are better preserved than judg-
tain emotion categories is better preserved across cultures than ments of affective features across India and the United States (C > D;
that of Valence—which is considered to be abasic building block of correlation of 0.80 compared to 0.59, P = 0.041, two-tailed bootstrap
emotional life79—or Arousal, the other putative component of core test; C − D = 0.21, 90% confidence interval: 0.041 < C − D < 0.39;
affect, contrasts with the claim that the recognition of emotion cate- see Supplementary Note 6 for details). In keeping with the idea that
gories derives from the recognition of such affective features43,60,79,81. the interpretation of prosody in terms of affective features derives
from the shared recognition of emotion categories, we find that (1)
The primacy of the recognition of emotion categories over Indian category judgments predicted US affective scale judgments
affective features. That several emotion categories were more far better than Indian affective scale judgments predicted US affec-
robustly recognized across cultures than Valence or Arousal raises tive scale judgments (D1 > D; correlation of 0.80 compared to 0.59,
an intriguing question about the conceptualization of emotion in P = 0.012, two-tailed bootstrap test; D1 − D = 0.21, 90% confidence
prosody: perhaps affective features, such as Valence and Arousal, interval: 0.06 < D1 − D < 0.35), and that (2) US category judgments
are psychologically constructed from categories of emotion. In also predicted Indian affective scale judgments nominally better
other words, perhaps emotion recognition from prosody involves than US affective scale judgments predicted Indian affective scale
the immediate recognition of an emotion category (or categories), judgments (D2 > D; correlation of 0.65 compared to 0.59, P = 0.12,
and then levels of Valence, Arousal and other affective features are two-tailed bootstrap test; D2 − D = 0.050, 90% confidence interval:
inferred from these more primary categorical judgments. If so, the −0.01 < D2 − D < 0.12). In addition, there is little preserved varia-
additional stage of inference involved in affective feature judgments tion across the two cultures in affective scale judgments that is inde-
might introduce additional cultural variation, which should be pendent of the category judgments (see term R in Fig. 2), suggesting
reflected in their lower levels of cross-cultural similarity—which we little cross-cultural similarity in how Valence, Arousal and other
have observed—and their reduced power in predicting categorical affect features operate in the recognition of emotion from prosody
judgments across cultures. Given this reasoning, one might expect once emotion category judgments are accounted for. Additionally,
that category judgments, rather than affective scale judgments, from as one might expect, the affective scale judgments from each coun-
one culture are better predictors of affective scale judgments from try do a poor job of predicting the category judgments from the
another culture. Gathering separate judgments of a full complement other (see Supplementary Fig. 4). On the basis of these results, it is
of emotion categories and affective scales across 2,519 samples of more plausible that judgments of general affective features (such as
emotional prosody enabled a rigorous test of this possibility. Valence and Arousal) are psychologically constructed from the rec-
To test the hypotheses concerning the primacy of emotion cat- ognition of emotion categories (such as Amusement and Fear) than
egories and affective features in emotion recognition, we used lin- vice versa, at least during the recognition of emotion in prosody.
ear regression analyses to derive cross-cultural signal correlations
in the mapping between category and affective scale judgments of The number of distinct varieties of emotion recognized in both
prosody (Supplementary Note 6). These analyses ascertain whether cultures. Thus far, we have shown that at least 22 emotion catego-
emotion category ratings are stronger predictors of affective fea- ries were recognized at above-chance accuracy in at least one speech
ture judgments across cultures, or vice versa (Fig. 2). Critical to the sample and that the cross-cultural recognition of emotion from
present question of the primacy of categories or affective features prosody was better represented by these categories than scales of
in emotion recognition are certain linkages denoted by letters in affect. We next investigated how many distinct varieties of emotion
)r(
noitalerroc
larutluc-ssorC
Fig. 1 | Correlations in the meaning of emotional prosody across cultures. The cross-cultural signal correlation (r) for each category (orange bars) and
affective scale (green bars) captures the degree to which each judgment is preserved across India and the United States across all 2,519 speech samples.
It is found by correlating the mean responses by Indian participants with the mean responses by US participants across the 2,519 speech samples, then
dividing by the explainable variance78 in responses from each culture. Error bars represent the standard error estimated by bootstrapping across raters.
For category surveys, participant sample size, n US = 525, n India = 152, and for the two affective scale surveys, n US = 927 and 827 and n India = 242 and 205.
See Supplementary Notes 4 and 5 for details regarding the explainable variance and standard error estimations, Supplementary Fig. 2 for confirmation
that these results accurately recover population-level correlations and Supplementary Fig. 3 for similar results using Spearman correlations and/or binary
affective scale ratings.
NATuRE HumAN BEHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Nature HumaN BeHaviour Articles
Multiplied by
Equals US C Indian
category 0.80 category
Minus judgments judgments
r Signal correlation
US Indian
category w category
to affective 0.73 to affective
scale scale
weights weights
US Indian
affective affective
US Indian
scale D1 D D2 scale
affective affective
judgments 0.80 scale 0.59 scale 0.65 judgments predicted predicted judgments judgments
from Indian from US
categories categories
P
0.79
US Indian
R
affective affective
scale 0.25 scale
residuals residuals
were preserved in the recognition of emotional prosody across the function Cov(Xα, Yα). It shares features of partial least-squares cor-
i i
two cultures—that is, what the dimensionality of the cross-cultural relation analysis (PLSC)82, canonical correlation analysis (CCA)83
recognition of emotion from prosody is. More specifically, we have and PCA. Like PLSC and CCA, PPCA examines the cross-covari-
not yet ruled out whether some of the categories were redundant ance between datasets rather than the variance–covariance matrix
(for example, synonyms). There may have been interrater reliabil- within a single dataset. However, whereas PLSC and CCA derive
ity in labelling emotional prosody with categories such as Awe and two sets of latent variables, α and β, maximizing Cov(Xα, Yβ] or
i i
Fear, but perhaps these categories ultimately capture the same kinds Corr[Xα, Yβ], PPCA derives only one variable: α. The goal here is
i i
of emotional prosody. If we reduce the US and Indian judgments to find dimensions of recognition that are common to both datas-
of prosody to a more limited number of statistically independent ets X and Y. Our method reduces to principal component analysis
dimensions, we wondered what the minimum number of dimen- (PCA) when the two datasets to which it is applied are identical,
sions that is necessary to account for commonalities in the recogni- so that the objective becomes Cov(Xα, Xα) = Var(Xα), but PCA
i i i
tion of emotion across cultures is. (and related factor-analytic methods) capture the variance within
To compute the total number of distinct varieties of emotion a dataset rather the covariance across datasets. Note that we also
that were significantly preserved across the US and Indian emo- apply a second kind of PPCA—correlational PPCA—which per-
tion judgments of the speech samples, we introduce a principal forms a whitening transformation within each dataset and then
preserved component analysis (PPCA) method. PPCA extracts derives a latent set of variables α that maximizes the correlation
linear combinations of attributes (here, emotion judgments) that Corr(X α, Y α) rather than the covariance. See Supplementary
wh i wh i
maximally covary across two datasets that measure the same attri- Note 7 for further details and discussion.
butes (US and Indian judgment data). The resulting components are Given that we had previously found the categories that explained
ordered in terms of their level of positive covariance across the two the cross-cultural preservation of affective scales, we applied
datasets (cultures). More technically, PPCA maximizes the objective PPCA to the US and Indian category judgments of the 30 emotions
predictions
US
affective
scale
elacs
evitceffa
naidnI
snoitciderp
1.0
0.9 0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0 C W D D1D2 P R
noitalerroc
langiS
Fig. 2 | The preserved recognition of emotion categories accounts for the preservation of affective feature judgments across cultures. Each circle (or
ellipse) represents a matrix of estimators relevant to the recognition of emotion attributes—categories or affective features—in the United States (on the
left) and India (on the right). In the first row, for example, US mean category judgments are compared to Indian mean category judgments. Relationships
between circles are described using the symbols indicated in the top left key. For example, US category judgments are multiplied by a set of category-
to-affective-scale weights, estimated using ordinary least-squares regression, to predict US affective scale judgments. Signal correlations between the
Indian and US matrices of emotion judgment data are given in the small black circles, signified by adjacent letters, and plotted in the top right graph.
Category judgments are significantly better preserved than affective scale judgments (C > D, P = 0.041, two-tailed bootstrap test; C − D = 0.21, 90%
confidence interval: 0.041 < C − D < 0.39). Moreover, category judgments are better than affective scale judgments at predicting affective scale judgments
from another culture (D1 > D, P = 0.012, two-tailed bootstrap test; D2 > D, P = 0.12; D1 − D = 0.21, 90% confidence interval: 0.06 < D1 − D < 0.35;
D2 − D = 0.050, 90% confidence interval: −0.01 < D2 − D < 0.12). The variance in the affective scale judgments left over after removing the predictions of
the categories is less correlated across cultures (R = 0.25 between residuals, 90% confidence interval: 0.024 < R < 0.47). Taken together, these results are
consistent with the hypothesis that categories of emotion are recognized from prosody, and then subsequently used to construct affective scale judgments
in a more culture-specific process of inference. All signal correlations have been divided by the explainable variance78 for each matrix (see Supplementary
Note 6). Error bars in the top right plot represent the standard error estimated by bootstrapping across raters (for category surveys, n US = 525, n India = 152,
and for the two affective scale surveys, n USA = 927 and 827 and n India = 242 and 205). Also note that due to limitations in model fitting, estimates D1, D2
and P are biased downward, such that the preservation of dimensional judgments is probably even better explained by the preservation of categorical
judgments than indicated here.
NATuRE HumAN BEHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles Nature HumaN BeHaviour
20
15
10
5
0
0 5 10 15 20
Actual number of shared dimensions
conveyed by the 2,519 speech samples to determine the number of plot shows the proportion of variance explained by each dimension
independent dimensions—or kinds—of emotion that are recog- (principal preserved components (PPCs)) uncovered by PPCA in
nized in both cultures. We applied PPCA in a leave-one-rater-out data from each culture; the bottom left plot shows the proportion of
manner to determine the statistical significance of each component. preserved covariance for each dimension, as well as the correspond-
More technically, we iteratively applied PPCA to extract compo- ing correlation and its significance.
nents from the judgments of all but one of the raters, projected the Of note, the application of CCA83 also resulted in 12 significant
held-out rater’s ratings onto the components and assessed the par- dimensions (out-of-sample r ≥ 0.049, q < 0.05 across all held-out
tial Pearson correlation between the component scores derived from raters, q < 0.05 across held-out raters from each country individu-
each held-out rater’s ratings and those derived from the mean ratings ally, ForwardStop sequential FDR-corrected84 one-tailed Wilcoxon
from the other culture, partialing out each previous component. We signed-rank test84; see Supplementary Note 7), as did the application
then tested whether these held-out, statistically independent cor- of correlational PPCA (out-of-sample r ≥ 0.041, q < 0.001 across all
relation values were consistently positive for each component using held-out raters, q < 0.05 across held-out raters from each country
a non-parametric Wilcoxon signed-rank test84. We excluded the individually, ForwardStop sequential FDR-corrected84 one-tailed
‘Neutral’ category from PPCA to avoid matrix degeneracy, resulting Wilcoxon signed-rank test84). Each method resulted in a latent vari-
in dimensions that can be conceived as variations from neutrality. able solution for the first 8–12 dimensions relatively similar to that
It was not a guarantee that these methods would be effective for obtained using PPCA, as demonstrated in Fig. 5 and Supplementary
sparse data of the kind that we analysed here. Hence, we established Figs. 5–7. Differences beyond around the eight dimension emerge
using simulations that they would produce accurate results given when using PCA methods that were not designed to extract pre-
the distribution of responses that we observed. See Fig. 3 for results served components.
of simulations.
As we show in Fig. 4, PPCA revealed that 12 distinct semantic The preserved categories of emotional prosody. To find the
dimensions of emotion were recognized in prosody and that these 12 patterns (dimensions) of emotion recognition within the cat-
were significantly preserved across the US and Indian participant egorical judgments that were preserved across participants from the
judgments (Fig. 4b; out-of-sample r ≥ 0.066, q < 0.001 across all United States and India, we applied factor rotation (varimax) to the
held-out raters, q < 0.05 across held-out raters from each country 12 significant components extracted using PPCA. Here, factor rota-
individually, ForwardStop sequential FDR-corrected84 one-tailed tion extracts a simplified representation of the space by attempt-
Wilcoxon signed-rank test84—one-tailed because we are only ing to find dimensions constituted of only a few categories each, if
interested in positive cross-cultural correlations). We find that the possible. After factor rotation, we find that each of the 12 resulting
pattern of tune, rhythm and timbre in speech conveys 12 distinct dimensions (PPCs) loaded maximally on a distinct category (see
varieties of emotion across the two cultures. In Fig. 4, the top left Fig. 4c). These categories include aDoration, Amusement, Anger,
snoisnemid
derahs
fo
rebmun
detamitsE
20
15
10
5
0
0 5 10 15 20
Actual number of shared dimensions
snoisnemid
derahs
fo
rebmun
detamitsE
a b
Overall actual Overall actual
FDR: 0.0024 FDR: 0.0248
No. of sim. No. of sim.
12345 12345
Fig. 3 | verifying that PPCA accurately estimates the number of shared dimensions. To test whether a leave-one-rater-out PPCA would accurately
estimate the number of preserved dimensions of emotion recognition across cultures, we ran Monte Carlo simulations of our experiment in which
the ratings were drawn from distributions that varied systematically in their underlying dimensionality. In 100 separate simulations, five each for
dimensionalities between 1 and 20, category ratings of each speech sample in each culture were drawn at random from multinomial distributions
∼
parameterized by XX, the 2,519 × 30 probabilities of selecting each category for each speech sample, and N, the number of raters who rated each speech
∼
sample in each country. XX was computed by applying PPCA to the proportion of times each category was actually selected for each speech sample in
each culture, X and X , projecting X onto the first 1–20 dimensions extracted by PPCA, back-projecting these scores into the space of categories
US India US
(αsimTX USAαsim), and normalizing the result by subtracting the minimum from e ∼ach row and dividing by the sum of each row. This resulted in 1–20 preserved
dimensions in each simulation, each repeated five times. We used the same XX for both cultures to maximize the similarity in ratings. N was set to the
number of ratings actually obtained of each speech sample in each culture. Each rating was randomly assigned to a ‘rater’ with a probability given by the
percentage of ratings each rater actually contributed. Finally, we used a leave-one-rater-out PPCA to determine the P values for extracted dimensions
(Supplementary Note 7). a,b, The actual numbers of preserved dimensions used to generated the data in each simulation (x axis) versus the estimated
number of dimensions (y axis) using two criteria (a: q < 0.001 across all held-out raters; b: q < 0.05 across held-out raters from each country individually;
ForwardStop sequential FDR-corrected84 one-tailed Wilcoxon signed-rank test83). We can see that leave-one-rater-out PPCA accurately estimates the
number of preserved dimensions and generates conservative q values. Note that there was less power to detect later dimensions given that these carried
less covariance; dimensions 21+ carried negative covariance (see Fig. 4) and are therefore excluded.
NATuRE HumAN BEHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Nature HumaN BeHaviour Articles
24
22
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29
Preserved component number
A B C D E F G H I J K L
Awe, Confusion, Contempt, Desire, Disappointment, Distress, Fear, in prosody, we now ask how these categories of emotion recog-
Interest and Sadness. We can infer that these 12 categories corre- nized from prosody are distributed within a semantic space. We
spond to distinct prosodic modulations of speech that are preserved also asked whether they are found within discrete clusters, as pre-
in India and the United States. Note that some dimensions involve dicted by basic emotion theories40,65–70, or along continuous gradi-
multiple categories, such as Awe and Surprise (dimension D), indi- ents between emotion categories, as recently documented in our
cating that they were used similarly across cultures to label speech investigation of reported emotional experience7. We find that the
samples. These findings replicate the conclusions of previous studies emotional states conveyed by prosody lie along continuous gradi-
that several emotions can be conveyed across cultures with prosody ents between categories rather than within discrete clusters (as with
(Anger, Contempt, Fear, Interest, Desire, Relief and Sadness33–36), emotional experience) (Fig. 6). These gradients between categories
but also reveal other emotions—Adoration, Amusement, Awe, are evident when we visualize smooth variations in the categori-
Confusion, Disappointment and Distress—that can be reliably cal judgment profiles of the 2,519 speech samples using a method
communicated with prosody. (It is also worth noting that three of called t-distributed stochastic neighbour embedding(t-SNE)85.
the categories—Awe, Confusion and Disappointment—were not t-SNE projects data into a two-dimensional space that largely
among those targeted with scenarios during the recording of the preserves the local distances between data points. A limitation of t-
speech samples (see Supplementary Note 1), illustrating that the SNE is that it will generate a different result each time it is run. We
induction procedure was compatible with rich variation in emo- therefore ran t-SNE analyses 100 times, identified the instance that
tional responses.) resulted in the lowest loss of information (Kullback–Leibler diver-
gence) and fine-tuned this map using more iterations of t-SNE (see
The distribution of categories of emotional prosody within a Supplementary Note 8 for further details). In Fig. 4, t-SNE is used
semantic space. Having thus far examined the dimensionality and to visualize the smooth gradients between emotion categories—
conceptualization of the semantic space of emotion recognition represented in different colours—and the extent to which they are
)%(
denialpxe
ecnairaV
ecnairavoc
fo
toor
erauqs/noitalerroC
a c
Adoration
Amusement
US
Anger
Awe
Confusion
Contempt
Contentment
Desire
Disappointment
Disgust
Distress India
Ecstasy
Elation
Embarrassment
Fear
Guilt
b 0.8 Interest
Pain
0.7 * Pride
* Raw US–India test Realization
0.6 correlation (r)
Relief
0.5 * Square root of the proportion Romantic love
* of positive covariance Sadness
0.4 * Serenity
*
Shame
0.3
* Negative surprise
0.2 Positive surprise
** Sympathy
0.1 * * Triumph
0 *
Component
1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29 loading (AU)
Preserved component number –1 0 1
Fig. 4 | 12 distinct varieties of emotional prosody are preserved across cultures via category recognition. a, The in-sample proportion of variance
explained within US and Indian ratings by the 29 principal preserved components (PPCs) of the mean categorical ratings of 30 emotions across cultures.
b, The square root of the in-sample covariance of each PPC across cultures, scaled by total positive covariance, is plotted alongside the out-of-sample
cross-cultural correlation derived from a cross-validation analysis (see Supplementary Note 7). The test correlation was significant for 12 PPCs (out-of-
sample r ≥ 0.066, q < 0.001 across all held-out raters, q < 0.05 across held-out raters from each country individually, ForwardStop sequential FDR-
corrected95 one-tailed Wilcoxon signed-rank test84). Error bars represent the standard error (participant sample size, n USA = 525, n India = 152). Note that
these correlations are not adjusted for explainable variance, so it is safe to assume that the corresponding population-level correlations are substantially
higher. c, The 12 distinct varieties of emotional prosody that are preserved across cultures correspond to 12 categories of emotion—Adoration,
Amusement, Anger, Awe, Confusion, Contempt, Desire, Disappointment, Distress, Fear, Interest and Sadness. By applying factor rotation (varimax) to the
12 significant PPCs, we find 12 preserved varieties of emotional prosody that each load maximally on a distinct emotion category. Thus, we will refer to
each component, labeled A–L on the x axis, with a single emotion category (not to be confused with the raw categorical judgments). AU, arbitrary units.
NATuRE HumAN BEHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles Nature HumaN BeHaviour
confidence interval: 0.65 < r2 < 0.71) and a discrete model with
intensity (keeping only the top non-zero score per speech sample)
predicting 76% of the variance in the affective scales (90% confi-
dence interval: 0.72 < r2 < 0.79). Both discrete models performed
significantly worse than the full 12-dimensional model (P < 0.001,
two-tailed bootstrap test; see Supplementary Note 9 for details).
This result confirms that the affective scales vary along category
gradients rather than just being a function of the most recognized
category. Furthermore, to ascertain whether these results could be
explained by correlations in perceptual ambiguity across the cat-
egory and affective scale judgments (for example, some subjects
perceiving a sample as Awe and others perceiving it as Adoration),
we correlated the mean standard deviation across participants of
the category judgments with that of the affective scale judgments
of each speech sample, finding that they were slightly inversely cor-
related (Pearson’s r = −0.21, P < 0.001, two-tailed bootstrap test,
90% confidence interval: −0.25 < r < −0.18; Spearman’s ρ = −0.16,
P < 0.001, two-tailed bootstrap test, 90% confidence interval: −0.19
< ρ < −0.12). Hence the smooth gradients between categories most
likely cannot be explained by ambiguity of recognition—rather,
they point to intermediate blends of emotion categories tradition-
ally thought of as discrete.
Figure 7 presents the number of prosody samples that loaded sig-
nificantly on each of the 12 dimensions that we uncovered and on
each combination of two dimensions. This analysis shows the variet-
ies of emotion that can be blended together in prosodic modulations
of a single sentence and suggests that the gradients tend to bridge
distinct, conceptually related emotional states. Careful inspection
of Fig. 7 reveals, for example, that prosodic modulations traverse
gradients from Fear to Sadness, from Amusement to Adoration,
from Confusion to Interest, and from Anger to Contempt. But these
gradients were specific to particular category pairs; for example,
Sadness overlapped heavily with Fear (51 speech samples) but did
not overlap at all with Desire. Thus, the emotions conveyed by pros-
ody are neither entirely discrete nor entirely independent, but are
rather distributed along continuous gradients between particular
pairs of emotion categories.
The preservation of acoustic correlates of emotion recognition
across cultures. Theorists have long claimed that certain acoustic
features drive the recognition of emotion in prosody30,32,33,86. Within
these theories, emotion recognition from vocalization is posited to
rely on lower-level processing of acoustic signals, which undergo
complex, multistage neural processing to yield appraisal feature and
categorical judgments such as those that we have considered thus
far10,11,46. Past work has examined how broad, lower-level acoustic
properties (for example, fundamental frequency) are associated
preserved across cultures. To allow further exploration of the cat- with emotion judgments30,32,33,87. We therefore wondered to what
egories of emotion signalled by prosody and the smooth gradients extent associations between acoustic features of prosody and emo-
between them, we also provide an online, interactive version of Fig. tion category and appraisal feature judgments are preserved across
6 in which each speech sample can be played while viewing its cate- cultures. Answers to this question trace the preserved recognition
gorical and affective scale ratings: https://s3-us-west-1.amazonaws. of emotion categories and affective features across two cultures to a
com/venec/map.html. more basic level of auditory processing, central to the analysis of the
To verify that the smooth gradients between categories cor- mechanisms of emotion recognition from prosody.
respond to smooth differences in emotional meaning, we deter- Broad acoustic properties, such as the fundamental frequency
mined whether judgments of the affective scales, such as Valence (F0—the lowest and loudest frequency of sound, corresponding
and Arousal, also varied smoothly along these gradients. First, we to perceived pitch), spectral centroid (the centre of the frequency
ascertained whether the raw proportions of category judgments spectrum, corresponding to perceived ‘brightness’), pitch saliency
assigned to each speech sample were more predictive of its affec- (corresponding to the perceived tonality and sound) and rate of
tive scale judgments than its discrete, modal category assignment speech, are known to correlate with the recognition of emotional
alone. We found that this was indeed the case, with the 12 dimen- and affective features30,32,33,56. To interrogate the emotional correlates
sions (PPCs) predicting 86% of the variance in the affective scales of these acoustic properties in each culture, we computed them for
(90% confidence interval: 0.82 < r2 < 0.89), a fully discrete model the 2,519 speech samples, correlated them with our 12 PPCs as well
(with 12 indicator variables denoting the maximal dimension that as the raw category and affective scale judgments in each culture
each speech sample loaded on—that is, one variety of emotion at and measured the extent to which these associations were preserved
a time) predicting 68% of the variance in the affective scales (90% across cultures (see Supplementary Note 11 for details).
PCA
PCA
variate
variate
India
US
PPCA
Mean
Stacked
Indian
US
PPCA
PPCA
Cov.
CCA
CCA
Corr.
Corr.
CCA CCA Corr. Corr.
Mean Stacked Indian US PPCA PPCA Cov.
PCA PCA variate variate India US PPCA
Correlation between
component coefficients
–1 0 1
Fig. 5 | Correlations between coefficients of components extracted
from uS and indian category judgments using different methods. Each
method was used to extract 29 components after excluding the ‘Neutral’
category. The actual component coefficients of each category are shown in
Supplementary Fig. 5. Here, each pixel in each plot represents a correlation
between coefficients of components derived using two different methods.
The components are ordered in a matter appropriate for each method:
in terms of descending explained variance for stacked and mean PCA,
in terms of descending canonical correlation for CCA, and in terms of
descending correlation and covariance for correlational and covariational
PPCAs, respectively. Note that the CCA extracts an entirely separate
latent space for each culture and the correlational PPCA extracts a slightly
modified latent space for each culture ([XTX]−1/2α1 and [YTY]−1/2α1). In
general, early components (the first seven to ten) are similar across the
different methods. The solution derived using the covariational PPCA, our
primary focus, shares similarities with those derived by both the PCA and
CCA, whereas the correlational PPCA solution was more similar to the CCA
solution. See also Supplementary Fig. 6 for US–India correlations between
the scores of categorical judgments projected onto the components derived
using each method.
NATuRE HumAN BEHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Nature HumaN BeHaviour Articles
All Raters Fear Distress USA
Sadness
Confusion
Interest Disappointment
Contempt Desire India
Adoration
Awe
Anger Amusement
Fig. 6 | visualizing the 12-dimensional structure of emotion conveyed by prosody. To visualize the categories of emotion conveyed by prosody, maps were
generated of average emotional categorical judgments of the 2,519 speech samples within a 12-dimensional categorical space of recognized emotion. t-SNE—a
data visualization method that accurately preserves local distances between data points while separating more distinct data points by longer, more approximate
distances—was applied to the concatenated US and Indian scores of the 2,519 speech samples on the 12 categorical judgment dimensions, generating coordinates
of each speech sample on two axes (this does not mean that the data is in fact two-dimensional; see Supplementary Discussion 6). The individual speech
samples are plotted along these axes as letters (A–L, as assigned on the x axis of Fig. 4c) that correspond to their highest-loading categorical judgment dimension
(with ties broken alphabetically) and are coloured using a weighted average of colours corresponding to their scores on the 12 categorical judgment dimensions
(see Supplementary Note 8). The resulting map reveals gradients from Amusement to Adoration, Anger to Contempt, and so on. For an interactive version of this
map, see https://s3-us-west-1.amazonaws.com/venec/map.html. The smaller maps, coloured using projections of the mean US or Indian judgments alone onto
the same 12 dimensions, demonstrate that the recognition of categories and smooth gradients between them is largely preserved across the two cultures.
Adoration tions between low-level acoustic features and emotion category or
Amusement 128 affective scale judgments are preserved across India and the United
Anger 64 States. The low-level acoustic correlates of the 12 PPCs—the 12
Awe
Confusion 32 emotions that Indian and US participants reliably recognized in
Contempt the speech samples—were very well preserved across cultures. The
16
Desire cross-cultural Spearman correlation in acoustic correlates exceeded
Disappointment 8
0.95 for 5 of the PPCs and exceeded 0.8 for all but Distress and
Distress
Fear 4 Contempt. By contrast, the correlations between acoustic features
Interest 2 and the recognition of Valence—which is considered a basic build-
Sadness ≤1 ing block of emotional life79—were considerably less well preserved
A B C D E F G H I J K L
across cultures (ρ = 0.40, 90% confidence interval: 0.02 < ρ < 0.76;
Fig. 7 | The 12 distinct categories can be blended together in a number significantly lower than ρ for 5 of the 12 PPCs (Amusement, Anger,
of ways. Represented here are the number of speech samples that loaded Awe, Desire and Disappointment; ρ = 1, 0.99, 0.99, 0.99 and 0.95;
significantly on each dimension, or kind, of emotion (diagonal) and on P = 0.002, 0.004, 0.002, 0.004 and 0.008), q < 0.05, two-tailed boot-
pairwise combinations of dimensions (q < 0.05, Monte Carlo simulation strap test; see Supplementary Note 11). Acoustic correlates of many
using rates of each category judgment, Benjamini–Hochberg FDR-corrected of the raw category judgments were also better preserved than
analysis80; see Supplementary Note 10 for details). Categories are often Valence, as were the acoustic correlates of several less typically
blended together, combining Adoration with Amusement, Anger with studied affective features; see Supplementary Fig. 8 for breakdown
Contempt, Awe with Interest, Sadness with Fear. by category and affective scale. These findings reveal that acoustic
parameters that are thought to contribute to emotion recognition
The top row of Fig. 8 shows the correlations between low-level are more robustly associated with emotion category judgments than
acoustic features and emotion category or affective scale judgments. with Valence judgments in terms of how they are preserved across
The bottom row of Fig. 8 shows the extent to which the associa- the United States and India.
NATuRE HumAN BEHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles Nature HumaN BeHaviour
Low-level auditory features are likely to support inferences made was to test hypotheses related to three properties of this seman-
at early stages of processing. Thus, the finding that the low-level tic space: its conceptualization—which focused explicitly on how
acoustic correlates of most emotion categories (such as Amusement emotion categories and scales of affect contribute to the recogni-
or Fear) were much better preserved across cultures than those of tion of emotion in prosody; its dimensionality—the number of dis-
Valence lends further support to the hypothesis that the recognition tinct kinds of emotion conveyed in prosody; and its distribution
of emotion categories occurs at earlier stages of processing. of states, here focusing on the nature of the boundaries between
emotion categories.
Discussion Guided by this conceptual framework, over 2,000 US and Indian
Recent studies have documented that the voice is a rich medium of participants judged 2,519 prosodically modulated speech samples
emotional communication, one with cross-cultural similarities and produced by 100 actors from 5 distinct English-speaking cultures.
early developmental onset in terms of what emotions are conveyed They either judged each prosody sample in terms of which emotion
in the voice. What is less well-understood is the taxonomy of emo- category (from a list of 30) was expressed or rated the prosody sam-
tions recognized from prosody—that is, how the emotions recog- ple on scales that capture 23 affective features theorized in appraisal
nized from prosody are arranged within a semantic space—and how and componential theories to account for emotion recognition.
this taxonomy of emotion may be preserved across cultures. Applying large-scale statistical inference techniques, we compared
Using mathematically based approaches7,37, we examined the the preservation of the recognition of 30 categories and 23 scales of
shared semantic space of the recognition of emotion from speech affect across cultures, modelled the latent space that captured the
prosody in participants from the United States and India. Our focus shared variance in judgments between cultures and interrogated the
sCPP
llA
seirogetac
llA
selacs
evitceffa
llA
ecnelaV lasuorA ecnanimoD
1.0 1.0
0.9 0.9
0.8 0.8
0.7 0.7
0.6 0.6
0.5 0.5
0.4 0.4
0.3 0.3
0.2 0.2
0.1 0.1
0 0
revo
)ρ(
noitalerroC
seitreporp
citsuoca
21
tnemesumA eriseD regnA ewA tnemtnioppasiD tseretnI noisufnoC ssendaS noitarodA raeF ssertsiD tpmetnoC
sCPP
21
revo
)ρ(
noitalerroC
noitaruD emit
esuaP
0F 0F
xaM
0F
niM
1F 2F 3F 1Q
lartcepS
diortnec
lartcepS
3Q
lartcepS
ycneilas
hctiP
India US
noitarodA tnemesumA regnA ewA noisufnoC tpmetnoC eriseD tnemtnioppasiD ssertsiD raeF tseretnI ssendaS noitarodA tnemesumA regnA ewA noisufnoC tpmetnoC eriseD tnemtnioppasiD ssertsiD raeF tseretnI ssendaS
India
ecnelaV lasuorA ecnanimoD ecnelaV lasuorA ecnanimoD
a
US
0.5
Duration
Pause time 0.2
F0
Max. F0
0.1
Min. F0
F1 0 0
F2
F3
–0.1
Spectral Q1
Spectral centroid
Spectral Q3 –0.2
Pitch saliency –0.5
b
Fig. 8 | Low-level acoustic correlates of emotion recognition and their preservation across cultures. a, Correlations (ρ) between each acoustic property
and judgments from each culture across the 2,519 speech samples. Acoustic correlates of the 12 emotion dimensions (PPCs) are similar in both cultures.
For example, judgments of Awe correlate with fundamental frequency (F0) in both cultures. However, the acoustic correlates of the affective scale
judgments are less similar across cultures. Supplementary Figure 8 shows results for every category and dimension. b, Cross-cultural signal correlations
in acoustic correlates of emotion category and affective feature recognition. Each coloured bar represents the Spearman correlation between a given
column of the above acoustic correlation matrices across cultures (individual dimensions A–F as well as Valence, Arousal and Dominance), between entire
matrices (all PPCs, all categories, all affective scales; see full category/affective scale matrices in Supplementary Fig. 8) or between rows (duration, F0 and
the 10 other acoustic properties). The acoustic correlates of many of the emotion dimensions, or distinct kinds, are very well-preserved across cultures,
whereas those of Valence are considerably less well-preserved. Error bars represent the standard error (participant sample size, n US = 525, n India = 152 for
emotion categories, and n US = 927 or 827, n India = 242 or 205 for the different affective scales). F1, F2 and F3 represent the first, second and third formants.
Q1 and Q3 are the first and third spectral quartiles. See Supplementary Note 11 for details.
NATuRE HumAN BEHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Nature HumaN BeHaviour Articles
boundaries between the 12 categories that were found to underlie as Amusement and Desire may be recognized more directly from
this latent space. prosody, and that judgments of broader affective features may sub-
With respect to the dimensionality of the semantic space of sequently be inferred in a more culture-specific manner from these
emotion recognition, many studies of expressive signalling have categories.
focused on 6–8 categories of emotion and relied on either interra- It is important to note that the pattern of results observed in this
ter agreement rates12,13,21,42 or factor analysis44,47,48 to characterize the investigation was potentially influenced by the kind of prosody that
recognition of emotion. Applying statistical modelling techniques we studied, the emotion recognition response formats, and the cul-
to judgments of a vast array of stimuli, we uncovered 12 distinct tures—both English-speaking—that we included. Given this, it will
emotions that were recognized in India and the United States. The be important to extend the methods presented here to other kinds
12 emotions—Adoration, Amusement, Anger, Awe, Confusion, of prosody captured in contexts in which speakers are not directed
Contempt, Desire, Disappointment, Distress, Fear, Interest and to communicate specific emotions as in the present study32,94. It will
Sadness—that emerged from our analyses were highly correlated be important to study more naturalistic, spontaneous forms of pros-
across India and the United States and most were also found to have ody and the range of emotions such forms of prosody communicate
distinct acoustic correlates that were preserved robustly across the as well as the potentially broader semantic space of emotion that
two cultures (Fig. 6). It will be important to examine whether these captures such signals54,55,57.
emotions emerge in studies of other kinds of emotional vocaliza- We note that the present results pertain to similarities in the
tion—for example, vocal bursts or song—and whether they emerge recognition of emotional prosody between two English-speaking
in other cultures and, in particular, among non-English speakers. cultures, the United States and India. By examining distinct English-
We note that this investigation yields evidence of the shared rec- speaking cultures (see Supplementary Discussion 7), we were able
ognition not only of commonly studied emotional states, such as to interrogate the relative preservation of distinct emotional signals
Anger, Fear, Sadness and Surprise, but also of less commonly stud- in prosodically modulated speech samples, while holding constant
ied emotional states, including traditionally understudied varieties the effects of interpretations of the phonetic and semantic content
of positive emotion, such as Adoration, Amusement, Awe, Desire of the sentences. However, cultures that adopt the English language
and Interest (Fig. 4). Understanding the rich variety of emotions may acquire certain prosodic conventions in addition to its lexicon,
conveyed in prosody may be particularly useful for studies of the which may shape the prosodic communication of emotion, in part
physiological and neural representations of distinct emotions (espe- accounting for the high degrees of similarity across the United States
cially considering that conversation with subjects is already com- and India in conveying distinct emotions through prosody. It will be
monplace in most studies). important for future research to use similar methods to examine the
In addition, we wanted to examine one property of the distribu- structure of emotional prosody in other languages, such as French
tion of emotional states within the semantic space of emotion rec- and Chinese, that have different prosodic conventions32.
ognition—the boundaries between emotion categories. In contrast More generally, our findings fit with two general interpretations:
to discrete theories of emotion40,65–70, we find that emotional pros- that they are explained by the innate psychological basicness of
ody is characterized not by discrete clusters of states, but by smooth varieties of emotional prosody in all humans, or by the acquired
gradients between emotion categories. Prosodic signals occupy gra- psychological basicness of varieties of emotional prosody in English
dients from Adoration to Amusement, Sadness to Distress, Interest speakers. Both interpretations point to the primacy of signals of
to Confusion, and between many other categories (Figs. 4 and 5). emotion categories, such as Amusement, over signals of affective
These findings may help to explain past findings of interrater vari- features, such as Valence. Nevertheless, it remains unclear whether
ability in the perception of emotional signals12,72,88, suggesting that the specific categories recognized from emotional prosody in the
disagreement across raters in forced-choice rating tasks may reflect United States and India are universal to all human languages.
the intermediacy of states between categories signalled by expres- Recent studies of the recognition of nonverbal expressive signals
sive behaviour as opposed to just the indistinctness of the categories in remote cultures do, however, point to broader universals in the
or individual differences in recognition60. Furthermore, these find- recognition of vocal emotion categories. A previous study23 assessed
ings support a shift from the predominantly scientific focus of how the recognition of nonverbal vocal bursts targeting 16 emotion cat-
discrete patterns of expression, physiology and neural activation egories in a remote culture in Bhutan; moderate to strong recogni-
distinguish discrete emotion states89–93 toward an understanding of tion (around 50% accuracy or greater, with chance = 25%) of more
the continuous variability and blending together of emotion catego- than half of the targeted categories was found in this study, includ-
ries by continuously varying patterns of expression, physiology and ing 7 of the categories found by the present study to be distinguished
neural activation39,41,71. from prosody in the United States and India (Amusement, Anger,
Lastly, we examined one critical issue related to the conceptu- Awe, Desire, Interest, Fear and Sadness). Another study16 assessed
alization of emotion in prosody: whether the recognition of emo- the recognition of 9 emotion categories from vocal bursts among
tion in prosody is explained at a more basic, cross-cultural level by Himba listeners from remote Namibian villages and in this study
categorical labels or scales of affect. It has been posited that in the moderate to strong recognition (around 75% accuracy or greater,
recognition of emotion, the signalling of Valence, usually along with with chance = 50%) of more than half of the targeted categories was
Arousal, is a core, low-level interpretive process from which specific reported, including 4 found to be recognized from prosody in the
emotion categories are constructed43,79. In contrast to this claim, we present study (Amusement, Anger, Fear and Sadness). In the same
found empirical evidence that the recognition from prosody of cate- study, English listeners were found to strongly recognize (>90%
gories such as Amusement and Desire is better preserved across cul- accuracy) 8 of the 9 targeted categories of emotion from recorded
tures than that of Valence (Fig. 1). Judgments along scales of affect, Himba vocalizations72. While the overlap in the mechanisms of rec-
including Valence, are better predicted by category judgments from ognizing vocal bursts and prosody is not well-understood, these
another culture than by the identical scale-of-affect judgments from recent findings offer early clues that the recognition of signals of
another culture (Fig. 2 and Supplementary Fig. 4). Finally, the low- many distinct categories of emotion from the human voice may be
level acoustic correlates of the recognition of many emotion catego- universal as opposed to unique to English-speaking cultures.
ries are extremely well-preserved across cultures, whereas those for Finally, it is worth noting how the present findings dovetail
Valence are not at all well-preserved (Fig. 8), suggesting that the with recent research on reported experiences of emotion. It was
recognition of emotion categories may occur at earlier stages of pro- previously shown7 that the subjective feelings that people report
cessing. Taken together, these results suggest that categories such in response to viewing a wide range of evocative videos (2,185 in
NATuRE HumAN BEHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles Nature HumaN BeHaviour
total) reliably distinguish among 27 distinct varieties of emotion. As linear regression. Here, it may be worth acknowledging that methods specialized
with the present findings regarding emotional prosody, categories for sparse data could potentially have produced better prediction correlations.
However, this only generates a more conservative interpretation of our findings
emerged as more primary in determining the structure of experi-
that category judgments explain the preservation of affective scale judgments
ence, and these reported experiences were found to be organized across cultures.
along continuous gradients bridging categories of emotion, such as
Interest and Awe. Together, these results converge on a taxonomy of PPCA. We determined the number of dimensions necessary to explain
emotion consisting of a rich array of distinct categories bridged by the preservation of emotion category recognition across cultures by
introducing a method called PPCA, which has two versions, correlational
smooth gradients.
and covariational. Covariational PPCA maximizes the objective function
Debates over the structure of expressive signals are foundational Cov(Xα, Yα) whereas correlational PPCA maximizes the objective function
to the science of emotion. They bear upon central theoretical claims Corr(X[XTX]−1/2α, Y[YTY]−1/2α). We tested the significance of each component
about emotion and exert a profound influence on fields ranging by applying each version of PPCA in a leave-one-rater-out fashion, determining
whether the held-out ratings projected onto each component were consistently
from affective neuroscience to machine learning. Our method
positively correlated with component scores of ratings from the other country
of interrogating how the varieties of emotional prosody are situ-
using a non-parametric Wilcoxon signed-rank test83. After determining the
ated within a semantic space reveals a more complex taxonomy of number of significant PPCs, we applied varimax rotation, generating more
expressive states than is typical in existing accounts of how emo- interpretable components. To compute P and q values for the scores of each
tions are organized. Prosodic signals reliably convey at least 12 dis- individual speech sample on each component, we used a Monte Carlo simulation
of the category ratings.
tinct dimensions of emotion and are distributed along continuous
It is worth acknowledging that we do not establish here that PPCA is applicable
gradients between them.
to all distributions of data. However, we do show that PPCA generates accurate
results on randomly simulated data that are distributed identically to those of the
methods present study, but with varying numbers of underlying dimensions (Fig. 3).
Speech samples. The 2,519 speech samples were drawn from the VENEC (vocal
expressions of nineteen emotions across cultures) corpus, a large cross-cultural Maps. To visualize the distribution of speech samples within the multidimensional
database33. Actors from Australia, India, Kenya, Singapore and the United States space derived using PPCA, we applied a method called t-SNE. We then assigned a
were provided with scenarios describing typical situations in which each of 18 colour to each speech sample in the map corresponding to a weighted average of
emotions may be elicited and were instructed to enact finding themselves in similar the unique colours of its top 2 scores on the 12 categorical judgment dimensions.
situations. The emotion categories targeted by the VENEC corpus were Affection,
Anger, Amusement, Contempt, Disgust, Distress, Fear, Guilt, Happiness, Interest, Continuous versus discrete category models. We compared how well
Lust, Negative surprise, Positive surprise, Pride, Relief, Sadness, Serenity, and continuous versus discrete category models predicted affective scale ratings using
Shame. See Supplementary Methods for further details. ordinary least-squares regression. For the discrete models, we used ordinary
least-squares analyses to predict the affective scale judgments from the maximally
Emotion judgments. Emotion judgments of the speech samples were obtained loading PPC, which was converted to a dummy variable (1 for the maximally
using Amazon Mechanical Turk. Three separate survey formats were used to obtain loading PPC, 0 otherwise) to form a fully discrete model, and to a continuous
emotion judgments: one for the category judgments and two for the affective scale intensity (keep the maximally loading PPC, convert others to 0) to form a
judgments. Each individual survey presented a subset of speech samples (30 for discrete model with intensity. For these analyses, we averaged across ratings
the category judgments, 12 for the affective scale judgments, assigned randomly) from the United States and India. To test for a difference in variance explained
in an order randomized for each participant. A total of 2,345 English-speaking between the continuous and discrete category models, we used across-rater
participants, including 1,969 US participants (1,095 females, mean age = 36 years) bootstrap resampling.
and 376 Indian participants (123 females, mean age = 30 years), took part in the study.
For each judgments format, 10–15 judgments were collected of each speech sample Acoustic measures. To analyse the acoustic correlates of emotion recognition, we
from each culture. (No statistical methods were used to predetermine sample sizes, computed twelve acoustic measurements of each speech sample. (1) duration, (2)
but our sample sizes are similar to those in a previous study in which similar methods pause time, (3) F0, (4) maximum F0, (5) minimum F0, (6)–(8) F1–3, (9) Spectral
captured over 90% of the systematic variability in judgments of emotional videos7.) Q1, (10) spectral centroid, (11) spectral Q3 and (12) pitch saliency.
US participants rated 71.6 speech samples on average and Indian participants rated
249.2 speech samples on average. The experimental procedures were approved by the Reporting Summary. Further information on research design is available in the
Institutional Review Board at the University of California, Berkeley. All participants Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.
gave their informed consent. See Supplementary Methods for further details.
Code availability
Statistical analyses. Our statistical analyses are outlined briefly below. Data were Custom MATLAB analysis code can be requested from https://goo.gl/
analysed primarily using custom code in MATLAB version R2012b. Acoustic forms/3q0y2Vvi1KinMft13.
properties were computed using the BioSound Toolbox in Python (http://github.
com/theunissenlab/BioSoundTutorials). Analyses were not performed blind to Data availability
the conditions of the experiments. For a detailed description of each method, see
The 2,519 speech samples used in the present study and their ratings can
Supplementary Methods.
be requested from https://goo.gl/forms/3q0y2Vvi1KinMft13. Publications
incorporating the speech samples should reference the previous study33.
Category judgment proportions. For each speech sample, we computed the
proportion of participants who chose each category and the average judgments
Received: 19 October 2017; Accepted: 15 January 2019;
of each affective scale. To estimate the significance of the category judgment
proportions of each speech sample we constructed a null distribution of category Published: xx xx xxxx
judgment proportions using a Monte Carlo simulation.
References
Signal correlations. To derive signal correlations between cultures for each 1. Keltner, D. & Haidt, J. Social functions of emotions at four levels of analysis.
judgment, we correlated the mean judgments from each culture across all speech Cogn. Emot. 13, 505–521 (1999).
samples and divided by the estimated explainable variance. Explainable variance 2. Nesse, R. M. Evolutionary explanations of emotions. Hum. Nat. 1,
was estimate by dividing the mean of the squared standard errors (estimated 261–289 (1990).
using bootstrapping) by the total variance and subtracting this quantity from 1. To 3. Campos, B., Shiota, M. N., Keltner, D., Gonzaga, G. C. & Goetz, J. L. What is
calculate standard errors and P values for signal correlations, it was necessary to shared, what is different? Core relational themes and expressive displays of
account for potential non-independence across ratings of different speech samples eight positive emotions. Cogn. Emot. 27, 37–52 (2013).
due to the fact that each rater rated multiple samples. To do so, we applied a non- 4. Oveis, C., Spectre, A., Smith, P. K., Liu, M. Y. & Keltner, D. Laughter conveys
parametric bootstrap approach, using stratified resampling across individual raters status. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 65, 109–115 (2016).
rather than individual ratings. We validate these methods by demonstrating that 5. Gonzaga, G. C., Keltner, D., Londahl, E. A. & Smith, M. D. Love and the
signal correlations accurately estimate the respective population-level correlations commitment problem in romantic relations and friendship. J. Pers. Soc.
in Monte Carlo simulations (Supplementary Fig. 2). Psychol. 81, 247–262 (2001).
6. ten Brinke, L. & Adams, G. S. Saving face? When emotion displays
Regression between category and affective scale judgments. We predicted during public apologies mitigate damage to organizational performance.
affective scale judgments from category judgments using ordinary least-squares Organ. Behav. Hum. Decis. Process. 130, 1–12 (2015).
NATuRE HumAN BEHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Nature HumaN BeHaviour Articles
7. Cowen, A. S. & Keltner, D. Self-report captures 27 distinct categories of 38. Laukka, P. et al. Cross-cultural decoding of positive and negative non-
emotion bridged by continuous gradients. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 114, linguistic emotion vocalizations. Front. Psychol. 4, 353 (2013).
E7900–E7909 (2017). 39. Parr, L. A., Cohen, M. & de Waal, F. Influence of social context on the use of
8. Schirmer, A. & Adolphs, R. Emotion perception from face, voice, and touch: blended and graded facial displays in chimpanzees. Int. J. Primatol. 26,
comparisons and convergence. Trends Cogn. Sci. 21, 216–228 (2017). 73–103 (2005).
9. Singer, T. & Lamm, C. The social neuroscience of empathy. Ann. NY Acad. 40. Ekman, P. in The Nature of Emotion (eds Ekman, P. & Davidson, R. J.)
Sci. 1156, 81–96 (2009). 15–19 (Oxford Univ. Press, Oxford, 1992).
10. Frühholz, S., Ceravolo, L. & Grandjean, D. Specific brain networks during 41. Harris, R. J., Young, A. W. & Andrews, T. J. Morphing between expressions
explicit and implicit decoding of emotional prosody. Cereb. Cortex 22, dissociates continuous from categorical representations of facial expression in
1107–1117 (2012). the human brain. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 190, 21164–21169 (2012).
11. Bach, D. R. et al. The effect of appraisal level on processing of emotional 42. Russell, J. A. Is there universal recognition of emotion from facial expression?
prosody in meaningless speech. Neuroimage 42, 919–927 (2008). A review of the cross-cultural studies. Psychol. Bull. 115, 102–141 (1994).
12. Cordaro, D. T. et al. Universals and cultural variations in 22 emotional 43. Russell, J. A. Core affect and the psychological construction of emotion.
expressions across five cultures. Emotion 18, 75–93 (2018). Psychol. Rev. 110, 145–172 (2003).
13. Elfenbein, H. A. & Ambady, N. On the universality and cultural specificity of 44. Smith, C. A. & Ellsworth, P. C. Patterns of cognitive appraisal in emotion.
emotion recognition: a meta-analysis. Psychol. Bull. 128, 203–235 (2002). J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 48, 813–838 (1985).
14. Keltner, D. & Cordaro, D. T. in Emotion Researcher (Scarantino, A. ed.) 45. Frijda, N. H., Kuipers, P. & ter Schure, E. Relations among emotion,
Available at http://emotionresearcher.com/understanding-multimodal- appraisal, and emotional action readiness. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 57,
emotional-expressions-recent-advances-in-basic-emotion-theory/ (2015). 212–228 (1989).
15. Norenzayan, A. & Heine, S. J. Psychological universals: what are they and 46. Scherer, K. R. The dynamic architecture of emotion: evidence for the
how can we know? Psychol. Bull. 131, 763–784 (2005). component process model. Cogn. Emot. 23, 1307–1351 (2009).
16. Sauter, D. A., Eisner, F., Ekman, P. & Scott, S. K. Cross-cultural recognition of 47. Watson, D. & Tellegen, A. Toward a consensual structure of mood.
basic emotions through nonverbal emotional vocalizations. Proc. Natl Acad. Psychol. Bull. 98, 219–235 (1985).
Sci. USA 107, 2408–2412 (2010). 48. Posner, J., Russell, J. A. & Peterson, B. S. The circumplex model of affect: an
17. Filippi, P. et al. Humans recognize emotional arousal in vocalizations across integrative approach to affective neuroscience, cognitive development, and
all classes of terrestrial vertebrates: evidence for acoustic universals. Proc. R. psychopathology. Dev. Psychopathol. 17, 715–734 (2005).
Soc. B 284, 20170990 (2017). 49. Russell, J. A circumplex model of affect. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 39,
18. Parr, L. A., Waller, B. M. & Vick, S. J. New developments in understanding 1161–1178 (1980).
emotional facial signals in chimpanzees. Curr. Dir. Psychol. Sci. 16, 50. Ang, J., Dhillon, R., Krupski, A., Shriberg, E. & Stolcke, A. Prosody-based
117–122 (2007). automatic detection of annoyance and frustration in human-computer dialog.
19. Snowdon, C. T. in Handbook of Affective Sciences (eds Davidson, R. J. & In Proc. 7th International Conference on Spoken Language Processing
Scherer, K. R.) 457-480 (Oxford Univ. Press, Oxford, 2002). 2037–2040 (2002).
20. Filippi, P. Emotional and interactional prosody across animal communication 51. Laukka, P., Neiberg, D., Forsell, M., Karlsson, I. & Elenius, K. Expression of
systems: a comparative approach to the emergence of language. affect in spontaneous speech: acoustic correlates and automatic detection of
Front. Psychol. 7, 1393 (2016). irritation and resignation. Comput. Speech Lang. 25, 84–104 (2011).
21. Adolphs, R. Neural systems for recognizing emotion. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 52. Provine, R. R. & Fischer, K. R. Laughing, smiling, and talking: relation to
12, 169–177 (2002). sleeping and social context in humans. Ethology 83, 295–305 (1989).
22. Russell, J. A. Is there universal recognition of emotion from facial 53. Vidrascu, L. & Devillers, L. Real-life emotion representation and detection in
expressions? A review of the cross-cultural studies. Psychol. Bull. 115, call centers data. In Proc. 3784th Lecture Notes in Computer Science
102–141 (1994). (including subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes
23. Cordaro, D. T., Keltner, D., Tshering, S., Wangchuk, D. & Flynn, L. M. in Bioinformatics) 739–746 (Springer, 2005).
The voice conveys emotion in ten globalized cultures and one remote village 54. Sauter, D. A. & Fischer, A. H. Can perceivers recognise emotions from
in Bhutan. Emotion 16, 117–128 (2016). spontaneous expressions?. Cogn. Emot. 32, 504–515 (2018).
24. Gendron, M., Roberson, D., van der Vyver, J. M. & Barrett, L. F. Cultural 55. Anikin, A. & Lima, C. F. Perceptual and acoustic differences between
relativity in perceiving emotion from vocalizations. Psychol. Sci. 25, authentic and acted nonverbal emotional vocalizations. Q. J. Exp. Psychol. 71,
911–920 (2014). 622–641 (2018).
25. Hertenstein, M. J. & Campos, J. J. The retention effects of an adult’s emotional 56. Scherer, K. R. Vocal markers of emotion: comparing induction and acting
displays on infant behavior. Child Dev. 75, 595–613 (2004). elicitation. Comput. Speech Lang. 27, 40–58 (2013).
26. Juslin, P. N. & Laukka, P. Communication of emotions in vocal expression 57. Juslin, P. N., Laukka, P. & Bänziger, T. The mirror to our soul? Comparisons
and music performance: different channels, same code? Psychol. Bull. 129, of spontaneous and posed vocal expression of emotion. J. Nonverbal Behav.
770–814 (2003). 42, 1–40 (2018).
27. Keltner, D. et al. in Handbook of Emotions 4th edn (eds Lewis M., 58. Gupta, V., Hanges, P. J. & Dorfman, P. Cultural clusters: methodology and
Haviland-Jones, J. M. & Barrett, L. F.) 467–482 (Guilford, New York, 2016). findings. J. World Bus. 37, 11–15 (2002).
28. Wu, Y., Muentener, P. & Schulz, L. E. One- to four-year-olds connect diverse 59. Jaju, A., Kwak, H. & Zinkhan, G. M. Learning styles of undergraduate
positive emotional vocalizations to their probable causes. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. business students: cross-cultural comparison between the US, India, and
USA 114, 11896–11901 (2017). Korea. Mark. Educ. Rev. 12, 49–60 (2002).
29. Titze, I. R. & Martin, D. W. Principles of voice production. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 60. Barrett, L. F. Are emotions natural kinds? Perspect. Psychol. Sci. 1,
104, 1148 (1998). 28–58 (2006).
30. Scherer, K. R. & Bänziger, T. Emotional expression in prosody: a review 61. Ekman, P. What scientists who study emotion agree about. Perspect. Psychol.
and an agenda for future research. In Proc. Speech Prosody 2004 Sci. 11, 31–34 (2016).
359–366 (2004). 62. Ekman, P. & Cordaro, D. What is meant by calling emotions basic. Emot. Rev.
31. Mitchell, R. L. C. & Ross, E. D. Attitudinal prosody: what we know and 3, 364–370 (2011).
directions for future study. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 37, 471–479 (2013). 63. Keltner, D. & Lerner, J. S. in Handbook of Social Psychology 5th edn
32. Hancil, S. The Role of Prosody in Affective Speech (Peter Lang, New York, 2009). (eds Fiske, S. T. et al., Wiley Online Library, Hoboken NJ, 2010).
33. Laukka, P. et al. The expression and recognition of emotions in the voice 64. Lazarus, R. S. Progress on a cognitive–motivational–relational theory of
across five nations: a lens model analysis based on acoustic features. J. Pers. emotion. Am. Psychol. 46, 819–834 (1991).
Soc. Psychol. 111, 686–705 (2016). 65. Roseman, I. J. Appraisal determinants of discrete emotions. Cogn. Emot. 5,
34. Nordström, H., Laukka, P., Thingujam, N. S., Schubert, E. & Elfenbein, H. A. 161–200 (1991).
Emotion appraisal dimensions inferred from vocal expressions are consistent 66. Etcoff, N. L. & Magee, J. J. Categorical perception of facial expressions.
across cultures: a comparison between Australia and India. R. Soc. Open Sci. Cognition 44, 227–240 (1992).
4, 170912 (2017). 67. Harmon-Jones, C., Bastian, B. & Harmon-Jones, E. The discrete emotions
35. Paulmann, S. & Uskul, A. K. Cross-cultural emotional prosody recognition: questionnaire: a new tool for measuring state self-reported emotions.
evidence from Chinese and British listeners. Cogn. Emot. 28, 230–244 (2014). PLoS ONE 11, e0159915 (2016).
36. Scherer, K. R., Banse, R. & Wallbott, H. G. Emotion inferences from vocal 68. Izard, C. E. Four systems for emotion activation: cognitive and noncognitive
expression correlate across languages and cultures. J. Cross Cult. Psychol. 32, processes. Psychol. Rev. 100, 68–90 (1993).
76–92 (2001). 69. Johnson-Laird, P. N. & Oatley, K. The language of emotions: an analysis of a
37. Cowen, A. S. & Keltner, D. Clarifying the conceptualization, dimensionality, semantic field. Cogn. Emot. 3, 81–123 (1989).
and structure of emotion: response to Barrett and colleagues. Trends Cogn. 70. Shiota, M. N. et al. Beyond happiness: building a science of discrete positive
Sci. 22, 274–276 (2018). emotions. Am. Psychol. 72, 617–643 (2017).
NATuRE HumAN BEHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles Nature HumaN BeHaviour
71. Samson, A. C., Kreibig, S. D., Soderstrom, B., Wade, A. A. & Gross, J. J. 89. Kragel, P. A. & LaBar, K. S. Multivariate neural biomarkers of emotional states
Eliciting positive, negative and mixed emotional states: a film library for are categorically distinct. Soc. Cogn. Affect. Neurosci. 10, 1437–1448 (2015).
affective scientists. Cogn. Emot. 30, 827–856 (2016). 90. Kreibig, S. D. Autonomic nervous system activity in emotion: a review.
72. Gendron, M., Roberson, D., van der Vyver, J. M. & Barrett, L. F. Perceptions Biol. Psychol. 84, 394–421 (2010).
of emotion from facial expressions are not culturally universal: evidence from 91. Lench, H. C., Flores, S. A. & Bench, S. W. Discrete emotions predict changes
a remote culture. Emotion 14, 251–262 (2014). in cognition, judgment, experience, behavior, and physiology: a meta-analysis
73. Laukka, P., Neiberg, D. & Elfenbein, H. A. Evidence for cultural dialects in of experimental emotion elicitations. Psychol. Bull. 137, 834–855 (2011).
vocal emotion expression: acoustic classification within and across five 92. Vytal, K. & Hamann, S. Neuroimaging support for discrete neural correlates
nations. Emotion 14, 445–449 (2014). of basic emotions: a voxel-based meta-analysis. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 22,
74. Mehrabian, A. & Russell, J. An Approach to Environmental Psychology 2864–2885 (2010).
(MIT Press, Cambridge MA, 1974). 93. Wager, T. D. et al. in Handbook of Emotions 3rd edn (eds Lewis, M. et al.)
75. Osgood, C. E. Dimensionality of the semantic space for communication via 249–271 (Guilford, New York, 2008).
facial expressions. Scand. J. Psychol. 7, 1–30 (1966). 94. Scherer, K. & Bänziger, T. in Blueprint for Affective Computing: A Sourcebook
76. Sauter, D. A. & Scott, S. K. More than one kind of happiness: can we (eds Scherer, K. R., Banziger, T., & Roesch, E.) 166–176 (Oxford Univ. Press,
recognize vocal expressions of different positive states? Motiv. Emot. 31, Oxford, 2010).
192–199 (2007). 95. G’Sell, M. G., Wager, S., Chouldechova, A. & Tibshirani, R. Sequential selection
77. Simon-Thomas, E. R., Keltner, D. J., Sauter, D., Sinicropi-Yao, L. & procedures and false discovery rate control. J. R. Stat. Soc. B. 78, 423–444 (2016).
Abramson, A. The voice conveys specific emotions: evidence from vocal burst
displays. Emotion 9, 838–846 (2009). Acknowledgements
78. Benjamini, Y. & Yu, B. The shuffle estimator for explainable variance in FMRI
We thank R. Rosipal for devising a correlational version of PPCA and F. Theunissen for
experiments. Ann. Appl. Stat. 7, 2007–2033 (2013).
providing input regarding acoustic analyses. Research reported in this publication was
79. Barrett, L. F. Valence is a basic building block of emotional life. J. Res. Pers.
supported by the US National Institute of Mental Health under award number T32-
40, 35–55 (2006).
MH020006-16A1 and by the Thomas and Ruth Ann Hornaday Chair in Psychology
80. Benjamini, Y. & Hochberg, Y. Controlling the false discovery rate: a
at the University of California, Berkeley. The funders had no role in study design, data
practical and powerful approach to multiple testing. J. R. Stat. Soc. B 57,
collection and analysis, decision to publish or preparation of the manuscript.
289–300 (1995).
81. Barrett, L. F., Lindquist, K. A. & Gendron, M. Language as context for the
perception of emotion. Trends Cogn. Sci. 11, 327–332 (2007). Author contributions
82. Abdi, H. & Williams, L. J. Partial least squares methods: partial least squares P.L. and H.A.E. contributed all speech samples; A.S.C. and D.K. designed the research
correlation and partial least square regression. Comput. Toxicol. 930, with input from P.L. and H.A.E.; A.S.C. performed research, contributed analytic tools and
549–579 (2013). analysed data; and A.S.C. and D.K. wrote the paper with input from P.L., H.A.E. and R.L.
83. Hardoon, D. R., Szedmak, S. & Shawe-Taylor, J. Canonical correlation
analysis: an overview with application to learning methods. Neural Comput.
Competing interests
16, 2639–2664 (2004).
84. Wilcoxon, F. Individual comparisons by ranking methods. Biom. Bull. 1, The authors declare no competing interests.
80–83 (1945).
85. Van Der Maaten, L. & Hinton, G. Visualizing data using t-SNE. J. Mach.
Additional information
Learn. Res. 9, 2579–2605 (2008).
86. Scherer, K. R. Vocal affect expression: a review and a model for future Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/
research. Psychol. Bull. 99, 143–165 (1986). s41562-019-0533-6.
87. Ringeval, F. et al. AV+EC 2015: The first affect recognition challenge bridging Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
across audio, video, and physiological data. In Proc. 5th International
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to A.S.C.
Workshop on Audio/Visual Emotion Challenge 3–8 (ACM, 2015).
88. Haidt, J. & Keltner, D. Culture and facial expression: open-ended methods Publisher’s note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
find more expressions and a gradient of recognition. Cogn. Emot. 13, published maps and institutional affiliations.
225–266 (1999). © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2019
NATuRE HumAN BEHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
1
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
April
2018
Corresponding author(s): Alan S. Cowen
Reporting Summary
Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency
in reporting. For further information on Nature Research policies, see Authors & Referees and the Editorial Policy Checklist.
Statistical parameters
When statistical analyses are reported, confirm that the following items are present in the relevant location (e.g. figure legend, table legend, main
text, or Methods section).
n/a Confirmed
The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
An indication of whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided
Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.
A description of all covariates tested
A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
A full description of the statistics including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient) AND
variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)
For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted
Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.
For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated
Clearly defined error bars
State explicitly what error bars represent (e.g. SD, SE, CI)
Our web collection on statistics for biologists may be useful.
Software and code
Policy information about availability of computer code
Data collection Surveys were coded in Javascript and HTML and launched on Amazon Mechanical Turk.
Data analysis Data were analyzed primarily using custom code in Matlab (versions 2017a and 2018a). Acoustic properties were computed using the
BioSound Toolbox in Python (http://github.com/theunissenlab/BioSoundTutorials).
For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors/reviewers
upon request. We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Research guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.
Data
Policy information about availability of data
All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable:
- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets
- A list of figures that have associated raw data
- A description of any restrictions on data availability
The 2,519 speech samples used in the present study and their ratings can be requested here: https://goo.gl/forms/3q0y2Vvi1KinMft13.
2
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
April
2018
Field-specific reporting
Please select the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.
Life sciences Behavioural & social sciences Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences
For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/authors/policies/ReportingSummary-flat.pdf
Behavioural & social sciences study design
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
Study description A quantitative examination of the emotions people recognize in speech prosody in both the US and India.
Research sample A total of 2345 English-speaking participants recruited on Amazon Mechanical Turk, including 1969 US participants (1095 females, mean
age = 36 y) and 376 Indian participants (123 females, mean age = 30 y), took part in the study. Mechanical Turk samples typically span a
wide geographic and demographic range. The use of Mechanical Turk made it feasible to collect over one million human judgments.
Sampling strategy Three separate survey formats were used to obtain emotion judgments: one for the category judgments and two for the affective scale
judgments. Each individual survey presented a subset of speech samples (30 for the category judgments, 12 for the affective scale
judgments, assigned randomly) in an order randomized for each participant. For each judgments format, 10-15 judgments were collected
of each speech sample from each culture. No statistical methods were used to pre-determine sample sizes, but our sample sizes are
similar to those in a previous study in which similar methods captured over 90% of the systematic variability in judgments of emotional
videos (Cowen & Keltner, 2017).
Data collection Data collection was performed online using Amazon Mechanical Turk.
Timing Data were collected in May, 2017.
Data exclusions No data were excluded from analyses.
Non-participation No participants dropped out.
Randomization Each individual survey presented a subset of speech samples (30 for the category judgments, 12 for the affective scale judgments,
assigned randomly) in an order randomized for each participant.
Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods
Materials & experimental systems Methods
n/a Involved in the study n/a Involved in the study
Unique biological materials ChIP-seq
Antibodies Flow cytometry
Eukaryotic cell lines MRI-based neuroimaging
Palaeontology
Animals and other organisms
Human research participants
Human research participants
Policy information about studies involving human research participants
Population characteristics See above.
Recruitment Participants opted to participate in surveys on Amazon Mechanical Turk entitled "Rate emotions expressed by the voice". It is
unclear how self-selection bias (perhaps toward people interested in emotion or the human voice) would impact results.