
===== PAGE 1/15 =====
Meta-Psychology, 2019, vol 3, MP.2018.1592, Open data: Yes Edited by: Moritz Heene
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2018.1592 Open materials: Not relevant Reviewed by: Felix Naumann, Sven Hilbert
Article type: Original Article Open and reproducible analysis: Yes Analysis reproduced by: Rickard Carlsson
Published under the CC-BY4.0 license Open reviews and editorial process: Yes All supplementary files can be accessed at the OSF project
Preregistration: Not relevant page: https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/DZN3S
Dealing with Distributional Assumptions in Preregistered
Research
Matt N. Williams
Massey University, New Zealand
Casper J. Albers
University of Groningen, Netherlands
Virtually any inferential statistical analysis relies on distributional assumptions of some
kind. The violation of distributional assumptions can result in consequences ranging from
small changes to error rates through to substantially biased estimates and parameters
fundamentally losing their intended interpretations. Conventionally, researchers have
conducted assumption checks after collecting data, and then changed the primary
analysis technique if violations of distributional assumptions are observed. An approach
to dealing with distributional assumptions that requires decisions to be made contingent
on observed data is problematic, however, in preregistered research, where researchers
attempt to specify all important analysis decisions prior to collecting data. Limited
methodological advice is currently available regarding how to deal with the prospect of
distributional assumption violations in preregistered research. In this article, we examine
several strategies that researchers could use in preregistrations to reduce the potential
impact of distributional assumption violations. We suggest that pre-emptively selecting
analysis methods that are as robust as possible to assumption violations, performing
planned robustness analyses, and/or supplementing preregistered confirmatory
analyses with exploratory checks of distributional assumptions may all be useful
strategies. On the other hand, we suggest that prespecifying “decision trees” for selecting
data analysis methods based on the distributional characteristics of the data may not be
practical in most situations.
Keywords: preregistrations, distributional assumptions, open science, transparency.
We thank Moritz Heene as editor and reviewers Felix Naumann and Sven Hilbert for valuable feedback on an
earlier version of this article. We also thank Tobias Mühlmeister for assisting in the copyediting of our manuscript.
Correspondence regarding this article can be addressed to Matt N. Williams, School of Psychology, Massey
University, Private Bag 102903 North Shore, Auckland 0745, New Zealand. Email: M.N.Williams@massey.ac.nz

===== PAGE 2/15 =====
2
WILLIAMS & ALBERS
Virtually any inferential statistical method relies interpretation. For example, in a simple linear
on some set of distributional assumptions1 in order regression model estimated using ordinary least
to produce valid inferences. For example, a squares, a breach of the assumption that the error
regression model estimated via ordinary least terms are normally distributed will not cause biased
squares relies on the assumptions the predictors are or inconsistent estimates or harm the
measured without error, that any measurement interpretability of the parameters, but only affect
error in the response variable is uncorrelated with confidence interval coverage and Type I error rates,
the predictors, and that the error terms are and even these effects can be mild (see Gelman &
independent, identically and normally distributed Hill, 2007; Lumley, Diehr, Emerson, & Chen, 2002;
with a mean of zero for all values of the predictors2 Meuleman, Loosveldt, & Emonds, 2015; Williams et
(Williams, Grajales, & Kurkiewicz, 2013). Even non- al., 2013). On the other hand, if the assumption of a
parametric methods have assumptions, albeit not linear relationship between the predictor variable
with respect to the specific probability distribution and the response variable is breached, the slope
of particular variables. For example, if a Mann- loses its interpretability as a measure of the
Whitney test is used to test the equality of the dependency between the predictor and response
medians of two populations on some variable, one variables (see Meuleman et al., 2015): A measure of
must assume that the distribution of the variable has linear relationship is of little value if the true
the same shape and spread within each of the relationship is not linear.
populations (Fagerland & Sandvik, 2009). Many methodological textbooks and other
Distributional assumptions are a common source of resources offer researchers advice on how to detect
misconceptions (Ernst & Albers, 2017), but even and respond to distributional assumption violations.
when assumptions are correctly identified and There are many methods for detecting
investigated, several issues can arise. One of these distributional assumption problems, including both
will be discussed in this paper. graphical approaches and inferential tests. For
Breaches of distributional assumptions can cause example, a researcher interested in whether the
problems for inference, including biased estimates, error terms in her regression model are normally
artificially narrow (or broad) confidence intervals, distributed could evaluate this assumption using
and increases in Type I and/or Type II error rates visual methods, such as a q-q plot, a formal
(Ernst & Albers, 2017; Williams et al., 2013). The statistical test such as the Shapiro-Wilk or
severity of these problems varies depending on the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, or by evaluating
analysis method, the sample size, the nature of the skewness and kurtosis statistics. Likewise, the
assumption breach, and on whether one or more potential responses available for dealing with a
assumptions are violated simultaneously. The distributional problem are legion, including
consequences of an assumption breach can vary transformations, deletion of outliers, trimming of
from a minor change in Type I error rates and samples, alternative estimation algorithms,
confidence interval coverage, through to biased randomisation-based tests, rank-based non-
parameter estimates, right through to parameter parametric statistics, and many others.
estimates fundamentally losing their intended
1 By “distributional assumption” we mean an assumption with respect to the univariate, bivariate, or multivariate
distribution of variables and/or error terms—e.g., that the relationship between two variables is linear, or that the variances of
a set of error terms is identical, or that the distribution of a response variable is negative binomial conditional on a set of
predictor values. Such assumptions are also sometimes referred to as “statistical assumptions” or just “assumptions”. We use
the modifier “distributional” simply to differentiate such assumptions from purely non-statistical assumptions (e.g.,
assumptions about ontology or epistemology).
2 The assumption that the error terms all have mean zero for any combination of values of the predictor variables
implies that the independent effects of the predictor variables included in the model on the response variable are additive and
linear. Indeed, some presentations of the assumptions of multiple regression (e.g., Gelman & Hill, 2007) replace a description
of this assumption with a description of the assumption of “additivity and linearity”. Note that the predictor variables
included in a regression model may include transformations of the original variables (e.g., polynomial terms), which provides
some capacity to specify nonlinear effects between the original variables in a dataset and the response variable.

===== PAGE 3/15 =====
DEALING WITH DISTRIBUTIONAL ASSUMPTIONS IN PREREGISTERED RESEARCH 3
Nevertheless, an important meta-strategy
underlies the advice about dealing with
distributional assumptions found in many Preregistration
methodological resources (see the discussion in
One important strategy gaining popularity as a
Wells & Hintze, 2007): First, one should check for
partial solution to problems with replicability and p-
distributional problems, and then, if problems are
detected, select a strategy to deal with the hacking is preregistration. In a landmark paper,
problems. We term this the “test then respond” Wagenmakers, Wetzels, Borsboom, van der Maas
meta-strategy for dealing with distributional and Kievit (2012) argued that when research is
assumption violations. intended to be confirmatory—i.e., to test
The potential risks of the “test then respond” hypotheses—a data collection and analysis plan
meta-strategy will be apparent to readers aware of should be preregistered in advance. Doing so
the problems of the “garden of forking paths” reduces the capacity of researchers to exploit
(Gelman & Loken, 2014, p. 460) and “researcher flexibility in their data collection and analysis
degrees of freedom” (Simmons, Nelson, & procedures to produce positive (or statistically
Simonsohn, 2011, p. 1359). By applying different significant) findings. Preregistration is a crucial
analysis strategies contingent on the characteristics control strategy in an environment where
of the observed data, a researcher may end up researchers are incentivised to produce statistically
happening upon a statistically significant result in significant and novel findings in order to achieve
favour of a particular hypothesis that is itself publications in high-impact journals. Online
contingent on an analysis decision made after platforms for uploading and permanently time-
observing the data. This will be especially stamping preregistrations have since been
problematic if the researcher is motivated to search developed (osf.io, aspredicted.org), and
for and selectively report statistically significant preregistered research studies have been
increasingly frequent in the pages of psychology
results (“p-hacking”). p-hacking can result in
journals, especially within experimental social
inflated Type I error rates and seriously biased
estimates, and is thought to be one of the major psychology; see for example the 67(1) special issue of
causes of the current “replication crisis” in the Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, which
psychology and other sciences. was entirely dedicated to preregistered research.
Although p-hacking has especially negative Preregistration is useful for increasing the
credibility of individual studies, but it can also help
effects, the making of analysis decisions contingent
on observed data can still be problematic even if the address the broader problem of publication bias—a
researcher’s intentions are entirely scrupulous. problem wherein statistically significant findings are
Specifically, the nominal error rates of analysis more likely to be published than non-significant
strategies are invariably derived based on repeated ones (see Ferguson & Heene, 2012). Publication bias
sampling with a fixed analysis method, and will not can distort the mean effect sizes estimated in meta-
necessarily apply where the analysis method analyses both because studies that produce non-
depends on the data. For example, the common significant findings are less likely to end up in the
strategy for comparing two means of using a published literature, and because authors may
respond to the existence of this bias by exploiting
Student’s t test if a preliminary Levene’s test fails to
reject the null hypothesis of equal variances across flexibility in data collection and analysis procedures
to produce statistically significant findings.
the two groups, but using a Welch’s t test if the
Preregistration can help to address publication bias
Levene’s test is significant, can result in Type I error
both in the sense that the individual preregistered
rates that differ markedly from the nominal alpha
studies included in a meta-analysis may be less likely
level (Albers, Boon, & Kallenberg, 2000; Bancroft,
to have used methods that produce biased effect
1964; Zimmerman, 2004).
sizes (e.g., p-hacking), but also in the sense that
researchers conducting meta-analyses can search
for preregistrations that have not resulted in
published outputs, and thus obtain some

===== PAGE 4/15 =====
4
WILLIAMS & ALBERS
information about the size of the unpublished “file sophisticated approaches that a researcher could
drawer”. make use of for dealing with distributional
Preregistration is clearly valuable, but it is assumptions in the context of preregistered
currently unclear how researchers should deal with research. In the current section, we consider and
distributional assumptions when performing discuss four potential strategies in turn. In
preregistered research. The conventional “test then discussing each strategy we will focus on how these
respond” approach to dealing with distributional strategies can be conducted and their consequences
assumptions—where the researcher selects a for the resulting analyses of empirical data, but we
primary analysis strategy, performs exploratory will also briefly touch on the implications of these
assumption checks using a range of statistical and strategies for analyses conducting before data
graphical measures, and then uses their judgment to collection—i.e., statistical power and sample size
determine whether a change in analysis strategy is determination.
needed—is clearly anathema to a preregistered
approach to research. So how should researchers Strategy 1: Decision Tree
writing preregistrations deal with distributional The first strategy is to outline a decision tree
assumptions? In this article we aim to provide specifying what methods will be used to identify
concrete and practical advice to help researchers distributional assumption breaches, and which
pre-emptively respond to the spectre of breaches of alternative methods will be applied if breaches are
distributional assumptions when performing identified. For example, a researcher might specify
preregistered research. that linear regression using ordinary least squares
will be applied in order to test their hypothesis, and
a Shapiro-Wilk test applied to the residuals. If the
Strategies for Dealing with Distributional
Shapiro-Wilk test statistic is not significant,
Assumptions in Preregistrations
confidence intervals will be calculated based via the
One strategy for dealing with distributional usual Wald method; if it is significant (indicating
assumptions in preregistered research is to simply non-normality), they will be calculated using a
ignore the issue and preregister a primary analysis percentile bootstrap. Such a decision tree is
strategy without any conscious attention to effectively just a preregistered form of the test then
distributional assumptions whatsoever. This respond meta-strategy, albeit with a commitment to
strategy does at least avoid the possibility of biased pre-specified criteria for making decisions. The
estimates caused by the researcher exploiting decision tree method is currently implicitly
analytic flexibility to produce statistically significant endorsed in the widely used template for
findings. In this sense it may arguably be superior to preregistrations in social psychology (van ’t Veer &
a strategy of using exploratory strategies to Giner-Sorolla, 2016), which asks researchers to
diagnose distributional problems, running multiple specify “Assumptions of analyses, and plans for
analyses, and potentially allowing decisions about alternative/corrected analyses if each assumption
which analyses to report to be affected by whether is violated.” However, we suggest that this strategy
or not they produce significant results. does have several problems.
This said, selective reporting or p-hacking is Problem 1: Uncertainty involved in diagnosing
obviously not the only cause of biased estimates or distributional problems. The first problem is that
untrustworthy findings. Some distributional determining whether a particular distributional
assumption violations can cause very serious assumption violation is present—and of a magnitude
inferential problems (consider, for example, the bias likely to harm inferences—can be difficult, and the
in estimates that can result when predictors in conclusion of such an investigation may come with
regression models are measured with error; Westfall great uncertainty attached. Consider, for example, a
& Yarkoni, 2016). As such, simply ignoring researcher conducting a simple experiment with a
distributional assumptions in preregistered continuous response variable and two conditions
research is obviously not a complete solution. (treatment and control). Here, the primary research
Alternatively, there are a variety of more question might be simple: Is the mean of the
response variable higher for treated participants

===== PAGE 5/15 =====
DEALING WITH DISTRIBUTIONAL ASSUMPTIONS IN PREREGISTERED RESEARCH 5
than control participants? The most obvious violations is explicitly recommended by the APA’s
analysis strategy would also be simple: An statistical task force (Wilkinson & Task Force on
independent-samples Student’s t test. Yet the Statistical Inference, 1999). In the context of
questions to be investigated in an examination of the preregistration, however, which is largely intended
distributional assumptions pertaining to this test to remove flexibility in how data analysis is
would be much more complex. conducted, relying on the researcher to subjectively
For example, investigating the assumption of interpret a plot and then make a decision is
independent error terms means answering this problematic.
question: Over repeated sampling, would each of the Firmer statistical rules for diagnosing particular
N error distributions in this design be statistically problems exist, of course. For example, one can
independent of one another, and, if not, is the form statistically test a null hypothesis that a particular
and magnitude of this non-independence sufficient distributional assumption is valid. A Shapiro-Wilk
to cause substantive changes to the error rates of test, for instance, can be used to test a null
the t test in the main analysis? It should be obvious hypothesis that the error terms for a particular
that this distributional question is more complex model are normally distributed. There is a paradox
than the primary research question regarding the here, though, in the sense that statistical tests will
differences between two means. It is complex both generally have low power to detect distributional
because it refers to the relationships between a problems when the sample size is small, even though
large matrix of error terms (rather than just two this is precisely the scenario in which distributional
means), about which we must make inferences assumptions matter most. On the other hand, if the
based on a single sample of residuals, and also sample size is large, statistical tests of assumptions
because it is double-barrelled—the question is not may be powerful, even though the large sample size
just whether the error terms are statistically means that the primary analysis may be robust to
dependent, but whether this dependence in turn is the detected assumption violation3. Of course, this
likely to harmfully affect the resulting inferences in is a general problem with statistical tests of
the main analysis. The net result would be that any assumptions, rather than one that solely applies in
investigation of the validity of this assumption is the context of preregistration or the decision tree
likely to come with substantial uncertainty attached, strategy.
and as such relying on such an investigation to Problem 3: Complexity of decision trees
determine the final choice of primary analysis may required. The third problem is the fact that, even if
be problematic. it were possible to accurately and objectively
Problem 2: Difficulty of formulating hard-and- diagnose distributional problems, there is a large
fast rules. Relatedly, it is often difficult to formulate number of distributional problems that may arise for
hard-and-fast rules for diagnosing particular any given analysis, and thus an exploding quantity of
distributional assumption breaches. Many potential remedies. For example, a simple linear
conventional distributional assumption diagnostics regression model can be afflicted by a wide variety
require the researcher to subjectively interpret a of distributional problems, including measurement
plot (e.g., a q-q plot for diagnosing non-normality, error of any sort in the predictor variable,
an autocorrelation function plot for diagnosing measurement error in the response variable that is
correlated error terms, a scatterplot of predicted correlated with the predictor, non-linearity of the
values vs. residuals for diagnosing relationship between the predictor and the
heteroscedasticity or non-linearity, etc.). Using response variable, dependent error terms,
such graphical methods to detect assumption heteroscedasticity of errors, or non-normality of
3 This admittedly depends on the nature of the assumption violation. For example, a linear regression model esti-
mated using ordinary least squares will be more and more robust to a violation of the assumption of normally dis-
tributed error terms as the sample size increases, due to the central limit theorem (provided that the other assump-
tions of the model hold). On the other hand, if measurement error is present in the predictor variables, increasing
the sample size would not necessarily reduce the biasing effect of this measurement error on the estimates of the
regression parameters.

===== PAGE 6/15 =====
6
WILLIAMS & ALBERS
errors. Often these problems occur in combination misspecifications to incorporate in the simulated
with one another. Each problem has an array of data. The researcher is thus faced with the prospect
potential remedies: For example, heteroscedasticity of trying to predict the types of distributional
might be dealt with by using Huber-White problems that are likely to occur and to then
“sandwich” errors, by variance-stabilising simulate data that embodies these problems, which
transformations, or by bootstrapping (see Liu, 1988). will inevitably require some complex (and relatively
Further checks may be necessary to check whether arbitrary) decision-making.
particular remedies “worked”, those checks Strategy 1: Conclusion. In summary, while the
potentially implying the need for yet more decisions decision tree approach to dealing with distributional
(did the variance stabilising transformation produce assumption breaches in preregistrations may be
homoscedasticity? If not, what potential remedy appropriate when wielded by expert researchers in
should be tried next?) Furthermore, the order in some circumstances, we suggest that it has several
which the assumptions are checked—although important problems that mean that it is not suitable
arbitrary—can have an effect on the final model that as a default strategy in preregistrations.
is applied to the data. Setting out a decision tree that
will select an appropriate analysis strategy for each Strategy 2: Selecting a Robust Primary Analysis
of the various combinations of problems that may Strategy
occur for a given analysis would thus be an Given the need to make analysis decisions prior
extremely difficult task, and the prospect of doing so to any opportunity to check for distributional
might discourage researchers considering using assumption problems, it may be useful to select
preregistration. primary analysis strategies that are as conservative
Problem 4: Effects on nominal error rates. A as possible with respect to those assumptions. As
final problem with the “decision tree” approach to stated earlier, virtually any inferential analysis will
diagnosing and responding to distributional require distributional assumptions of some sort, but
assumption problems in preregistrations is the fact some analyses require stronger assumptions than
that, whatever the primary analysis technique ends others. Some examples of analysis choices that may
up being, its nominal Type I and Type II error rates reduce the reliance on at least some distributional
(e.g., the pre-set alpha and 1-power) will typically be assumptions in commonly used statistical analyses
based on an assumption that the analysis technique include:
was fixed in advance. Unless they perform
● Using bootstrapping or permutation tests rather
simulation studies, researchers will not typically
than normal theory to calculate confidence
know what the applicable error rates are in the
intervals and p values (thus obviating the need
scenario of analysis decisions being made
for normally distributed errors in linear models)
contingent on particular features of the data. As
noted previously, these error rates may vary ● Using Huber-White “sandwich” standard errors
considerably from the nominal error rates of the rather than assuming homoscedasticity in
individual techniques considered in isolation (e.g., regression-like models (White, 1980)
Zimmerman, 2004).
● Using so-called robust methods that are
Specifying simulations to estimate error rates
designed to rely less on distributional
and power for the decision tree approach could
assumptions (Wilcox, 2012).
often present significant challenges. Such an
analysis would require a simulation in which Beyond these familiar examples, the possibility of
multiple samples are simulated from a population in using Bayesian models estimated using Markov
which there is a particular hypothesised effect size, Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) means that researchers
the analysis method for each sample is decided can quite readily estimate models where specific
according to the preregistered decision rule, and assumptions are loosened in specific ways. For
the data analysis then conducted. This alone may be example, a Bayesian regression model can be
challenging for many researchers to program, but an estimated in which the distribution of the error
even more difficult challenge would be deciding terms is modelled not with a normal distribution,
what distributional characteristics or but rather, for example, a skew-normal distribution

===== PAGE 7/15 =====
DEALING WITH DISTRIBUTIONAL ASSUMPTIONS IN PREREGISTERED RESEARCH 7
in which a skewness parameter is freely estimated of not having distorted Type I error rates if the
(and in which a the normal distribution is a special assumptions are violated comes at the cost of
case; see Azzalini, 1985). Similarly, one can specify a structurally lower power, thus a higher Type II error
Bayesian regression model in which the variance of rate, if the assumptions actually hold true.
the errors is not necessarily constant across all the Admittedly, the extent of this problem differs
values of the predictor variables, but instead some depending on the planned test. For instance, the
function of the values of the predictor variables Welch t test, for unequal variances, barely has lower
(with constant variance again being a special case). power than the standard Student t test (Delacre,
Bayesian models are by no means assumption-free, Lakens, & Leys, 2017).
but do give the researcher the capacity to Power analysis may again be challenging when
thoughtfully loosen specific distributional applying the robust primary analysis strategy,
assumptions, and thus may be an attractive option mainly in that there may be ambiguity in terms of
in the context of preregistered research. Excellent the distributional characteristics that should be
introductions to Bayesian data analysis can be found assumed when simulating data for the purposes of
in Kruschke and Liddell (2018) and Etz and power analysis. For example, if a Welch’s t test is
Vandekerckhove (2018). The programming language planned, should we nevertheless simulate data from
Stan (Carpenter et al., 2017) provides a framework two populations with equal variances? If not, how
for implementing Bayesian analyses that apply different should the variances be? This said, the
flexible sets of assumptions. complication of programming a simulation in which
In attempting to select a robust primary analysis the analysis method applied to each sample differs
method, researchers should carefully consider what depending on its characteristics (as for Strategy 1) is
distributional issues or problems are most likely to avoided, making power analysis slightly easier for
arise in the context of their specific study. A Strategy 2 (robust primary analysis strategy) than is
researcher conducting a study will often have some the case for Strategy 1 (decision tree).
familiarity with the measurement instruments being
used (whether these are survey scales, Strategy 3: Robustness Analysis
electromyography devices, counts of particular
The third strategy we consider here is that of
incidents, or reaction times), and the typical
deliberately preregistering multiple analyses that
characteristics of the data produced by these
answer the same research questions (while making
instruments. Researchers may thus be able to draw
different distributional assumptions). We will term
on their own contextual knowledge to anticipate the
this strategy that of performing robustness analyses.
distributional issues that might arise, and pick a
Two related terms are sensitivity analysis (which
statistical analysis method that is robust to the most
investigates how uncertainty pertaining to the
plausible problems.
inputs into scientific models relate to uncertainty in
The approach of selecting a primary analysis
the outputs; see Saltelli, Tarantola, Campolongo, &
method that makes distributional assumptions that
Ratto, 2004), and multiverse analysis (which focuses
are as weak as possible can definitely be useful in
on how different decisions made during data
preregistrations. Doing so avoids the need to make
processing can lead to different datasets and
analytic decisions contingent on data. In
different conclusions; see Steegen, Tuerlinckx,
comparison to the other strategies discussed in this
Gelman, & Vanpaemel, 2016). We prefer the term of
section, this strategy also minimises the need for
robustness analysis over robustness checks because
conducting multiple data analyses, thus
we see the purpose of this strategy as to investigate
streamlining the analysis process and resulting in a
how the results vary across numerous plausible
more concise write-up. This said, this strategy can
choices of analysis, rather than just to check that
also be applied in combination with the two
some favoured conclusions holds up under an
strategies we will consider below.
alternative specification.
However, this strategy is not without its
As an example of the robustness analysis
problems either. If all the assumptions of the linear
approach, imagine a researcher seeking to test the
model are met, then the standard parametric
hypothesis that one continuous variable has a
methods are uniformly most powerful. The benefit

===== PAGE 8/15 =====
8
WILLIAMS & ALBERS
positive relationship with another continuous we will conclude that the data supports the
variable (with both variables comprising series of hypothesis”). However, such decision rules are
observations gathered over time). Here the necessarily arbitrary, and designing a sensible
researcher might preregister a simple ordinary least interpretation structure may be more difficult for a
squares regression as a primary analysis, with a larger number of analyses (e.g., what if the
model that also includes an autoregressive coefficient is statistically significant in six out of
correlated error structure as a robustness analysis. seven planned robustness analyses?) There is also
This robustness analysis would help to deal with the no strong reason to assume that a combined
potential problem of a breach of the assumption of hypothesis test based on multiple statistical
independent error terms, which is a problem that methods would have more desirable long-run
often arises when analysing time series data. properties than any one of the single analyses that
Robustness analyses are useful especially when are included within the combined test. As such, it
there is genuine ambiguity over which analysis may be more appropriate to preregister multiple
technique is the most appropriate choice to address robustness analyses, preregister criteria for the
a given research question. interpretation of each, and to subsequently attempt
When employing this strategy, one might to sensibly integrate the findings produced across
designate one particular analysis as the primary these analyses—but not to specify an overarching
analysis, and a set of other analyses as the decision rule based on the combined results of
robustness analyses. One could also regard all the multiple analyses. This means that the synthesis of
planned analyses as having equal priority (and all findings (e.g., in a discussion section) may be more
being “robustness analyses”). Regardless, the key to complex when applying robustness analyses than
an effective preregistered robustness analysis is when using any of the other strategies, with more
identifying different analysis methods that test the ambiguity about whether a particular set of findings
same (preregistered) hypotheses, but while making supports or does not support a particular
different (but plausible) distributional assumptions. hypothesis. It may nevertheless allow the researcher
As some examples: to clearly communicate the degree to which a
particular finding “holds up” across multiple
• If planning a correlational analysis, one could
reasonable analysis options.
specify both an analysis that assumes that the
Power in robustness analyses. Conducting a
variables have a linear relationship (Pearson’s
power analysis when planning to apply Strategy 3
correlation) as well as an analysis that assumes
could be either straightforward or very complex. If a
only a monotonic relationship (Spearman’s rho).
relatively simple analysis method with strong
• If planning a linear regression, one could specify assumptions is selected as the primary analysis
an analysis that assumes homoscedasticity (OLS strategy (in conjunction with some additional
estimation), as well as an analysis that produces robustness analyses with different assumptions), it
consistent estimates even in the presence of could be justifiable to perform the power analysis
heteroscedasticity (Huber-White sandwich solely for the primary analysis strategy. This means
standard errors). that it could be possible to perform the power
analysis using point-and-click software such as
• If planning a linear regression, one could specify
G*Power (Faul, Erdfelder, Buchner, & Lang, 2009).
both an analysis using standard OLS estimation
Such an analysis would nevertheless need to come
as well as a model including an autoregressive
with an acknowledgement that the power of the
AR(1) term, to allow for possible serial
additional analyses is almost inevitably likely to be
dependence in the data.
lesser (depending in part on the actual degree to
Synthesising the results from robustness which any assumptions are breached), and that the
analyses. It is possible to preregister a specific reported power analysis should be interpreted as
decision rule for interpreting the results of multiple representing a best-case scenario. When taking this
analyses (e.g., “If the relationship is positive and approach, it would probably be helpful to increase
statistically significant in both the Pearson’s the planned sample size somewhat beyond what the
correlation analysis and the Spearman’s rho analysis, power analysis suggests is required.

===== PAGE 9/15 =====
DEALING WITH DISTRIBUTIONAL ASSUMPTIONS IN PREREGISTERED RESEARCH 9
On the other hand, a more comprehensive power which power analysis is available in easy-to-use
analysis would check power for all of the planned software such as G*Power. Furthermore, the fact
robustness analyses, and do so based on data that is that the distributional assumption checks would not
simulated so as to display plausible assumption need to be used to make binary decisions (unlike the
violations. Such a power analysis could be case in strategy 1) means that graphical methods
challenging to conduct. could be used to convey information about the
Robustness analysis and meta-analyses. A magnitude of any assumption breaches.
problem with the robustness analysis approach is The primary downside of this strategy would be
the ambiguity in terms of how the findings of a study the resulting ambiguity with respect to how the
that conducted a robustness analysis should be findings of the assumption checks should impact the
coded if included a later meta-analysis, given that interpretation of the results of the primary analysis.
each statistical method included in the robustness We would essentially suggest that the preregistered
analysis may have produced a different estimated primary analysis should be conducted, reported and
effect size. A researcher conducting a meta-analysis interpreted as planned in the preregistration
and aiming to code the effect sizes reported in an effectively regardless of the outcomes of the
individual study conducted using robustness check distributional assumption checks, but that the
may thus face uncertainty about whether to include researcher should identify any apparent
just one effect size estimate (and if so, which one), distributional problems as a reason to interpret the
or whether to aggregate the findings of the various results with some extra caution. There is a risk here,
analyses in some way. While this may be an however, that a researcher might describe and
ambiguity that can satisfactorily be resolved within emphasise evidence for a particular distributional
the preregistration for a given meta-analysis (see problem differently depending on whether the
Quintana, 2015), the use of a robustness analysis results of the primary analysis are “positive” or not
within an individual study probably presents greater (e.g., ignoring a distributional problem if the main
complications for meta-analysis than do the other findings are positive, vs. emphasising the
strategies discussed in this article. distributional problem as a possible explanation of
the results if the data would otherwise appear to
Strategy 4: Exploratory Assumption Checks falsify a favoured theory). As such, this strategy has
The final strategy we consider here is its dangers, but may be useful in some contexts—
preregistering a primary (confirmatory) analysis particularly student research, where preregistering
method that will be followed regardless of the a relatively simple analysis plan and using a relatively
characteristics of the data, without necessarily simple power analysis, while allowing some capacity
making this primary analysis method a robust one, for distributional assumption checks, may be
but including in the ensuing data analyses some desirable.
exploratory investigations of distributional
assumptions (or “assumption checks”). A plan for
Example
these investigations could be specified to at least
some degree in the preregistration (perhaps making In this section, we will give a practical example of
them more confirmatory in nature), but this is not the four strategies suggested in this paper. In a
absolutely necessary—provided that the analyses paper published in Psychological Science,
are explicitly tagged as exploratory in the final Schroeder and Epley (2015) reported multiple
report. related organizational psychological studies. These
This strategy has the advantage of allowing for studies investigated the effect of voice on
the communication of information about (hypothetical) job applications. In this paper, we look
distributional assumptions without increasing the only at their Experiment 4, and use the description
complexity of the preregistration too greatly. It also of this experiment by McIntyre (2016).
makes power analysis straightforward, since there In this experiment, 39 professional recruiters
would be just one primary analysis method to plan were assigned to one of two conditions. The
(for each research question), and the analysis recruiters either listened to a spoken job application
method might well be a commonly-used one for

===== PAGE 10/15 =====
10
WILLIAMS & ALBERS
or read a written transcript of the application. The “We will recruit 39 professional recruiters. Each
recruiters rated the participants on intelligence, recruiter is assigned at random to the “written” or
competence, and thoughtfulness, resulting in an “spoken” condition. [+some detailed description of the
average rating denoted as intellect. Some covariates materials.] After reading/hearing the job pitch, the
were measured as well, but we will ignore these for recruiter scores the candidate on three categories.
the sake of simplicity. The main research question The average score will be designated the intellect
was whether ratings differed between spoken and rating.”
written job pitches. Even for such a seemingly
simple design, there are many researcher degrees of We should note in passing that the sample size in
freedom. For instance, the choice to define this example is quite small, meaning that this study
“intellect” as the arithmetic mean of competence, only has adequate power to detect fairly large
thoughtfulness and intelligence implies that these effects. For example, if the primary analysis was to
three variables are equally important ingredients of be an independent-samples Student’s t test (with a
intellect. 2-sided test), and if the assumptions of the Student’s
t test were satisfied, then this study would have just
. 33% power to detect a “medium” effect size of d =
Table 1. Data for Experiment 4 of Schroeder & Epley 0.5. The power to detect an effect of this magnitude
(2015) would be lower again for the other analysis methods
Written 1.67 2.00 2.67 2.67 specified below, even if the t test assumptions were
job pitch met, and potentially even lower again in the
3.00 3.33 4.33 4.33
presence of violations of the assumptions of these
4.67 4.67 4.67 4.67 methods (depending on the nature of those
assumption violations). In short, the data are useful
5.67 5.67 6.67 7.33
for the purposes of illustration, but the sample size
is not one that we would typically recommend.
7.67 8.00
Please note that this is no criticism towards
Spoken 3.33 4.33 4.67 5.67 Schroeder and Epley (2015), as they base their
job pitch conclusions on four separate experiments, three of
5.67 6.00 6.00 6.00
which have a sample size much larger than 39.
For the sake of brevity, we have not included
6.33 6.67 6.67 6.67
individual power analyses for each of the four
7.00 7.00 7.00 7.00 separate strategies we illustrate.
7.00 7.67 8.67 10.00
Strategy 1, the Decision Tree
10.00 To compare the intellect ratings of both groups,
we could apply a Student’s t test. However, this test
assumes (i) normality of the dependent variable
As these issues are besides the focus of our
within each of the two populations, (ii) equal
paper, we will not discuss them further, and instead
variances between populations. We will therefore
take the 39 intellect ratings as given and work from
apply the following decision tree:
there. The scores are given in Table 1, and are also
available (along with analysis code) in the OSF
1. First, we apply the Shapiro Wilk for normality
project for this paper https://osf.io/h2xry/ .
test on the deviations from the group average
Below, we indicate how the test for comparing both
and denote the resulting p-value by p .
experimental groups could be preregistered, SW
according to the four strategies. The beginning of a. If p < 0.05 we deem the normality
SW
the preregistration, describing the data collection assumption breached and we will apply
itself, will be the same for each of the strategies: the non-parametric Mann-
Whitney/Wilcoxon test.

===== PAGE 11/15 =====
DEALING WITH DISTRIBUTIONAL ASSUMPTIONS IN PREREGISTERED RESEARCH 11
b. If p > 0.05, there is no evidence to reject samples and a seed set to 1. This last test mimics that
SW
the assumption of normality and we used in Strategy 2 above.
proceed with:
Strategy 4, Exploratory Assumption Checks
2. Second, we apply the F test for equality of
To compare the intellect rating of both groups,
variances and denote the resulting p-value by p .
F
we perform Student’s t test. We also provide
a. If p < 0.05 we deem this assumption
F
exploratory checks of the validity of the
violated and we will apply the Welch t test.
distributional assumptions underlying this test.
b. If p > 0.05, we will apply Student’s t test.
F
Example: Results for Each Strategy
For the chosen test, we will report the p value of
In this case we obviously already have the data,
the two-sided comparison.
so we can see how the four preregistrations work
Note that this decision tree is just one way to
out:
check the assumptions. We chose the Shapiro-Wilks
Strategy 1, decision tree. The Shapiro-Wilk test
procedure after the recommendation by Razali and
Wah (2011), but could have employed other was non-significant (p = .124), and so was the two-
normality tests instead. A similar argument holds for sided F test for equality of variances (p = .458). We
the F test for equality of variances. Furthermore, the therefore conducted Student’s t test, and this test
order of testing both assumptions matters, but is found a significant difference between both groups,
arbitrary. t(37) = -3.525, p = .001.
Strategy 2, robust primary analysis strategy.
Strategy 2, Robust Primary Analysis Strategy The bootstrap version of the Yuen test provided a p
value of .002 and a 95% confidence interval for the
To compare the intellect ratings of both groups,
trimmed mean difference [-3.323, -0.698].
we will use a bootstrapped version of Yuen’s (1974)
Strategy 3, robustness analysis. All five tests
two-sample trimmed t test. This test is an
yielded a significant difference (at α = 0.05) in favour
alternative to the independent samples Student’s t
of the audio group, with the following test results.
test designed for situations where there are both
Student’s t: t(37) = -3.525, p = .001; Welch’s t: t(33.441)
unequal variances across groups and non-normality
= -3.478, p = .001; Wilcoxon test: W = 84.5, p = .003;
within groups. The test is particularly useful with
Yuen’s test: trimmed mean difference -2.010, p =
very long-tailed error distributions. To apply this
.004, bootstrapped Yuen’s test: trimmed mean
test, we use the function yuenbt from the WRS2
difference -2.010, p = .002. Thus, we conclude that
package (Mair & Wilcox, 2018) in the statistical
applicants with a spoken job pitch receive higher
software R (R Core Team, 2018). We trim 20% of the
ratings than those with a written job pitch.
data, thus removing the 10% smallest and 10%
Strategy 4, exploratory assumption checks.
largest observations. This way, the influential effect
Student’s t test indicated that the audio-group
of outliers is diminished. We employ 1,000 bootstrap
performed significantly better than the written-
samples, which is sufficient for accurate results
group, t(37) = -3.525, p = .001. The Shapiro-Wilk test
(Mair & Wilcox, 2018). Before bootstrapping we set
for normality provided no significant evidence for
the random number generator to seed 1. We will
non-normality (W = 0.966, p = .124) and the F test for
report the p value of this test as well as the 95%
equality of variances did not provide significant
confidence interval for the trimmed mean.
evidence for violation of this assumption, F(17, 20) =
Strategy 3, Robustness Analysis 1.411, p = .458.
To compare the intellect rating of both groups,
Example: Summary
we will perform the following tests, each based on a
It will be clear that all four strategies have their
different set of assumptions: (i) Student’s t test, (ii)
own benefits and drawbacks. A clear benefit of
Welch t test, (iii) the Mann-Whitney/Wilcoxon test,
Strategy 2, for instance, is that the results can be
(iv) Yuen’s test for the 20% trimmed means, (v) the
reported in a very condensed form. A drawback,
bootstrap version of test (iv) with 1,000 bootstrap
however, is that fewer people are familiar with the

===== PAGE 12/15 =====
12
WILLIAMS & ALBERS
Yuen test compared to more conventional tests. In Tactic 1: Clearly and Accurately Describe
this example, we deliberately kept the methodology Distributional Assumptions
as simple as possible with a single test for a two-
The first of these tactics is to transparently and
group comparison. The complexity of some
accurately describe the distributional assumptions
strategies will grow beyond feasible limits when the
of the statistical analyses employed, and then
research questions are more complex.
acknowledge in the limitations section of the
discussion that any uncertainty with respect to the
Summary: Strategies for Distributional validity of these assumptions adds to the
Assumption Checks uncertainty surrounding the substantive
conclusions. A description of the assumptions of
In the subsections above, we have outlined four various statistical analyses is beyond the scope of
strategies for dealing with distributional this article, but some useful sources include Gelman
assumptions in preregistered research. Obviously, and Hill (2007), Williams et al. (2013), and Casella and
however, we have not considered all possible Berger (2002). We note in passing that is not
approaches that researchers could take to dealing uncommon for distributional assumptions to be
with distributional issues in a preregistration. Of the described incorrectly in resources aimed at
four strategies we have discussed, strategy 1 (a psychologists; it can often be useful to look to more
decision tree) seems the least desirable on several rigorous sources written for statisticians.
counts, although it may be useful in some research
contexts—particularly when applied by researchers Tactic 2: Open Data
with particularly strong statistical expertise. The second tactic which we suggest applying in
Strategy 3 (preregistering robustness analyses) is virtually any study—subject to any restrictions
probably the most comprehensive and sophisticated necessary to safeguard the privacy of the
way of dealing with the uncertainty arising from participants, or necessary for legal reasons—is to
distributional assumptions. It is nevertheless a make a de-identified copy of the raw data openly
relatively challenging strategy to adequately specify accessible for readers and reviewers (see Houtkoop
in a preregistration (and to perform a power analysis et al., 2018; Munafò et al., 2017; Nosek et al., 2015).
for), and the strategy that would result in the most Although the authors of any given piece of research
verbose write-up of the results. On the other hand, will always have the primary responsibility for
strategy 4 would be the easiest to specify in a conducting and reporting data analyses that address
preregistration, and may be useful for student uncertainty arising due to distributional
research, or for researchers new to preregistration. assumptions, sharing open data nevertheless helps
Finally, Strategy 2 represents something of a to ensure that others who might wish to apply a
compromise between difficulty level and level of different approach to checking distributional
sophistication, would produce a very concise write- assumptions—or a different approach to the primary
up of results, and could also be applied in analyses—are able to check the robustness of the
conjunction with any of the three other strategies. findings to such alternative approaches. Along with
the raw data it is useful to post the programming
code or syntax necessary to process the data and
Additional Tactics for Dealing with Distributional
apply the analyses reported in a given article. The
Assumptions
Open Science Framework (https://osf.io) is a
The four strategies listed above are, to at least particularly useful venue for posting data and
some degree, competing strategies. On the other analysis syntax, but other options are available—
hand, there are two additional tactics that may be including posting supplementary materials along
useful in virtually any preregistered research with the article on a journal’s website.
project, and that can be employed in conjunction When preregistering a study that will use an open
with whichever of the four strategies above is data policy, it is important to consider how this will
selected. be signalled to participants and in any institutional
review board/ethics committee application (see

===== PAGE 13/15 =====
DEALING WITH DISTRIBUTIONAL ASSUMPTIONS IN PREREGISTERED RESEARCH 13
Meyer, 2018). In some parts of the world, depending on the presence of particular assumption
institutional review boards may expect that data will breaches has several problems, preregistering
be kept entirely confidential to the research team, analyses that make weaker distributional
and boilerplate information sheet and consent assumptions, or preregistering robustness analyses,
materials may encode this expectation. It is thus may be more useful approaches. Alternatively,
crucial to plan an open data policy from the students and other researchers new to
beginning of a project, rather than leaving any preregistration may find it useful to preregister a
decisions about data sharing to after data has been simple primary analysis strategy—and stick with
collected (at which point the researchers may find that regardless of the characteristics of the data—
themselves inadvertently locked in to a restrictive but also conduct and report an exploratory post hoc
data sharing policy). analysis of the validity of the distributional
assumptions made. We recommend that
researchers use the guidance above to select the
Templates for Preregistrations
strategy—or combination of strategies—that is most
appropriate for their given context. Finally, we
In order to assist researchers prepare
suggest that transparently and accurately
preregistrations that pre-emptively deal with the
communicating the assumptions of the analyses
prospect of distributional assumption violations, we
employed, and making raw data openly available,
suggest that preregistration templates include
can be useful tactics for ensuring that readers and
prompts leading researchers to consider employ
reviewers have sufficient information available to
some of the strategies described above. The specific
reach an informed judgment about the impact of any
prompts we would suggest would be:
distributional problems on the validity of a study’s
conclusions.
What are the distributional assumptions of the
statistical analyses you will be applying?
How have you accounted for the possibility of
References
violations of these distributional assumptions?
(Some options include selecting analysis
methods that make assumptions that are as Albers, W., Boon, P. C., & Kallenberg, W. C. M.
conservative as possible; preregistering (2000). Size and power of pretest
robustness analyses which test the robustness of procedures. The Annals of Statistics, 28(1),
your findings to analysis strategies that make 195–214.
different assumptions; and/or pre-specifying a https://doi.org/10.1214/aos/1016120369
single primary analysis strategy, but noting that Azzalini, A. (1985). A class of distributions which
you will also report an exploratory investigation includes the normal ones. Scandinavian
of the validity of distributional assumptions). Journal of Statistics, 12(2), 171–178.
Bancroft, T. A. (1964). Analysis and inference for
incompletely specified models involving the
Conclusion
use of preliminary test(s) of significance.
Preregistration is a valuable strategy in Biometrics, 20(3), 427–442.
confirmatory research projects, but it does come https://doi.org/10.2307/2528486
with challenges. One of those challenges is the need Carpenter, B., Gelman, A., Hoffman, M. D., Lee, D.,
to make decisions about how distributional Goodrich, B., Betancourt, M., … Riddell, A.
assumption violations will be dealt with before (2017). Stan: A probabilistic programming
examining the data itself. In this article, we have language. Journal of Statistical Software,
examined several strategies that researchers could 76(1). https://doi.org/10.18637/jss.v076.i01
adopt for addressing distributional assumptions in Casella, G., & Berger, R. L. (2002). Statistical
preregistered research. While preregistering inference (2nd ed.). Pacific Grove, CA:
“decision trees” for changing the primary analysis Duxbury.

===== PAGE 14/15 =====
14
WILLIAMS & ALBERS
Delacre, M., Lakens, D., & Leys, C. (2017). Why Bulletin & Review, 25(1), 155–177.
psychologists should by default use Welch’s https://doi.org/10.3758/s13423-017-1272-1
t-test instead of Student’s t-test. Liu, R. Y. (1988). Bootstrap procedures under some
International Review of Social Psychology, non-iid models. The Annals of Statistics,
30(1), 92–101. 16(4), 1696–1708.
https://doi.org/10.5334/irsp.82 https://doi.org/10.1214/aos/1176351062
Ernst, A. F., & Albers, C. J. (2017). Regression Lumley, T., Diehr, P., Emerson, S., & Chen, L. (2002).
assumptions in clinical psychology research The importance of the normality
practice—a systematic review of common assumption in large public health data sets.
misconceptions. PeerJ, 5. Annual Review of Public Health, 23, 151–169.
https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj.3323 https://doi.org/annurev.publhealth.23.100
Etz, A., & Vandekerckhove, J. (2018). Introduction to 901.140546
Bayesian inference for psychology. Mair, P., & Wilcox, R. (2018). WRS2: A collection of
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 25(1), 5–34. robust statistical methods (Version 0.10-0).
https://doi.org/10.3758/s13423-017-1262- Retrieved from https://CRAN.R-
3 project.org/package=WRS2
Fagerland, M. W., & Sandvik, L. (2009). The McIntyre, K. P. (2016). Do spoken or written words
Wilcoxon–Mann–Whitney test under better express intelligence? Retrieved
scrutiny. Statistics in Medicine, 28(10), 1487– August 3, 2018, from Open Stats Lab
1497. https://doi.org/10.1002/sim.3561 website:
Faul, F., Erdfelder, E., Buchner, A., & Lang, A.-G. https://sites.trinity.edu/osl/data-sets-
(2009). Statistical power analyses using and-activities/t-test-activities
G*Power 3.1: Tests for correlation and Meuleman, B., Loosveldt, G., & Emonds, V. (2015).
regression analyses. Behavior Research Regression analysis: Assumptions and
Methods, 41(4), 1149–1160. diagnostics. In H. Best & C. Wolf (Eds.),
https://doi.org/10.3758/BRM.41.4.1149 Regression analysis and causal inference (pp.
Ferguson, C. J., & Heene, M. (2012). A vast graveyard 83–110). London, United Kingdom: Sage.
of undead theories: Publication bias and Meyer, M. N. (2018). Practical tips for ethical data
psychological science’s aversion to the null. sharing. Advances in Methods and Practices
Perspectives on Psychological Science, 7(6), in Psychological Science, 1(1), 131–144.
555–561. https://doi.org/10.1177/2515245917747656
https://doi.org/10.1177/1745691612459059 Munafò, M. R., Nosek, B. A., Bishop, D. V. M., Button,
Gelman, A., & Hill, J. (2007). Data analysis using K. S., Chambers, C. D., Sert, N. P. du, …
regression and multilevel/hierarchical Ioannidis, J. P. A. (2017). A manifesto for
models. Cambridge, United Kingdom: reproducible science. Nature Human
Cambridge University Press. Behaviour, 1.
Gelman, A., & Loken, E. (2014). The statistical crisis https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-016-0021
in science. American Scientist, 102(6), 460– Nosek, B. A., Alter, G., Banks, G. C., Borsboom, D.,
465. https://doi.org/10.1511/2014.111.460 Bowman, S. D., Breckler, S. J., … Yarkoni, T.
Houtkoop, B. L., Chambers, C., Macleod, M., Bishop, (2015). Promoting an open research culture.
D. V. M., Nichols, T. E., & Wagenmakers, E.- Science, 348(6242), 1422–1425.
J. (2018). Data sharing in psychology: A https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aab2374
survey on barriers and preconditions. Quintana, D. S. (2015). From pre-registration to
Advances in Methods and Practices in publication: A non-technical primer for
Psychological Science, 1(1), 70–85. conducting a meta-analysis to synthesize
https://doi.org/10.1177/2515245917751886 correlational data. Frontiers in Psychology,
Kruschke, J. K., & Liddell, T. M. (2018). Bayesian data 6.
analysis for newcomers. Psychonomic https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2015.01549

===== PAGE 15/15 =====
DEALING WITH DISTRIBUTIONAL ASSUMPTIONS IN PREREGISTERED RESEARCH 15
R Core Team. (2018). R: A language and environment https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.01527
for statistical computing. Retrieved from 19
http://www.R-project.org/ White, H. (1980). A heteroskedasticity-consistent
Razali, N. M., & Wah, Y. B. (2011). Power covariance matrix estimator and a direct
comparisons of Shapiro-Wilk, Kolmogorov- test for heteroskedasticity. Econometrica:
Smirnov, Lilliefors and Anderson-Darling Journal of the Econometric Society, 48(4),
tests. Journal of Statistical Modeling and 817–838. https://doi.org/10.2307/1912934
Analytics, 2(1), 21–33. Wilcox, R. (2012). Introduction to robust estimation
Saltelli, A., Tarantola, S., Campolongo, F., & Ratto, and hypothesis testing (3rd ed.). Waltham,
M. (2004). Sensitivity analysis in practice: A MA: Academic Press.
guide to assessing scientific models. Wilkinson, L., & Task Force on Statistical Inference.
Chichester, United Kingdom: Wiley. (1999). Statistical methods in psychology
Schroeder, J., & Epley, N. (2015). The sound of journals: Guidelines and explanations.
intellect: speech reveals a thoughtful mind, American Psychologist, 54(8), 594–604.
increasing a job candidate’s appeal. https://doi.org/10.1037/0003-
Psychological Science, 26(6), 877–891. 066X.54.8.594
https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797615572906 Williams, M. N., Grajales, C. A. G., & Kurkiewicz, D.
Simmons, J. P., Nelson, L. D., & Simonsohn, U. (2011). (2013). Assumptions of multiple regression:
False-positive psychology: Undisclosed Correcting two misconceptions. Practical
flexibility in data collection and analysis Assessment, Research & Evaluation, 18(11).
allows presenting anything as significant. Retrieved from
Psychological Science, 22(11), 1359–1366. http://www.pareonline.net/getvn.asp?v=1
https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797611417632 8&n=11
Steegen, S., Tuerlinckx, F., Gelman, A., & Yuen, K. K. (1974). The two-sample trimmed t for
Vanpaemel, W. (2016). Increasing unequal population variances. Biometrika,
transparency through a multiverse analysis. 61(1), 165–170.
Perspectives on Psychological Science, 11(5), https://doi.org/10.1093/biomet/61.1.165
702–712. Zimmerman, D. W. (2004). A note on preliminary
https://doi.org/10.1177/1745691616658637 tests of equality of variances. British Journal
van ’t Veer, A. E., & Giner-Sorolla, R. (2016). Pre- of Mathematical and Statistical Psychology,
registration in social psychology—A 57(1), 173–181.
discussion and suggested template. Journal https://doi.org/10.1348/000711004849222
of Experimental Social Psychology, 67, 2–12.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jesp.2016.03.004
Wagenmakers, E.-J., Wetzels, R., Borsboom, D., van
der Maas, H. L. J., & Kievit, R. A. (2012). An
agenda for purely confirmatory research.
Perspectives on Psychological Science, 7(6),
632–638.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1745691612463078
Wells, C. S., & Hintze, J. M. (2007). Dealing with
assumptions underlying statistical tests.
Psychology in the Schools, 44(5), 495–502.
https://doi.org/10.1002/pits.20241
Westfall, J., & Yarkoni, T. (2016). Statistically
controlling for confounding constructs is
harder than you think. PLOS ONE, 11(3),
e0152719.