Articles
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-020-00950-4
An evolutionary explanation for ineffective altruism
Bethany Burum 1 ✉, Martin A. Nowak 2 and Moshe Hoffman 3
We donate billions to charities each year, yet much of our giving is ineffective. Why are we motivated to give but not to give
effectively? Building on evolutionary game theory, we argue that donors evolved (genetically or culturally) to be insensitive to
efficacy because people tend not to reward efficacy, as social rewards tend to depend on well-defined and highly observable
behaviours. We present five experiments testing key predictions of this account that are difficult to reconcile with alternative
accounts based on cognitive or emotional limitations. Namely, we show that donors are more sensitive to efficacy when help-
ing (1) themselves or (2) their families. Moreover, (3) social rewarders don’t condition on efficacy or other difficult-to-observe
behaviours (4, 5), such as the amount donated.
W
hen we spend money on a weekend trip or a new coat, but often little reason to give effectively. Consequently, the resulting
we attend to the value that we are getting for our money; mental apparatuses (mental heuristics, empathy and warm glow)
we weigh alternatives, read reviews, ask our friends for developed to motivate us to give but not to give effectively.
advice and are sensitive to price differentials. In contrast, when we Why do people reward giving but not efficacy? Rewards for
donate time and money to charities, efficiency matters surpris- giving (and punishments for not giving) are well summarized by
ingly little1–3. Americans, for instance, donate about 2% of the gross evolutionary game theory models of cooperation such as models
domestic product4 and volunteer over 7 billion hours a year5 for of indirect reciprocity, norm enforcement and the folk theorem
charities that show little correlation between impact and popular- in repeated games19–23. In all such models, the following criteria
ity6,7, despite immense differences in cost effectivenes8–10. Studies are crucial for maintaining good behaviour: what counts as good
also find that respondents are insensitive to the scope of need, will- must be (1) well defined and (2) easy to observe, and (3) different
ing to pay the same, for instance, to save 2,000 as to save 200,000 people’s assessments must be correlated with each other or easily
birds from an oil spill11. And field studies indicate that we often do communicated—that is, they must create common knowledge21,24,25.
not donate more when our charitable contributions are matched at Only then can the third-party rewarders agree on who did good.
higher rates12,13. All of this raises the fundamental puzzle: why are This shared understanding, in turn, allows the observers to be
we motivated to give but not motivated to give effectively? rewarded themselves for rewarding do-gooders, receiving a kind of
This puzzle is made even more surprising by the way that we higher-order reward.
talk about giving: we speak as if impact is our primary concern. However, giving effectively, compared with merely giving, is lia-
Habitat for Humanity’s website, for instance, broadcasts that “Every ble to fail on all three of these criteria. What counts as sufficiently
donation helps…” The Red Cross’s homepage advertises that “you effective is not easy to define. Even if it were well defined, one might
can make a difference”. Indeed, the US national holiday focused on not know whether a given charity meets that definition. And even if
community service and volunteerism is called Make a Difference one does know whether the charity qualifies, one may not be con-
Day. Why aren’t our actions as focused on impact as our words? fident that others know this. In contrast, everyone knows what it
Behavioural scientists often presume that we do care about means to give, and others are likely to share the same assessment of
impact, but emotional and cognitive limitations get in the way. who gave, or at least this information can be easily conveyed, veri-
Perhaps we are bad at understanding large numbers, and we rely fied, made public and agreed on.
instead on mental simulations of specific instances1,14. Or perhaps We present five studies that test this social-rewards account of
empathy is limited, evoked when we imagine a specific person in inefficient giving and that test alternatives based on cognitive or
need but not when we consider some abstract concept of need15–17. emotional constraints. The first two studies show that people are
Or perhaps we feel warm glow when we do good but not when more capable of attending to efficacy when social rewards are not the pri-
good has been done1,18. mary evolutionary reason for giving. People attend to efficacy when
While the above behavioural explanations have a ring of truth making savings decisions but not charitable-giving decisions, and
to them—mental simulations, empathy and warm glow all have when giving to kin but not to strangers. All of these decisions are
limitations that can account for ineffective giving—these limita- constrained by our cognitive and emotional systems, but giving to
tions themselves beg for a more ultimate evolutionary explana- charities and strangers is shaped more by social rewards than is sav-
tion. In particular, it is not obvious why we do not invest more ing for the future or giving to our kin.
mental resources into calculating absolute magnitudes or use heu- The remaining studies show that people reward giving in
ristics that do, why our empathic responses are not sensitive to ways that our theory requires but that alternative explanations
abstractions and why we do not feel more warm glow when we do not: rewarders are sensitive to whether someone gives but not
expect to have more of an impact. to effectiveness or to other variables that are difficult to observe.
We will argue that the social rewards for giving—a primary rea- We test this by having third parties (neither the recipient of the
son that we evolved to be altruistic19–21—provide a reason to give gift nor the donor) choose how much to reward donors who (a)
1Department of Psychology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA. 2Department of Mathematics, Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology,
Program for Evolutionary Dynamics, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA. 3Media Lab, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA.
✉e-mail: bethanyburum@gmail.com
NAture HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles Nature HuMaN BeHaviour
did or didn’t give, (b) gave gifts that were or weren’t multiplied (CI) = (−0.05, 0.27)). (Note that all P values that derive from cases
by a matching grant, (c) gave a large or small amount, or (d) gave where we had a directional prediction are reported as one-sided P
a fixed amount that corresponded to a large or small fraction of values. P values for cases where we had no directional prediction
their allotted funds. are reported as two-sided, as indicated. We use CIs for precision
estimation rather than testing, and so these are still two-sided.
results The data distributions were assumed to be normal, but this was
Study 1 (N = 304) found that the participants did not respond to not formally tested.) However, those who had the opportunity to
efficacy when donating to charity but did when saving (giving to save saved significantly more when faced with a larger ‘interest
their future selves; Fig. 1). Our participants received a small bonus. rate’ (t(151) = 4.56, P < 0.001, regression β = 0.35, 95% CI = (0.20,
Half decided what fraction to keep for themselves and what fraction 0.50)). The effect of the multiplier was significantly larger for sav-
to give to a charity of their choosing; half decided what fraction to ings than for charitable giving (t(301) = −2.40, P = 0.009, regression
take now and what fraction to save for the future. The money given β = −0.31, 95% CI = (−0.56, −0.06) for the interaction of the multi-
(saved) was multiplied by a factor ranging from 1 to 10. plier and donating versus saving). These results are difficult to rec-
We manipulated the multiplier (here and throughout) between oncile with the view that we are cognitively incapable of calculating
participants; each participant observed only a single multiplier. This impact or handling multipliers, but easy to reconcile with the view
is consistent with other research on scope insensitivity and match- that we make such calculations when motivated to do so but are not
ing grants. We used between-participant manipulations to ensure motivated by efficiency when giving to charities.
that we were not measuring whether participants responded to A possible confound with the above design is that the future self
efficacy when it was made highly salient, may be subject to experi- is more identifiable than the charity, easing our ability to simulate
menter demand effects and may be picking up on the expressive impact. We therefore replicated this study (using only the no match
norm that we ‘should’ be responsive to impact. and 1:1 match conditions, N = 504) but replaced the charity with
Participants who had the opportunity to give to charity were almost a specific family in need, attempting to mitigate this confound.
completely insensitive to the multiplier; the multiplier had no signif- This alteration did not in fact mitigate our results (t(501) = −4.95,
icant effect on donations despite its substantial range (t(149) = 1.32, P < 0.001, regression β = −0.36, 95% CI = (−0.51, −0.22) for the
P = 0.188, two-tailed, regression β = 0.11, 95% confidence interval interaction of the multiplier and donation versus saving), suggesting
)sunob
fo
%(
snoitanoD
)sunob
fo
%(
sgnivaS
a b
Donations Savings
To receive To receive
immediately immediately
Bonus Bonus
1× 2× 3× 1× 2× 3×
To charity To future self
100 100
90 90
80 80
70 70
60 60
50 50
40 40
30 30
20 20
10 10
0 0
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Multiplier Multiplier
Fig. 1 | Study 1: savings but not donations were sensitive to multipliers. a, Participants (N = 151) decided what percentage of their bonus to keep and
what percentage to donate to the charity of their choice. Donations were multiplied by a factor ranging from 1 to 10, which had no significant impact
on the amount donated (t(149) = 1.32, P = 0.188, two-tailed, regression β = 0.11, 95% CI = (−0.05, 0.27)). b, Other participants (N = 153) decided what
percentage of their bonus to receive immediately and what percentage to save. Savings were also multiplied by a factor ranging from 1 to 10 before being
returned in 3 months. This multiplier had a large impact (t(151) = 4.56, P < 0.001, regression β = 0.35, 95% CI = (0.20, 0.50)). The effect of the multiplier
was significantly larger for savings than for charitable giving (t(301) = −2.40, P = 0.009, regression β = −0.31, 95% CI = (−0.56, −0.06) for the interaction
of the multiplier and donating versus saving). The dot areas are proportional to the number of participants with that response; the lines represent the
best fit line for donations or savings regressed on the multiplier. Due to strong a priori directional predictions, the P values for all analyses in this paper are
one-sided unless otherwise specified. The CIs are used for estimation and are always two-sided. Coin icons are from freesvg.org.
NAture HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Nature HuMaN BeHaviour Articles
that the confound in the original study was not driving those results.
a
(See Methods for the experimental stimuli and details of the analy- Design
ses for these and all subsequent experiments.)
Our second study found that people respond to effectiveness or
or
when helping family members but not when helping strangers,
consistent with the fact that giving in the former case is ultimately
One or five people go These people are either
driven not by social rewards but by kin selection19,26,27, which does hungry for a year unknown US children or
not place the same requirements on observability and agreement. your family members
In this study, we also use a different metric of sensitivity to efficacy:
b
instead of manipulating the multiplier, we asked for (hypothetical) Results
willingness to pay for a given amount of impact, and we varied this
amount of impact, mimicking surveys on scope insensitivity11.
We asked the participants in study 2a (N = 607) to imagine that 100
90
either one or five people were going to go hungry for a year. We
80
varied whether these people were unknown children or members of 70
the participant’s family. Each participant saw only one of these four 60
versions. The participants then indicated what percentage of their 50
income they would give up to prevent this from happening, assum- 40 30
ing that no one else could prevent it (Fig. 2). 20
The participants were of course more willing to pay to save family 10
members than strangers. But, crucially, the amount that they were 0
Victims are
willing to pay to save family members depended on the number of
unknown
family members in need, which wasn’t true for strangers. The par- children
ticipants were willing to contribute substantially to help strangers
but were not willing to contribute more to help five strangers than
to help one, yet they were willing to contribute more to help five
family members than to help one (t(604) = 3.36, P < 0.001, regres-
sion β = 0.20, 95% CI = (0.08, 0.32) for the interaction of relation-
ship and number). We found similar effects for reported empathy
ratings. In a second version of this study (study 2b, N = 1,006), we
asked a new pool of participants how much empathy they felt for the
hungry victims, rather than asking about willingness to pay to help.
The participants’ reported empathy was sensitive to the scope of
suffering for family members but not for strangers (t(1,002) = 2.24,
P = 0.013, regression β = 0.12, 95% CI = (0.01, 0.21) for the interac-
tion of relationship and number). This provides additional evidence
that constraints on empathy are not the cause of insensitivity to
impact; empathy itself can be made sensitive to impact when there
is an evolutionary reason for it to be.
Our third study (N = 544) found that people reward others on
the basis of whether they give, but not on the basis of how effective
their gifts are. This is a key premise in our explanation, and it is a
premise not shared by alternative explanations. One might imagine,
for instance, in the absence of our theory, that people would penal-
ize others more if they did not give in instances where their gift
would have had a bigger impact. This is not what we found.
We paired the participants with a donor who chose whether to same participant pool make a (hypothetical) decision about their
donate all or none of their bonus to a charity, and whose donation own money. These participants were asked how long they would
was matched with a multiplier ranging again from 1 to 10. The par- wait to double their bonus, where their bonus was set to be the same
ticipants chose how much of their bonus to send as a reward to the as that of the donor in study 3. (Doubling was chosen because it is
donor. It was clear to the participants that the donor knew about the smallest multiple in study 3.) This is a parallel design to study
the multiplier when deciding whether to donate. Any reward was 3—each participant encounters only one multiplier. These partici-
tripled before being handed to the donor, making rewarding socially pants were willing to wait 16.24 days on average for the doubled
efficient. (One may wish to interpret rewarding as the default bonus, indicating that they do think doubling amounts of this size
behaviour and not rewarding as a form of punishment; that would is meaningful (one-sample t-test, t(101) = 16.24, P < 0.001, Cohen’s
not impact our theoretical predictions or analysis.) We found that d = 1.48, 95% CI = (1.28, 1.68)).
the participants rewarded the donors more if they chose to donate As another measure of social rewards, we also measured the
(t(538) = 2.67, P = 0.004, regression β = 0.24, 95% CI = (0.06, 0.41)), participants’ assessments of the donor’s character (for example,
but the rewards were not significantly higher if their donation was how generous, giving, ethical or deserving of praise), as rewards
multiplied by a larger factor (Fig. 3), and for those who chose not or punishments often come in the form of other people’s impres-
to donate, there was no significant penalty for keeping money that sions that influence subsequent cooperative decisions or reputa-
would have been multiplied, having up to ten times the impact tions28. Character judgements showed the same pattern as monetary
(t(538) = −0.42, P = 0.868, two-tailed, regression β = 0.07, 95% rewards—sensitivity to whether the donor gave (t(528) = 8.75,
CI = (−0.12, 0.26) for the interaction of donating and the multiplier). P < 0.001, regression β = 0.60, 95% CI = (0.47, 0.73)), but no sig-
To rule out that our participants just think multiplying these nificant sensitivity to the multiplier the donor faced (t(528) = 1.18,
stakes isn’t meaningful, we had new participants (N = 102) from the P = 0.239, two-tailed, regression β = 0.09, 95% CI = (−0.06, 0.24)).
yap
ot
ssengnilliW
)lacitehtopyh
,emocni
launna
fo
%(
4
3
2
1
0
–1
–2
–3
–4
Victims are Victims
unknown are family
children members
)dezidradnats(
serocs
yhtapmE
Save one person from starving Save one person from starving
Save five people from starving Save five people from starving
Victims
are family
members
Fig. 2 | Study 2: willingness to pay and empathy were sensitive to the
number helped for family members but not for strangers. a, Participants
were asked to imagine that one (five) family members (strangers) would
go hungry for a year (between participants, full factorial design). The
participants then reported their (hypothetical) willingness to pay to prevent
this suffering (study 2a, N = 607) or their empathy for the victims (study
2b, N = 1,006). b, Participants were willing to pay a greater percentage
of their salary to prevent five family members from going hungry than to
prevent one from going hungry, but they were not willing to pay more to
prevent five strangers from going hungry than to prevent one from going
hungry (t(604) = 3.36, P < 0.001, regression β = 0.20, 95% CI = (0.08,
0.32) for the interaction of relationship and number). The participants
reported feeling more empathy in response to five family members going
hungry than one, but they did not report feeling more empathy in response
to five strangers going hungry than one (t(1,002) = 2.24, P = 0.013,
regression β = 0.12, 95% CI = (0.01, 0.21) for the interaction of relationship
and number). The error bars indicate ±s.e.m. Dot plots are overlaid on the
bar graphs. The dot areas are proportional to the number of participants
with that response. Stick figures and map are from freesvg.org. Family
image is by papapishu (openclipart.org).
NAture HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles Nature HuMaN BeHaviour
100 100
90 90
80 80
70 70
60 60
50 50
40 40
30 30
20 20
10 10
0 0
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Multiplier
In our next two studies, we manipulated the amount of money signal) or that people would reward costlier gifts more (to the extent
and the fraction of a bonus that a donor had donated, and we again that rewarders are motivated to reward those who can afford to sig-
looked at the participants’ decisions to reward these donors. Like nal). Neither of these predictions is borne out by our studies.
effectiveness, the appropriate amount and fraction to give are diffi- In study 4 (N = 422), we paired the participants with a donor
cult to define, and the actual amount and fraction given are typically who decided whether to donate all or none of their bonus to a
difficult to observe, at least compared with whether anything was charity (Fig. 4). The absolute size of their bonus, and hence what
given. Our theory therefore predicts that when rewarding others for they gave, was either relatively small or large. The participants chose
giving, people should be relatively insensitive to the amount and how much to reward the donor, and this amount was tripled. (The
fraction given, at least when compared with whether a donation was participants were given information about only the donor with
given at all. This prediction is not generated by the alternative expla- whom they were paired.) The participants rewarded the donors
nations based on cognitive or emotional constraints. These stud- more if they chose to donate (t(419) = 3.70, P < 0.001, regression
ies also test another alternative explanation: that charitable giving β = 0.25, 95% CI = (0.12, 0.38). The participants did not reward
is just a costly signal of wealth or other individual differences24,29,30. donors who donated all of their large bonus significantly more
While costly signalling is probably part of the explanation for inef- than donors who donated all of their small bonus, nor did the par-
ficient giving, it predicts that people would not reward costlier gifts ticipants refrain from rewarding donors who kept all of their large
(if rewarders are not motivated to give to those who can afford to bonus significantly more than donors who kept all of their small
stnemegduj
retcarahC
)dezidradnats(
Character judgements by multiplier level
stnemyap
draweR
)sunob
fo
%(
a
Rewards by multiplier level
Donated
Did not donate
Multiplier
b
2.0 2.0
1.5 1.5
1.0 1.0
0.5 0.5
0 0
–0.5 –0.5
–1.0 –1.0
–1.5 –1.5
–2.0 –2.0
Multiplier Multiplier
stnemyap
draweR
)sunob
fo
%(
Hypothetical pattern reflecting sensitivity
Actual rewards by multiplier level to the multiplier
Donated
Did not donate
Actual character judgements by Hypothetical pattern reflecting sensitivity
multiplier level to the multiplier
Donated Donated
Did not donate Did not donate
stnemegduj
retcarahC
)dezidradnats(
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Fig. 3 | Study 3: social rewards were sensitive to whether a donor gave but not to the match rate. a, Participants (N = 544) were given the option to pay
any percentage of their bonus to reward a donor. The donor received triple what the participants paid. The participants were paired with a donor who
chose whether to donate all or none of their bonus to a charity, and whose donation, if given, would be multiplied by a factor ranging from 1 to 10. The
participants rewarded the donors more if they donated (t(538) = 2.67, P = 0.004, regression β = 0.24, 95% CI = (0.06, 0.41)), but the rewards were not
significantly higher for donating when there was a higher multiplier or for not donating when there was a lower multiplier (t(538) = −0.42, P = 0.868,
two-tailed, regression β = 0.07, 95% CI = (−0.12, 0.26) for the interaction of donating and the multiplier). b, Likewise, there was a significant effect of
whether the partner donated on participants’ judgements of the partner’s character (t(528) = 8.75, P < 0.001, regression β = 0.60, 95% CI = (0.47, 0.73)),
but character judgements were not significantly higher for donating when there was a higher multiplier or for not donating when there was a lower
multiplier (t(528) = 1.18, P = 0.239, two-tailed, regression β = 0.09, 95% CI = (−0.06, 0.24) for the interaction of donating and the multiplier). The graphs
on the left present the mean reward payments or mean character judgements (standardized) for each level of the multiplier, separated by whether donors
donated or kept their bonus. The error bars indicate ±s.e.m. Dot plots are overlaid on the bar graphs. The dot areas are proportional to the number of
participants with that response. The graphs on the right show what the results would hypothetically look like if the participants rewarded donors more or
gave them higher character ratings for giving when there was a higher multiplier and rewarded donors less or gave them lower character ratings for not
giving when there was a higher multiplier.
NAture HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Nature HuMaN BeHaviour Articles
bonus (t(419) = 0.51, P = 0.608, two-tailed, regression β = 0.04, 95% Our research extends existing empirical work suggesting that
CI = (−0.12, 0.20) for the interaction of donating and bonus size). giving to strangers and charities is shaped largely by social rewards,
Character judgements mirrored these results—giving mattered, including evidence that people give substantially more when their
but those giving more were not viewed as significantly more gener- contributions are made observable31,32 and when giving is the
ous, giving, deserving of praise and so on (t(419) = 9.72, P < 0.001, norm33, and that people are rewarded when they give34,35, penalized
regression β = 0.54, 95% CI = (0.43, 0.65) for the effect of donat- when they do not give28,34–37, preferred for helping those who give38,39
ing; t(419) = 1.67, P = 0.095, two-tailed, regression β = 0.11, 95% and penalized for not penalizing those who do not give38,39.
CI = (−0.02, 0.24) for the interaction of donating and bonus size). Our studies are difficult to reconcile with the commonly held
Again, the participants (N = 201) distinguished between the view in the behavioural literature that insensitivity to impact is
absolute amounts (the sizes of the two bonuses) when the absolute driven by constraints on our cognitive or emotional systems1,14–18.
amount was going into their own wallet: a new set of participants Such constraints do not predict the insensitivities in studies 3–5 and
were willing to wait an average of 2.76 days longer to receive their are inconsistent with the sensitivity to efficacy for savings and kin
study payment when they were told that waiting would add the in studies 1 and 2, respectively. Likewise, these studies, particularly
larger bonus amount used in study 4, instead of the smaller amount 4 and 5, are difficult to reconcile with another commonly held view:
(asked hypothetically) (t(199) = 1.79, P = 0.038, Cohen’s d = 0.25, that we are insensitive to impact because our primary motivation
95% CI = (−0.025, 0.54)). We manipulated the bonus amount for giving is to signal wealth or other individual differences24,29,30.
(smaller or larger) between participants, as in study 4. (We note, however, that this form of signalling may also play an
Study 5 (N = 401) was similar to study 4, but instead of manipulat- important role in inefficient giving, and that the relatively small
ing the absolute amount donated, we manipulated the fraction of the stakes in our experiments do not provide the optimal opportunity
bonus donated, holding the absolute amount constant. One measure to signal wealth.)
of sacrifice is the amount that people donate; another is the fraction These results are also difficult to reconcile with two additional
of their wealth that they donate. Although donating a greater fraction accounts not yet mentioned: a view of charitable giving that is
signals more wealth, it is not expected to influence rewards according primarily driven by misapplied kinship40,41, and a ‘strong’ form of
to our theory. Like the amount donated, the fraction donated is typi- group selection40,42 that does not require higher-order rewards to
cally difficult to observe, and the appropriate fraction is ill defined, at make giving compatible with individual-level incentives. The the-
least compared with whether any donation was made. ory proposing that giving might be explained by misapplied kinship
As in study 4, we paired the participants in study 5 with a suggests that the psychology that evolved to motivate us to help our
donor. This time the donor was given the option to donate one of kin sometimes also motivates us to help non-kin, given the diffi-
several prespecified fractions of their bonus to a charity, includ- culty of identifying our kin precisely40,41. The theory proposing that
ing the option to donate all or none. We additionally varied the giving might be explained by strong group selection suggests that
size of the bonus, so that donors giving larger fractions under the groups with more altruistic members outcompete other groups, and
smaller bonus would be giving the same absolute amount as those this can maintain altruism in the population40,42. Charitable giving
giving a smaller fraction under the larger bonus. To save on par- based on misapplied kinship or strong group selection would pro-
ticipants, we then matched rewarders (the participants we focus duce giving that attends to efficacy and not to social rewards. Thus,
on in this analysis) only with those who donated none or 67% of to explain inefficient giving, these accounts would still require the
the larger bonus, or none or 80% of the smaller bonus (where 80% kind of cognitive limitation story that our studies were designed to
of the smaller bonus was the same absolute amount as 67% of the rule out. Of course, a ‘weak’ form of group selection43 that selects
larger bonus). We found that the participants rewarded donors between different equilibria is fully consistent with our results and
more if they chose to donate (t(398) = 4.05, P < 0.001, regres- could help explain the emergence of group-beneficial norms such as
sion β = 0.27, 95% CI = (0.14, 0.40)) but did not reward donors those conditioned on giving to charity.
significantly more for donating a larger fraction of their allot- Finally, our results are not easily explained by the conscious opti-
ment (t(398) = 1.05, P = 0.294, two-tailed, regression β = 0.09, mization of rewards, which would preclude any charitable giving
95% CI = (−0.08, 0.25) for the interaction of donating and in our first two experiments and any rewarding in our latter three
bonus size). Character judgements mirrored monetary rewards experiments. The former lacked any opportunity for rewards, and
(t(398) = 14.32, P < 0.001, regression β = 0.74, 95% CI = (0.63, the latter lacked any opportunity for higher-order rewards. Note
0.84) for the effect of donating; t(398) = −1.43, P = 0.153, that our explanation—that the mental apparatuses that motivate
two-tailed, regression β = −0.10, 95% CI = (−0.21, 0.03) for the giving, such as empathy and warm glow, evolved to be sensitive to
interaction of donating and bonus size). features that tend to yield social rewards—does not involve any con-
scious optimization of rewards. Rather, we believe that people often
Discussion optimize feelings such as warm glow without giving any conscious
We have shown that people can be sensitive to impact when they consideration to rewards, but that warm glow is itself designed to
have an evolutionary motive to be (studies 1 and 2). We have also optimize rewards.
shown that social rewards—a primary evolutionary motive to Many researchers have documented compelling proximate expla-
give—are not sensitive to impact (study 3), and hence there isn’t typ- nations for inefficient giving, such as showing that the empathy that
ically an evolutionary motive to be sensitive to impact when giving. motivates us to give17 or the good feelings we get when giving18 are
Moreover, we have argued that people are not sensitive to impact relatively insensitive to how effectively we give. We want to reiterate
when they reward others for giving because impact is difficult to that although we view these findings as important to understand-
define, observe and communicate. Studies 4 and 5 provide evidence ing inefficient giving, we do not view these accounts as alternatives
for this claim by showing that rewarders likewise do not attend to to our explanation. Rather, these proximate accounts themselves call
the absolute amount or fraction of the bonus donated. Like efficacy, for explanation—why are empathy and warm glow insensitive to effi-
these features are typically harder to define, observe and communi- cacy? We have attempted to provide and test just such an explanation,
cate than whether the donor gave, which rewarders attended to in rooted in an understanding of social incentives and their limitations.
all of our studies (3–5). We also ran additional studies replicating As we’ve shown, this more ultimate explanation makes specific pre-
our original findings, mitigating confounds and demonstrating that dictions that the proximate explanations alone would not, includ-
participants can be sensitive to the multipliers and the stakes that ing that we will attend more to efficacy when our decisions directly
we used (Methods). impact ourselves (study 1) or our families (study 2), that proximate
NAture HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles Nature HuMaN BeHaviour
motivations to give (such as empathy) will be more sensitive to number of children, parents’ health and recent fortune) would be
impact when considering helping family than when considering help- sufficiently observable, well defined and commonly known, leading
ing strangers (study 2), that reputational rewards will show the same giving norms to be relatively more sensitive to impact45,46. Likewise,
insensitivities to impact that giving does (study 3, considered also in the theory that we discuss in this paper may also help explain the
light of study 1), and that reputational rewards will be similarly insen- prevalence in some cultures of norms that focus on outcomes and
sitive to other variables that are difficult to condition social rewards ignore intent47,48. Intent can also be difficult to observe and make
on, such as the amount and fraction given (studies 4 and 5). commonly known, so norms ignoring it could be most efficient in
some circumstances, especially if sufficiently observable proxy cues
Limitations. We tested our theory only on participants from a are missing and/or the base rate of bad intent is high.
Western, educated, industrialized, rich and democratic (WEIRD) Another limitation is that, while we believe that our theory
society, and the literature that we cite on inefficient giving is drawn explains much of inefficient giving, we do not believe that it explains
from such societies44. Indeed, giving to large charitable organiza- the entire puzzle of inefficient giving. As mentioned above, the
tions such as the American Cancer Society may predominantly be motive to signal wealth or other individual differences may also be
a WEIRD phenomenon. The theory outlined in this paper—that it an important cause of inefficient giving24,29,30. Furthermore, while
is easier to condition norms on behaviours that are observable, well we made efforts to rule out cognitive constraint explanations in our
defined and commonly known—should generalize beyond WEIRD studies, we do expect that they play an important role in explain-
societies, and we expect that these limitations on norms are likely to ing certain instances of inefficient giving. For example, cognitive
create at least some inefficiencies in giving norms in these societies. constraint explanations, including ‘spillover explanations’—where
However, there might be good reason to believe that in small-scale features of the mind shaped for certain contexts spill over into oth-
societies, more features related to the efficacy of a gift (for example, ers—may help explain sensitivity to identifiable victims15,16 or to
ot
diap
tnuomA
)sunob
fo
%(
ronod
drawer
ot
diap
tnuomA
)sunob
fo
%(
ronod
drawer
a Study 4 b Study 5
Rewards Rewards
Donated Donated
Did not donate Did not donate
100
80
60
40
20
0
0/10 10/10 0/20 20/20 0/7560/75 0/9060/90
Amount donated Amount donated
Character judgements Character judgements
Donated Donated
Did not donate Did not donate
2 2
1 1
0 0
–1 –1
–2 –2
0/10 10/10 0/20 20/20 0/75 60/75 0/90 60/90
Amount donated Amount donated
stnemegduj
retcarahC
)dezidradnats(
stnemegduj
retcarahC
)dezidradnats(
100
80
60
40
20
0
Fig. 4 | Studies 4 and 5: social rewards were sensitive to whether a donor gave but not to the amount or fraction donated. a, Participants (N = 422) were
paired with a donor who chose whether to donate all or none of their bonus to a charity and whose bonus was either 10 cents or 20 cents. The participants
were given the option to pay any percentage of their bonus to reward the donor. The donor received triple what the participants paid. The participants
rewarded the donors more if they chose to donate (t(419) = 3.70, P < 0.001, regression β = 0.25, 95% CI = (0.12, 0.38)), but did not reward donors who
donated 20 cents significantly more than those who donated 10 cents, and did not reward donors who kept 20 cents significantly less than those who kept
10 cents (t(419) = 0.51, P = 0.608, two-tailed, regression β = 0.04, 95% CI = (−0.12, 0.20) for the interaction of donating and bonus size). Judgements
of the donor’s character mirrored rewards (t(419) = 9.72, P < 0.001, regression β = 0.54, 95% CI = (0.43, 0.65) for the effect of donating; t(419) = 1.67,
P = 0.095, two-tailed, regression β = 0.11, 95% CI = (−0.02, 0.24) for the interaction of donating and bonus size). b, Participants (N = 401) were paired
with a donor who chose to donate any amount of their bonus to charity, and whose bonus was either 90 cents or 75 cents. We paired the participants
with donors who chose to donate either 60 cents or none of their bonus. The participants were given the option to pay any percentage of their bonus to
reward the donor. The donor received triple what the participants paid. The participants rewarded the donors more if they chose to donate (t(398) = 4.05,
P < 0.001, regression β = 0.27, 95% CI = (0.14, 0.40) for the effect of donating), but did not reward the donors significantly more when the 60 cents donated
represented a larger fraction of their bonus (t(398) = 1.05, P = 0.294, two-tailed, regression β = 0.09, 95% CI = (−0.08, 0.25) for the interaction of donating
and bonus size). Judgements of the donor’s character mirrored rewards (t(398) = 14.32, P < 0.001, regression β = 0.74, 95% CI = (0.63, 0.84) for the effect
of donating; t(398) = −1.43, P = 0.153, two-tailed, regression β = −0.10, 95% CI = (−0.21, 0.03) for the interaction of donating and bonus size). The error
bars indicate ±s.e.m. Dot plots are overlaid on the bar graphs. The dot areas are proportional to the number of participants with that response.
NAture HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Nature HuMaN BeHaviour Articles
causes that afflict our friends49, among other instances where we pri- proximate mechanisms (such as scope insensitivity) as evidence
oritize features other than impact. Nevertheless, as we’ve discussed, that people don’t consider impact because of the limitations these
we believe that much of inefficient giving is explained by constraints mechanisms impose. This interpretation fails to ask why these
on social rewards, because we see a strong correspondence, in our limitations exist and thus misses out on important ramifications
studies and others28,31–39, between the existence and features of these for promoting effective giving, as well as a deeper understand-
rewards and the existence and features of giving. Our account also ing of human cooperation. We believe that this cautionary note
generated the predictions for all five of our studies, which other- generalizes to other areas of behavioural research, such as when
wise would require disparate (and in some cases tortuous) spillover interpreting evidence of dissonance as causing consistency effects,
explanations. explaining motivated reasoning with reference to the means by
which we deceive ourselves, or blaming partisan political views on
Implications. Our studies suggest that getting people to give effec- echo chambers, ignorance, faulty logic or tribalism. In all of these
tively may be an uphill battle. Effective giving doesn’t just have to cases, evidence exists for the proximate psychological mechanisms
combat people’s cognitive or emotional limitations; it also must (for example, that dissonance is felt when our beliefs and behav-
overcome a fundamental lack of motivation: people are inclined iours are inconsistent), and this evidence is consistent with these
to give in ways that are reputationally lucrative (for instance, vol- psychological mechanisms (for example, dissonance reduction)
unteering in ways that are highly visible or for charities that are ultimately driving the behaviour via some form of constrained
famous or pushed by one’s children’s school or local pastor). This cognition story (for example, we evolved minds that feel dissonant
lack of motivation to give effectively can perhaps be ameliorated by at inconsistencies so as to make sense of the world, and given such
making the efficacy of charities, or the impact of one’s gifts, more a hedonic system, we then choose fallacious beliefs to maximize
observable, well defined and easy to share and verify. In contrast, our hedonic experience). Yet the evidence is also consistent with
attempts to privately offer mental aids, to induce people to rely less a functional account whereby the corresponding cognition is just
on empathy or to induce them to extend their empathy to a broader a proximate mechanism (for example, dissonance acts as a proxy
set of circumstances may have limited impact. People have a strong for how easy it may be to justify our behaviour to others), as in
motivation to overcome such manipulations. our current studies. More research is often needed to differentiate
While our studies focused on insensitivity to efficacy, our logic between the two, as we tried to do in this paper.
and experimental predictions generalize to other peculiarities of Lastly, we wish to highlight a methodological point: our stud-
our prosocial tendencies, such as the omission–commission dis- ies were designed to test a functional, evolutionary account for
tinction (avoiding causing harm but allowing harm to happen by inefficient giving. To do so, we purposefully designed the studies
inaction24,25,50), strategic ignorance (purposely avoiding learning so as to preclude the possibility that the conscious optimization
the negative consequences of one’s selfish behaviour51) and avoid- of rewards could explain our results. This required us to avoid the
ing the ask (avoiding situations in which one could be called on to more tempting and perhaps straightforward direct manipulation of
help52,53). Each of these phenomena are difficult to reconcile with rewards (for example, what happens if others do reward efficacy?),
our purported motive that we do good because we care. Although and to instead develop more indirect methods of ascertaining the
they are often explained via preferences, emotions or cognitive con- role of social rewards (for example, are rewards sensitive to features
straints, they can also be explained by observability and what others that our theory suggests they should be, and does giving depend
can agree on. Failing to help and purposely avoiding information or on efficacy when social rewards are not the primary evolutionary
a specific situation, for instance, are difficult for others to observe, motivator?). We believe this indirectness to be imperative for our
and when observed are difficult to verify and convey to others. In goals, as any experimental results that could be explained by con-
contrast, actively causing harm, collecting information and then scious awareness and optimization would risk teaching us some-
ignoring it, and being asked and then denying aid are all relatively thing about our ability to consciously know and optimize, while not
easy to observe and convey to others. We would thus predict simi- necessarily saying much about the evolved psychology responsible
lar experimental findings if we replaced efficacy with these other for inefficient giving or the origins of the corresponding features of
quirky features of altruism. empathy, warm glow and so on.
We end with some more tentative thoughts on several broader
implications for research into evolutionary explanations for Methods
psychological puzzles. Our studies highlight the importance This research complies with all relevant ethical regulations and was approved by the
of distinguishing mechanisms for the evolution of cooperation Harvard University Institutional Review Board and the Yale University Institutional
Review Board (because the studies fell under a broader research proposal that
by their effect as well as their cause. Kin selection19,26,27, strong
also involved studies in collaboration with a researcher at Yale University). We
group selection42, reciprocity54 and norm enforcement19–23, for obtained informed consent from all participants. The participants were paid the
instance, are all very different causal stories. Each can induce going wage on the online platform that we used to recruit (Amazon Mechanical
cooperation and solve public-goods problems, but only kin Turk (MTurk)).
and strong group selection are expected to yield efficient giv-
ing and effective solutions to public-goods problems in the Study 1: savings are sensitive to a multiplier but charitable donations are
not. Study 1a: sensitivity to a multiplier when saving versus donating to charity.
face of informational imperfections. Reciprocity and norm
Experimental design overview. This study contrasted participants’ sensitivity to
enforcement are constrained by observability and the need for a multiplier when giving to charity versus saving for the future. The participants
agreement among observers19–25,54. This suggests a real limita- were given a bonus and either the option to donate any amount of the bonus to
tion on the efficacy of reciprocity and norm enforcement in charity or the option to save any amount of the bonus for the future. Donations and
the presence of informational imperfections. Furthermore, savings were assigned a match ranging from no match to 9:1.
different moderators will be more or less effective depending on
Participant recruitment method and the use of MTurk. We recruited all
which mechanism is at play, and testing the role of informational participants for all studies online through MTurk. MTurk is an online marketplace
imperfections may help adjudicate between these mechanisms where employers pay users for completing short tasks (generally about 10 minutes),
when it’s unclear which is the actual cause. usually referred to as Human Intelligence Tasks, for a relatively small payment
Our results also highlight the need for caution before taking (generally less than US$1). Workers who have been recruited on MTurk receive a
baseline payment and can also be paid a bonus depending on their performance
people’s purported or conscious motives at face value. If we pre-
and/or choices in the task. This setup lends itself well to incentivized experiments:
sume that people are ultimately motivated by impact because this the baseline payment acts as the show-up fee, and the bonus payment is based on
is what people say their motive is, we might interpret evidence of the workers’ choices, if applicable.
NAture HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles Nature HuMaN BeHaviour
Sample size determination. No statistical methods were used to predetermine As Fig. 1 shows, the predicted interaction was significant, such that
sample sizes, but our sample sizes are similar to, or in most cases larger than, those the multiplier predicts savings more strongly than it predicts donations
reported in previous publications. For example, the effect size from a relevant (t(301) = −2.40, P = 0.009, β = −0.31, 95% CI = (−0.56, −0.06)). (Total N = 153 for
online study of discounting55 (study 1), a topic related to our first study, suggests future self, total N = 151 for charity; total Ns ranged from 29 to 32 for levels of the
that one would need 29 people per condition to have an 80% chance of detecting multiplier; individual cell Ns ranged from 14 to 16.)
an effect of equivalent strength; in study 1a, we had 151 to 153 participants per
condition (comparing the effect of a multiplier on savings versus donations), and Study 1b: sensitivity to a multiplier when saving versus donating to a family in need.
in study 1b, we had 251 to 253 per condition for this contrast. Experimental design overview. Study 1b contrasted sensitivity to multipliers for
We set the sample size for each study at the beginning by requesting a certain saving versus donating to a few identified individuals, whose total scope of finances
round number of participants via Turkprime.com (a website that facilitates running is more comparable to an individual participant’s finances than that of a charitable
studies on MTurk) and then let the study run to completion without ever altering organization. The methods were identical to those in study 1a, except that the
the sample size. The studies typically returned more participants than we requested participants had the opportunity to donate to an individual family in need instead
(for example, 304 when we requested 300), probably because some people of a charitable organization, and we used only no match and a 1:1 match.
completed the survey (hosted by Qualtrics) without entering their completion code
into MTurk and being counted by that system. Participants. The participants were 504 respondents on MTurk (mean age, 35.31;
s.d., 11.55; range, 18 to 75). Participation was limited to people from the United
Participants. The participants were 304 respondents on MTurk (mean age, 34.23; States and Canada. The demographics were as follows: 57% were male, 42%
s.d., 10.22; range, 18 to 67). Participation was limited to people from the United female and the remaining 1% marked “other/prefer not to say”; 77% were white/
States and Canada. The demographics were as follows: 60% were male and 40% Caucasian, 6% African American, 6% Hispanic, 10% Asian American and 1%
female; 78% were white/Caucasian, 5% African American, 5% Hispanic, 10% Native American; 99% had graduated at least from high school, and 55% had
Asian American, 1% marked “other” and 1% marked “prefer not to say”; 99% had graduated at least from college. Two participants did not answer all the relevant
graduated at least from high school, and 55% had graduated at least from college. questions needed for the analyses.
Procedure. The participants in this study began by reading a campaign from
Procedure. The participants in this study began by selecting their top-choice the crowdsourcing website GoFundMe.org. The campaign was for a family with
charity from a list of six options: the American Cancer Society, the Ocean a young child recently diagnosed with childhood leukaemia. The text of the
Conservancy, World Animal Protection, Living Beyond Breast Cancer, the campaign was as follows:
Society for the Improvement of the Conditions for Stray Animals and The Nature
Our friends, Lisa and Derek Wolfe, are two of the finest people you will ever
Conservancy. They were then given a 30-cent bonus. Half of the participants were
meet. Lisa is one of those mom’s you can’t help but be jealous of. She is more
randomly assigned to the Charity Condition and were asked to divide this bonus in
loving, nurturing, and giving than I could ever hope to be. Lisa is one of
any way they wished between themselves and the charity that they had selected as
those people that puts everyone before herself. She is always taking care of
their top choice from the list of six. Random assignment to conditions in this and
others. It is our turn to take care of Lisa.
all studies was programmed through Qualtrics. All studies were thus double blind
in the sense that the participants did not know about the alternative condition(s),
Lisa and her little girl, Arlie, have this mesmorizing bond. In June 2016,
and there was no human interacting with the participants who knew about their
Arlie was diagnosed with Pre B ALL, a form of childhood leukemia. Lisa
condition. We knew the participants’ conditions once analysing the data because
and Derek are living every parents worst nightmare. I know Arlie will beat
this was a critical variable in the data analysis.
this cancer and come out stronger than ever, but the Wolfe’s have a long,
We also manipulated (between participants) whether any money donated to the
hard road ahead. Let’s ease their burden a bit so that medical bills are the
charity would be matched, multiplying it. The match levels ranged in integers from
last thing on their mind.
no match (donation is not increased) to 1:9 match (multiplying the donation by ten).
For example, a participant in the Charity Condition who selected the American You kick cancers butt, Lady A! We love you! Help spread the word!
Cancer Society as their favourite charity and was assigned a 1:3 match saw the
following text: After reading about the campaign, the participants were given a 30-cent bonus.
Half of the participants were randomly assigned to the Charity Condition and
In addition to the 30 cents that you will be paid for participating, we are
were asked to divide this bonus any way they wished between themselves and
giving you an additional 30 cents. You can choose to keep this 30 cents
the charitable campaign that they had read about. We also manipulated (between
for yourself, or to donate some or all of it to the American Cancer Society,
participants) whether any money donated to the campaign would be matched,
the charity that you selected as your top choice. For every one cent that
multiplying it. The match levels were no match or 1:1 match.
you give, we will give three cents, so that The American Cancer Society
A participant in the Charity Condition who was assigned no match saw the
receives quadruple what you give. How much of the 30 cents would
following text:
you like to donate to The American Cancer Society? (Total must sum to
30. Recall that for every one cent that you give, we will give three cents, In addition to the 30 cents that you will be paid for participating, we are
quadrupling the amount.) giving you an additional 30 cents. You can choose to keep this 30 cents
for yourself, or to donate some or all of it to the campaign you just
The other half of the participants were randomly assigned to the Savings
read about. How much of the 30 cents would you like to donate to the
Condition and were instead asked to divide the 30-cent bonus any way they wished
campaign? (Total must sum to 30.)
between what they would receive with their study payment and what they would
receive in three months (save). We manipulated (between participants) whether A participant in the Charity Condition who was assigned a 1:1 match saw the
any money saved would be matched, multiplying it. The match levels ranged in following text:
integers from no match (savings are not increased) to 1:9 match (multiplying the
In addition to the 30 cents that you will be paid for participating, we are
savings by ten).
giving you an additional 30 cents. You can choose to keep this 30 cents
For example, a participant in the Savings Condition who was assigned a 1:3
for yourself, or to donate some or all of it to the campaign you just read
match would see the following text:
about. For every one cent that you give, we will also give one cent, so that
In addition to the 30 cents that you will be paid for participating, we are this campaign receives double what you give. How much of the 30 cents
giving you an additional 30 cents. You can choose to either earn some or would you like to donate to the campaign? (Total must sum to 30. Recall
all of this 30 cents with your study payment, or wait to receive some or all that for every one cent that you give, we will also give one cent, doubling
of it in three months. For every one cent that you give, we will give three the amount.)
cents, so that in three months you receive quadruple. How much of the
The other half of the participants were randomly assigned to the Savings
30 cents would you like to receive in three months? (Total must sum to
Condition and were instead asked to divide the 30-cent bonus any way they wished
30. Recall that for every one cent that you give, we will give three cents,
between what they would receive soon after their study payment, and what they
quadrupling it.)
would receive in three months (save). We manipulated (between participants)
The participants concluded the study by answering some standard whether any money saved would be matched, multiplying it. The match levels were
demographic questions and providing open-ended feedback on the survey. no match or 1:1 match.
A participant in the Savings Condition who was assigned no match saw the
Analyses. We ran a regression that predicted the amount saved or donated from following text:
the multiplier (from one to ten), whether participants donated or saved (coded
0 = saved, 1 = donated) and the interaction (multiplier × donated or saved). As In addition to the 30 cents that you will be paid for participating, we are
predicted, there was a significant effect of the multiplier (t(301) = 4.65, P < 0.001, giving you an additional 30 cents. You can choose to either earn some or all
β = 0.36, 95% CI = (0.21, 0.51)). We made no prediction about the amount donated of this 30 cents with your study payment, or wait to receive some or all of
versus saved, but we report the coeffective here for completeness: t(301) = 0.18, it in three months. How much of the 30 cents would you like to receive in
P = 0.855 (two-sided), β = 0.02, 95% CI = (−0.21, 0.25). three months? (Total must sum to 30.)
NAture HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Nature HuMaN BeHaviour Articles
A participant in the Savings Condition who was assigned a 1:1 match saw the What percentage of your income during that year would you be willing to
following text: give up to prevent this from happening (assuming that no one else could
prevent it)?
In addition to the 30 cents that you will be paid for participating, we are
giving you an additional 30 cents. You can choose to either earn some or
all of this 30 cents with your study payment, or wait to receive some or all Analyses. We ran a regression that predicted the income percentage that
of it in three months. For every one cent that you give, we will also give participants reported being willing to pay from whether the hungry victims were
one cent, so that in three months you receive double. How much of the strangers or family members (coded 0 = strangers, 1 = family members), whether
30 cents would you like to receive in three months? (Total must sum to there was one victim or five (0 = one victim, 1 = five) and the interaction (victim
30. Recall that for every one cent that you give, we will also give one cent, status × number). As predicted, there was a significant effect of whether the
doubling it.) victims were strangers or family members (t(604) = 8.54, P < 0.001, β = 0.41, 95%
CI = (0.32, 0.51)). We made no prediction about the overall effect of whether there
The participants concluded the study by answering some standard
was one versus five victims, but we report the coefficient here for completeness:
demographic questions and providing open-ended feedback on the survey.
t(604) = −0.29, P = 0.769 (two-sided), β = −0.01, 95% CI = (−0.11, 0.08).
As Fig. 2 shows, the predicted interaction was significant, such that the
Analyses. We ran a regression that predicted the amount saved or donated
participants were not willing to donate more of their income to save five strangers
from whether there was a multiplier (coded 0 = no multiplier, 1 = multiplier),
from hunger than they were willing to donate to save one, but they were willing
whether the participants donated or saved (coded 0 = saved, 1 = donated) and the
to donate more of their income to save five family members from hunger than
interaction (multiplier × donated or saved). As predicted, there was a significant
they were willing to donate to save one (t(604) = 3.36, P < 0.001, β = 0.20, 95%
effect of the multiplier (β = 0.44, 95% CI = (0.32, 0.56), t(501) = 7.38, P < 0.001).
CI = (0.08, 0.32)). The pattern of means was as follows: for strangers, mean = 14.31
We made no prediction about the amount donated versus saved, but we report the
and s.d. = 15.55 for one (N = 153), and mean = 13.54 and s.d. = 15.67 for five
coefficient here for completeness: β = 8.68, 95% CI = (0.22, 0.45), t(501) = 5.58,
(N = 152); for family, mean = 36.83 and s.d. = 28.34 for one (N = 151), and
P < 0.001 (two-sided).
mean = 48.55 and s.d. = 28.79 for five (N = 151).
The predicted interaction was significant, such that the presence of a match
predicts savings more strongly than it predicts donations (β = −0.36, 95% CI = (−0.51,
Study 2b: empathy is scope sensitive for family but not for strangers. Experimental
−0.22), t(501) = −4.95, P < 0.001). The pattern of means was as follows: for donations,
design overview. Study 2b used the same design as study 2a, except that the
mean = 13.72 and s.d. = 12.64 for no match (N = 126), and mean = 14.34 and
participants were asked about their emotional responses to the hypothetical
s.d. = 12.31 for 1:1 match (N = 127); for savings, mean = 5.04 and s.d. = 10.27 for no
scenarios, rather than about their willingness to pay.
match (N = 124), and mean = 16.50 and s.d. = 13.69 for 1:1 match (N = 127).
Participants. The participants were 1,006 respondents on MTurk (mean age,
Study 2: donors’ willingness to pay and empathy are scope sensitive for family
35.45; s.d., 11.18; range, 18 to 73). Participation was limited to people from the
but not for strangers. Study 2a: willingness to pay is scope sensitive for family but
United States and Canada. The demographics were as follows: 44% were male, 55%
not for strangers. Experimental design overview. Study 2a asked the participants
female and 1% marked “prefer not to say”; 70% were white/Caucasian, 9% African
what percentage of their income they would give up, hypothetically, to prevent one
American, 7% Hispanic, 10% Asian American, 1% Native American, 2% marked
or five people from going hungry for a year. These people were either members of
“other” and 1% marked “prefer not to say”; 99% had graduated at least from high
their family or unknown children in their country (strangers).
school, and 54% had graduated at least from college.
Participants. The participants were 607 respondents on MTurk (mean age, 36.00;
s.d., 11.99; range, 18 to 80). Participation was limited to people from the United Procedure. The procedure was identical to that in study 2a, except that instead
States and Canada. The demographics were as follows: 46% were male and 54% of asking the participants about their willingness to pay to prevent the person
female; 72% were white/Caucasian, 8% African American, 6% Hispanic, 10% Asian or people described from going hungry, we asked the participants about their
American, 1% Native American, 2% marked “other” and 1% marked “prefer not to emotional responses to the same vignettes used in study 2a. Specifically, the
say”; 99% had graduated at least from high school, and 54% had graduated at least participants answered the following seven questions (in random order, all asked
from college. on a scale of 1 to 7; 1 = “Not at all”, 7 = “Most I can imagine”): “How empathic
would you feel in response to this?”; “How sad would this make you?”; “How
Procedure. The participants were asked to imagine that either one or five people compassionate would you feel in response to this?”; “How much concern would
would go hungry for a year (varied between participants). These people were you have about this?”; “How motivated would you feel to help?”; “How distressed
described as either unknown children in the United States (strangers) or members would you be by this?”; and “How unhappy would you be about this?”. The
of their own family (also varied between participants). The text for the four participants then answered some demographic questions.
conditions is included below.
Participants asked to imagine one unknown child going hungry saw the Analyses. We standardized the answers to the seven questions that we asked the
following text: participants about their emotional responses, and averaged the standardized
answers into a scale (Cronbach’s alpha = 0.950), which we will call the empathy
Imagine that you learned that a child in the United States was going to go scale. We then ran a regression that predicted the participants’ empathy scores
hungry for a year. Really imagine this child. Every day for a year, this child on this scale from whether the hungry victims were strangers or family members
will be hungry. All year this child will never get enough to eat. (coded 0 = strangers, 1 = family members), whether there was one victim or
Participants asked to imagine five unknown children going hungry saw the five (0 = one victim, 1 = five) and the interaction (victim status × number). As
following text: predicted, there was a significant effect of whether the victim was a stranger or
a family member (t(1,002) = 6.85, P < 0.001, β = 0.29, 95% CI = (0.20, 0.37)). We
Imagine that you learned that five children in the United States were going
made no prediction about the overall effect of whether there was one versus five
to go hungry for a year. Really imagine these children. Every day for a year,
victims, but we report the coefficient here for completeness: t(1,002) = −1.89,
these five children will be hungry. All year these children will never get
P = 0.059 (two-sided), β = −0.08, 95% CI = (−0.16, 0.00).
enough to eat.
As Fig. 2 shows, the predicted interaction was significant, such that the
Participants asked to imagine one family member going hungry saw the following participants did not report feeling more empathy, concern and so on in
text: response to imagining five strangers going hungry compared with imagining
one, but they did report feeling more empathy, concern and so on in response
Imagine that you learned that a member of your family was going to go
to imagining five family members going hungry compared with imagining
hungry for a year. Really imagine this family member. Every day for a year,
one (regression t(1,002) = 2.24, P = 0.013, β = 0.12, 95% CI = (0.01, 0.21)). The
this family member will be hungry. All year this family member will never
pattern of means was as follows: for strangers, mean = −0.24 and s.d. = 0.96 for
get enough to eat.
one (N = 253), and mean = −0.38 and s.d. = 0.96 for five (N = 249); for family,
Participants asked to imagine five family members going hungry saw the mean = 0.26 and s.d. = 0.65 for one (N = 253), and mean = 0.36 and s.d. = 0.65
following text: for five (N = 251).
Imagine that you learned that five members of your family were going to go
Study 3: reputational rewards are sensitive to giving but insensitive to giving
hungry for a year. Really imagine these five family members. Every day for
with a multiplier. Experimental design overview. Study 3 tested whether donors
a year, these family members will be hungry. All year these family members
were rewarded more for donating to charity when their donation did more good
will never get enough to eat.
(the donation was multiplied), and whether it cost participants to refrain from
The participants were then asked what percentage of their income they would donating when their donation could have done more good (when the donation
be willing to give up to prevent this from happening, assuming that no one else would have been multiplied). Donors were given a bonus that they could either
could prevent it. The text for this question was as follows (participants answered keep or donate to charity. The donations were assigned a match ranging from
using a slider bar that went from 0% to 100%): no match to 9:1. The participants were paired with a donor and told the match
NAture HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles Nature HuMaN BeHaviour
rate for that donor and whether the donor had donated or kept their bonus. The was a significant effect of whether the donor donated (t(218) = 4.42, P < 0.001,
participants then had the opportunity to pay to reward the donor. β = 0.38, 95% CI = (0.21, 0.55)). Also as expected, there was no significant effect
of the multiplier (t(218) = 0.46, P = 0.645 (two-sided), β = 0.04, 95% CI = (−0.14,
Study 3a: no match and 1:1 match. Participants. The participants were 220 0.22)) and no significant interaction between whether the participants donated and
respondents on MTurk (mean age, 35.85; s.d., 11.27; range, 18 to 69). Participation whether there was a multiplier (t(218) = −0.27, P = 0.788 (two-sided), β = −0.03,
was limited to people from the United States and Canada. The demographics were 95% CI = (−0.24, 0.19)). The pattern of means for the amount paid to reward (in
as follows: 52% were male and 48% female; 78% were white/Caucasian, 7% African cents) was as follows: for those who did not donate, mean = 4.68 and s.d. = 8.75
American, 5% Hispanic, 9% Asian American and 1% Native American; 99% had for no match (N = 59), and mean = 5.64 and s.d. = 10.79 for 1:1 match (N = 49);
graduated at least from high school, and 54% had graduated at least from college. for those who donated, mean = 13.58 and s.d. = 11.70 for no match (N = 59), and
We also ran 30 donors to pair with the participants (we paired multiple participants mean = 13.76 and s.d. = 12.24 for 1:1 match (N = 54).
with each donor), so that the study could be fully incentivized. In addition, the eight character questions were standardized and averaged into
a character judgement index (Cronbach’s alpha = 0.974). As predicted, there was a
Procedure. The participants selected their top-choice charity from the same list significant effect of whether the partner donated on the participants’ judgements
used in study 1a. The participants then read about a donor who had selected their of the partner’s character (t(218) = 11.12, P < 0.001, β = 0.71, 95% CI = (0.59, 0.84)).
top charity from the same list and had the choice to donate or keep all of a bonus. Also as expected, there was no significant effect of the multiplier (t(218) = −0.60,
We manipulated (between participants) whether we paired participants with a P = 0.551 (two-sided), β = −0.04, 95% CI = (−0.17, 0.09)) and no significant
donor who chose to donate or keep the bonus, and whether this donor was told interaction between whether participants donated and whether there was a
that their bonus would be matched 1:1 if they donated (compared with no match multiplier (t(218) = 0.22, P = 0.826 (two-sided), β = 0.02, 95% CI = (−0.14, 0.18)).
being used or mentioned). The pattern of means for standardized average character judgements was as follows:
A participant paired with a donor who chose to keep the bonus when for those who did not donate, mean = −0.65 and s.d. = 0.58 for no match, and
donations would not be matched saw the following text: mean = −0.72 and s.d. = 0.71 for 1:1 match; for those who donated, mean = 0.67 and
s.d. = 0.58 for no match, and mean = 0.63 and s.d. = 0.74 for 1:1 match.
For the next part of this study, we are pairing you with another MTurk
worker who saw the same list of charities that you saw, and had the
Validating that the participants discriminate between the relevant donation
opportunity to donate a 30 cent bonus to the charity that they selected as
amounts. To validate that the participants could cognitively process the difference
their top choice. They had a choice between two options: donate the entire
between the amounts donated with and without a match in study 3 under similar
30 cent bonus to their top charity, or keep the entire 30 cent bonus for
conditions, we recruited a separate sample (N = 102) from MTurk and asked the
themselves. This other MTurk worker decided to keep the entire 30 cent
participants how many days they would wait to receive a 60-cent bonus instead of
bonus for themself.
a 30-cent bonus. These participants indicated that they would wait an average of
A participant paired with a donor who chose to donate the bonus when 16.24 days (s.d. = 10.97) for the doubled bonus (one-sample t-test, t(101) = 16.24,
donations would not be matched saw the following text: P < 0.001, Cohen’s d = 1.48, 95% CI = (1.28, 1.68)).
For the next part of this study, we are pairing you with another MTurk
Study 3b: no match through 1:9. Participants. The participants were 544
worker who saw the same list of charities that you saw, and had the
respondents on MTurk (mean age, 34.58; s.d., 10.84; range, 18 to 73). Participation
opportunity to donate a 30 cent bonus to the charity that they selected as
was limited to people from the United States and Canada. The demographics were
their top choice. They had a choice between two options: donate the entire
as follows: 48% were male, 50% female and 2% preferred not to indicate sex; 75%
30 cent bonus to their top charity, or keep the entire 30 cent bonus for
were white/Caucasian, 8% African American, 7% Hispanic, 7% Asian American,
themselves. This other MTurk worker decided to donate the entire 30
1% Native American and 2% were another race/ethnicity or preferred not to
cent bonus to their top charity.
indicate their race/ethnicity; 98% had graduated at least from high school, and
A participant paired with a donor who chose to keep the bonus when donations 56% had graduated at least from college. Three participants did not answer all the
would be matched saw the following text: relevant questions needed for the primary analyses. We also ran 61 donors to pair
For the next part of this study, we are pairing you with another MTurk with the participants (we paired multiple participants with each donor), so that the
worker who saw the same list of charities that you saw, and had the study could be fully incentivized.
opportunity to donate a 30 cent bonus to the charity that they selected as
their top choice. They had a choice between two options: donate the entire Procedure. The procedure was identical to that for study 3a, except that instead of
30 cent bonus to their top charity, or keep the entire 30 cent bonus for using only two match levels, donors were assigned a match ranging from none to 1:9.
themselves. We informed this other Mturk Worker that if they donated,
we would match their donation 1:1, doubling it, so that their top charity Analyses. We ran a regression that predicted the amount participants paid to
received 60 cents. This other MTurk worker decided to keep the entire 30 reward the donor from whether the donor donated (coded 0 = kept bonus,
cent bonus for themself. 1 = donated bonus), the multiplier (from one to ten) and the interaction
(donated × multiplier). As predicted, there was a significant effect of whether the
A participant paired with a donor who chose to donate the bonus when donor donated (t(538) = 2.67, P = 0.004, β = 0.24, 95% CI = (0.06, 0.41)) (Fig. 3).
donations would be matched saw the following text: Also as expected, there was no significant effect of the multiplier (t(218) = −0.92,
For the next part of this study, we are pairing you with another MTurk P = 0.358 (two-sided), β = −0.05, 95% CI = (−0.17, 0.06)) and no significant
worker who saw the same list of charities that you saw, and had the interaction between whether the participants donated and whether there was a
opportunity to donate a 30 cent bonus to the charity that they selected as multiplier (regression, t(538) = −0.42, P = 0.868, β = 0.07, 95% CI = (−0.12, 0.26)).
their top choice. They had a choice between two options: donate the entire (Total N = 276 for did not donate, total N = 268 for donated; total Ns ranged from
30 cent bonus to their top charity, or keep the entire 30 cent bonus for 52 to 57 for levels of the multiplier; individual cell Ns ranged from 25 to 29.)
themselves. We informed this other Mturk Worker that if they donated, In addition, the eight character questions were standardized and averaged into
we would match their donation 1:1, doubling it, so that their top charity a character judgement index (Cronbach’s alpha = 0.975). As predicted, there was a
received 60 cents. This other MTurk worker decided to donate the entire significant effect of whether the partner donated on the participants’ judgements
30 cent bonus to their top charity. of the partner’s character (t(528) = 8.75, P < 0.001, β = 0.60, 95% CI = (0.47,
0.73)) (Fig. 3). Also as expected, there was no significant effect of the multiplier
After reading about this donor’s decision, the participants were given a bonus (t(528) = −1.87, P = 0.062 (two-sided), β = −0.08, 95% CI = (−0.17, 0.003))
of 30 cents and had the opportunity to pay some or all of this bonus to reward the and no significant interaction between whether the participants donated and
donor. To give the participants some encouragement to reward, they were informed whether there was a multiplier (t(528) = 1.18, P = 0.239 (two-sided), β = 0.09, 95%
that every cent that they paid would be tripled, such that the donor received three CI = (−0.06, 0.24)).
cents. The participants indicated how many cents (up to 30) they would like to
pay to reward the donor. We also asked the participants a series of eight questions Study 4: reputational rewards are sensitive to giving but insensitive to the
about the donor’s character (rated on seven-point Likert scale): how generous, amount given. Experimental design overview. Study 4 tested whether donors were
giving, good a person, ethical, moral and deserving of praise the donor was, and rewarded more for donating to charity when they donated twice as much. Donors
how much the donor cares about helping others and cares about charitable causes. were given a bonus of either 10 cents or 20 cents that they could either keep or
The participants concluded the study by answering some standard donate to charity. The participants then had the opportunity to pay to reward
demographic questions and giving open-ended feedback on the survey. donors who donated a 10-cent bonus, did not donate a 10-cent bonus, donated a
20-cent bonus or did not donate a 20-cent bonus.
Analyses. We ran a regression that predicted the amount participants paid to
reward the donor from whether the donor donated (coded 0 = kept bonus, Participants. The participants were 422 respondents on MTurk (mean age, 35.50;
1 = donated bonus), whether there was a multiplier (coded 0 = no multiplier, s.d., 11.82; range, 18 to 72). Participation was limited to people from the United
1 = multiplier) and the interaction (donated × multiplier). As predicted, there States and Canada. The demographics were as follows: 47% were male and 53%
NAture HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Nature HuMaN BeHaviour Articles
female; 77% were white/Caucasian, 6% African American, 7% Hispanic, 7% Asian judgements of the donor’s character (t(419) = 9.72, P < 0.001, β = 0.54, 95%
American, 1% Native American and 2% marked “other”; 98% had graduated at CI = (0.43, 0.65)) (Fig. 4). Also as expected, there was no significant effect of
least from high school, and 50% had graduated at least from college. We also ran bonus size (t(419) = −0.15, P = 0.881 (two-sided), β = −0.01, 95% CI = (−0.12,
114 donors to pair with the participants (we paired multiple participants with each 0.10)) and no significant interaction between whether the participants donated
donor), so that the study could be fully incentivized. and the size of the bonus (t(419) = 1.67, P = 0.095 (two-sided), β = 0.11, 95%
CI = (−0.02, 0.24)). The pattern of means for the average standardized character
Procedure. The participants selected their top-choice charity from the same list judgements was as follows: for those who did not donate, mean = −0.53 and
used in study 1a. The participants then read about a donor who had selected their s.d. = 0.73 for 10 cents, and mean = −0.55 and s.d. = 0.76 for 20 cents; for those
top charity from the same list and had the choice to donate or keep all of a bonus. who donated, mean = 0.43 and s.d. = 0.68 for 10 cents, and mean = 0.65 and
We manipulated (between participants) whether we paired the participants with a s.d. = 0.70 for 20 cents.
donor who chose to donate or keep the bonus, and whether this donor’s bonus was
10 cents or 20 cents. Validating that the participants discriminate between the relevant donation amounts.
A participant paired with a donor who chose to keep the bonus when the To verify that the participants could discriminate the difference between the
bonus was 10 cents saw the following text: donation amounts under similar conditions, we recruited a separate sample (N = 201)
For the next part of this study, we are pairing you with another MTurk from the same pool, and asked them (between participants) how many days they
worker who saw the same list of charities that you saw, and had the would wait to receive a 10-cent bonus (N = 101) or a 20-cent bonus (N = 100). These
opportunity to donate a 10 cent bonus to the charity that they selected as participants indicated that they would wait an average of 2.76 days longer for the
their top choice. They had a choice between two options: donate the entire 20-cent bonus (t(199) = 1.79, P = 0.038, Cohen’s d = 0.25, 95% CI = (−0.025, 0.54)).
10 cent bonus to their top charity, or keep the entire 10 cent bonus for The pattern of means was as follows: mean = 10.84 and s.d. = 10.93 for 10 cents
themselves. This other MTurk worker decided to keep the entire 10 cent (N = 101), and mean = 13.60 and s.d. = 10.89 for 20 cents (N = 101).
bonus for themself.
Study 5: reputational rewards are sensitive to giving but insensitive to the
A participant paired with a donor who chose to donate the bonus when the
percentage given. Experimental design overview. Study 5 tested whether donors
bonus was 10 cents saw the following text:
were rewarded more for donating to charity when they donated a greater
For the next part of this study, we are pairing you with another MTurk percentage of their available funds. The donors were given a bonus of either
worker who saw the same list of charities that you saw, and had the 75 cents or 90 cents. They could either keep their bonus or donate some portion
opportunity to donate a 10 cent bonus to the charity that they selected as of it to charity. The participants then had the opportunity to pay to reward
their top choice. They had a choice between two options: donate the entire donors who donated 60 cents out of a 75-cent bonus, did not donate any of a
10 cent bonus to their top charity, or keep the entire 10 cent bonus for 75-cent bonus, donated 60 cents out of a 90-cent bonus or did not donate any
themselves. This other MTurk worker decided to donate the entire 10 of a 90-cent bonus.
cent bonus to their top charity.
Participants. The participants were 401 respondents on MTurk (mean age, 35.53;
A participant paired with a donor who chose to keep the bonus when the bonus
s.d., 11.73; range, 18 to 74). Participation was limited to people from the United
was 20 cents saw the following text:
States and Canada. The demographics were as follows: 55% were male, 44% female
For the next part of this study, we are pairing you with another MTurk and 1% marked other/prefer not to say; 70% were white/Caucasian, 8% African
worker who saw the same list of charities that you saw, and had the American, 7% Hispanic, 11% Asian American, 1% Native American, 2% marked
opportunity to donate a 20 cent bonus to the charity that they selected as “other” and 1% marked “prefer not to say”; 99% had graduated at least from high
their top choice. They had a choice between two options: donate the entire school, and 57% had graduated at least from college. We also ran 81 donors to pair
20 cent bonus to their top charity, or keep the entire 20 cent bonus for with the participants (we paired multiple participants with each donor), so that the
themselves. This other MTurk worker decided to keep the entire 20 cent study could be fully incentivized.
bonus for themselves.
Procedure. The participants selected their top-choice charity from the same list
A participant paired with a donor who chose to donate the bonus when the
used in study 1a. The participants then read about a donor who had selected their
bonus was 20 cents saw the following text:
top charity from the same list and had the choice to donate or keep some or all of a
For the next part of this study, we are pairing you with another MTurk bonus. We manipulated (between participants) whether we paired the participants
worker who saw the same list of charities that you saw, and had the with a donor who chose to donate 60 cents or keep the entire bonus, and whether
opportunity to donate a 20 cent bonus to the charity that they selected as this donor’s bonus was 75 cents or 90 cents.
their top choice. They had a choice between two options: donate the entire A participant paired with a donor who chose to keep the entire bonus when the
20 cent bonus to their top charity, or keep the entire 20 cent bonus for bonus was 75 cents saw the following text:
themselves. This other MTurk worker decided to donate the entire 20
For the next part of this study, we are pairing you with another MTurk
cent bonus to their top charity.
worker who saw the same list of charities that you saw, and had the
After reading about this donor’s decision, the participants were given a bonus opportunity to donate some or all of a 75 cent bonus to the charity that they
of 30 cents and had the opportunity to pay some or all of this bonus to reward selected as their top choice. This other MTurk worker decided to keep the
the donor. As in study 3, to give the participants some encouragement to reward, entire 75 cent bonus for themself.
we informed them that every cent that they paid would be tripled, such that the
A participant paired with a donor who chose to donate 60 cents of the bonus
donor received three cents. We also asked the participants the same eight questions
when the bonus was 75 cents saw the following text:
about the donor’s character used in study 3 (rated on a seven-point Likert scale):
how generous, giving, good a person, ethical, moral and deserving of praise the For the next part of this study, we are pairing you with another MTurk
donor was, and how much the donor cares about helping others and cares about worker who saw the same list of charities that you saw, and had the
charitable causes. opportunity to donate some or all of a 75 cent bonus to the charity that they
selected as their top choice. This other MTurk worker decided to donate
Analyses. We ran a regression that predicted the amount participants paid to 60 cents from the 75 cent bonus.
reward the donor from whether the donor donated (coded 0 = kept bonus,
A participant paired with a donor who chose to keep the entire bonus when the
1 = donated bonus), the size of the bonus (coded 0 = 10 cents, 1 = 20 cents) and
bonus was 90 cents saw the following text:
the interaction (donated × bonus size). As predicted, there was a significant effect
of whether the donor donated (t(419) = 3.70, P < 0.001, β = 0.25, 95% CI = (0.12, For the next part of this study, we are pairing you with another MTurk
0.38)) (Fig. 4). Also as expected, there was no significant effect of bonus size worker who saw the same list of charities that you saw, and had the
(t(419) = 1.00, P = 0.322 (two-sided), β = 0.07, 95% CI = (−0.06, 0.20)) and no opportunity to donate some or all of a 90 cent bonus to the charity that they
significant interaction between whether the donor donated and bonus size selected as their top choice. This other MTurk worker decided to keep the
(t(419) = 0.51, P = 0.608 (two-sided), β = 0.04, 95% CI = (−0.12, 0.20)). The entire 90 cent bonus for themself.
pattern of means for the amounts paid to reward (in cents) was as follows: for
A participant paired with a donor who chose to donate 60 cents of the bonus
those who did not donate, mean = 5.38 and s.d. = 9.18 for 10 cents (N = 104),
when the bonus was 90 cents saw the following text:
and mean = 6.83 and s.d. = 10.04 for 20 cents (N = 108); for those who donated,
mean = 10.84 and s.d. = 11.18 for 10 cents (N = 104), and mean = 13.35 and For the next part of this study, we are pairing you with another MTurk
s.d. = 11.93 for 20 cents (N = 106). worker who saw the same list of charities that you saw, and had the
In addition, the eight character questions were standardized and averaged opportunity to donate some or all of a 90 cent bonus to the charity that they
into a character judgement index (Cronbach’s alpha = 0.967). As predicted, selected as their top choice. This other MTurk worker decided to donate
there was a significant effect of whether the donor donated on the participants’ 60 cents from the 90 cent bonus.
NAture HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles Nature HuMaN BeHaviour
After reading about this donor’s decision, the participants were given a bonus 12. Rondeau, D. & List, J. A. Matching and challenge gifts to charity: evidence
of 30 cents and had the opportunity to pay some or all of this bonus to reward the from laboratory and natural field experiments. Exp. Econ. 11, 253–267 (2008).
donor. To give the participants some encouragement to reward, they were informed 13. Karlan, D., List, J. A. & Shafir, E. Small matches and charitable giving:
that every cent that they paid would be tripled, such that the potential donor evidence from a natural field experiment. J. Public Econ. 95, 344–350 (2011).
received three cents. We also asked the participants the same eight questions about 14. Kahneman, D. & Tversky, A. Prospect theory: an analysis of decision under
the potential donor’s character used in studies 3 and 4 (rated on a seven-point risk. Econometrica 47, 263–291 (1979).
Likert scale): how generous, giving, good a person, ethical, moral and deserving 15. Jenni, K. & Loewenstein, G. Explaining the identifiable victim effect. J. Risk
of praise the potential donor was, and how much the potential donor cares about Uncertain. 14, 235–257 (1997).
helping others and cares about charitable causes. 16. Small, D. A. & Loewenstein, G. Helping a victim or helping the victim:
altruism and identifiability. J. Risk Uncertain. 26, 5–16 (2003).
Analyses. We ran a regression that predicted the amount participants paid to 17. Bloom, P. Empathy and its discontents. Trends Cogn. Sci. 21, 24–31 (2017).
reward the donor from whether the donor donated (coded 0 = kept bonus, 18. Andreoni, J. Impure altruism and donations to public goods: a theory of
1 = donated 60 cents of the bonus), the size of the bonus (coded 0 = 75 cents, warm-glow giving. Econ. J. 100, 464–477 (1990).
1 = 90 cents) and the interaction (donated × bonus size). As predicted, there was a 19. Nowak, M. A. Five rules for the evolution of cooperation. Science 314,
significant effect of whether the donor donated (t(398) = 4.05, P < 0.001, β = 0.27, 1560–1563 (2006).
95% CI = (0.14, 0.40)) (Fig. 4). Also as expected, there was no significant effect 20. Panchanathan, K. & Boyd, R. Indirect reciprocity can stabilize cooperation
of bonus size (t(398) = −0.95, P = 0.341 (two-sided), β = −0.06, 95% CI = (−0.20, without the second-order free rider problem. Nature 432, 499–502 (2004).
0.07)) and no significant interaction between whether the donor donated and the 21. Hoffman, M, Yoeli, E. & Navarrete, C. D. in The Evolution of Morality (eds
bonus size (t(398) = 1.05, P = 0.294 (two-sided), β = 0.09, 95% CI = (−0.08, 0.25)). Shakelford, T. & Hansen, R.) 289–316 (Springer, 2016).
The pattern of means for the amounts paid to reward (in cents) was as follows: 22. Nowak, M. A. Evolutionary Dynamics (Harvard Univ. Press, 2006).
for those who did not donate, mean = 4.77 and s.d. = 9.91 for 75 cents (N = 101), 23. Fudenberg, D. & Maskin, E. The folk theorem in repeated games with
and mean = 3.41 and s.d. = 8.59 for 90 cents (N = 99); for those who donated, discounting or with incomplete information. Econometrica 54,
mean = 10.50 and s.d. = 11.11 for 75 cents (N = 101), and mean = 11.26 and 533–554 (1986).
s.d. = 11.59 for 90 cents (N = 100). 24. Freitas, J. D., Thomas, K., DeScioli, P. & Pinker, S. Common knowledge,
In addition, the eight character questions were standardized and averaged into coordination, and strategic mentalizing in human social life. Proc. Natl Acad.
an average character judgement index (Cronbach’s alpha = 0.977). As predicted, Sci. USA 116, 13751–13758 (2019).
there was a significant effect of whether donors donated on the participants’ 25. DeScioli, P. & Kurzban, R. Mysteries of morality. Cognition 112,
ratings of the donors’ character (t(398) = 14.32, P < 0.001, β = 0.74, 95% CI = (0.63, 281–299 (2009).
0.84)) (Fig. 4). Also as expected, there was no significant effect of bonus size 26. Darwin, C. On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection, or, the
(t(398) = −0.11, P = 0.915 (two-sided), β = −0.01, 95% CI = (−0.11, 0.10)) and Preservation of Favoured Races in the Struggle for Life (P.F. Collier & Son,
no significant interaction between whether the participants donated and the size 1859).
of the bonus (t(398) = −1.43, P = 0.153 (two-sided), β = −0.10, 95% CI = (−0.21, 27. Hamilton, W. D. The evolution of altruistic behavior. Am. Nat. 97,
0.03)). The pattern of means for the average standardized character judgements 354–356 (1963).
was as follows: for those who did not donate, mean = −0.63 and s.d. = 0.76 for 28. Henrich, J. The Secret of Our Success: How Culture Is Driving Human
75-cent bonus, and mean = −0.64 and s.d. = 0.69 for 90-cent bonus; for those Evolution, Domesticating Our Species, and Making Us Smarter (Princeton
who donated, mean = 0.73 and s.d. = 0.63 for 75-cent bonus, and mean = 0.53 and Univ. Press, 2015).
s.d. = 0.62 for 90-cent bonus. 29. Barclay, P. Biological markets and the effects of partner choice on cooperation
and friendship. Curr. Opin. Psychol. 7, 33–38 (2016).
Reporting Summary. Further information on research design is available in the 30. Gintis, H., Smith, E. A. & Bowles, S. Costly signaling and cooperation.
Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article. J. Theor. Biol. 213, 103–119 (2001).
31. Alpizar, F., Carlsson, F. & Johansson-Stenman, O. Anonymity, reciprocity, and
Data availability conformity: evidence from voluntary contributions to a national park in
Costa Rica. J. Public Econ. 92, 1047–1060 (2008).
The data that support the findings reported in this paper are available from the
32. Kraft-Todd, G., Yoeli, E., Bhanot, S. & Rand, D. Promoting cooperation in the
corresponding author upon request.
field. Curr. Opin. Behav. Sci. 3, 96–101 (2015).
33. Goldstein, N. J., Cialdini, R. B. & Griskevicius, V. A room with a viewpoint:
Received: 20 January 2020; Accepted: 11 August 2020;
using social norms to motivate environmental conservation in hotels.
Published: xx xx xxxx
J. Consum. Res. 35, 472–482 (2008).
34. Hamlin, J. K. & Wynn, K. Young infants prefer prosocial to antisocial others.
references Cogn. Dev. 26, 30–39 (2011).
1. Baron, J. & Greene, J. Determinants of insensitivity to quantity in valuation of 35. Almenberg J., Dreber, A., Apicella, C. L., & Rand, D. G. in Psychology of
public goods: contribution, warm glow, budget constraints, availability, and Punishment (eds Palmetti, N. M. & Russo, J. P.) 73–92 (Nova Publishers, 2011).
prominence. J. Exp. Psychol. Appl. 2, 107–125 (1996). 36. McAuliffe, K., Jordan, J. J. & Warneken, F. Costly third-party punishment in
2. Kahneman, D., Ritov, I., Schkade, D., Sherman, S. J. & Varian, H. R. young children. Cognition 134, 1–10 (2015).
Economic preferences or attitude expressions? An analysis of dollar responses 37. Fehr, E., Fischbacher, U. & Gächter, S. Strong reciprocity, human cooperation,
to public issues. J. Risk Uncertain. 19, 203–235 (1999). and the enforcement of social norms. Hum. Nat. 13, 1–25 (2002).
3. Berman, J. Z., Barasch, A., Levine, E. E. & Small, D. A. Impediments to 38. Hamlin, J. K., Wynn, K., Bloom, P. & Mahajan, N. How infants and toddlers
effective altruism: the role of subjective preferences in charitable giving. react to antisocial others. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 108, 19931–19936 (2011).
Psych. Sci. 29, 834–844 (2018). 39. Jordan, J. J., Hoffman, M., Bloom, P. & Rand, D. G. Third-party punishment
4. Giving USA: The Annual Report on Philanthropy for the Year of 2015 (Giving as a costly signal of trustworthiness. Nature 530, 473–476 (2016).
USA Foundation, 2016). 40. Raihani, N. J. & Bshary, R. Why humans might help strangers. Front. Behav.
5. Volunteering in the United States, 2015 Economic News Release (Bureau of Neurosci. 9, 39 (2015).
Labor Statistics, US Department of Labor, 2016); https://www.bls.gov/news. 41. Alger, I. & Weibull, J. W. Homo moralis—preference evolution under
release/volun.nr0.htm incomplete information and assortative matching. Econometrica 81,
6. Lindsey, D. Who’s raising the most: The 100 charities that are America’s 2269–2302 (2013).
favorites. The Chronicles of Philanthropy https://www.philanthropy.com/ 42. Wilson, D. & Sober, E. Reintroducing group selection to the human
article/Who-s-Raising-the-Most-The/244933 (2018). behavioral sciences. Behav. Brain Sci. 17, 585–608 (1994).
7. Top Charities (GiveWell, 2020); https://www.givewell.org/charities/ 43. Boyd, R. A Different Kind of Animal: How Culture Transformed Our Species
top-charities?utm_expid=.QIUuueagRBqB_qsw6bI8xg.0&utm_ Vol. 46 (Princeton Univ. Press, 2017).
referrer=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.google.com%2F 44. Henrich, J., Heine, S. J. & Norenzayan, A. Most people are not WEIRD.
8. Your Dollar Goes Further Overseas (GiveWell, 2016); https://www.givewell. Nature 466, 29 (2010).
org/giving101/Your-dollar-goes-further-overseas 45. Aktipis, A. et al. Cooperation in an uncertain world: for the Maasai of East
9. Ord, T. The Moral Imperative Toward Cost-Effectiveness in Global Health Africa, need-based transfers outperform account-keeping in volatile
(Center for Global Development, 2013). environments. Hum. Ecol. 44, 353–364 (2016).
10. Singer, P. The Most Good You Can Do: How Effective Altruism Is Changing 46. Gurven, M. Tolerated reciprocity, reciprocal scrounging, and unrelated kin:
Ideas about Living Ethically (Yale Univ. Press, 2015). making sense of multiple models. Behav. Brain Sci. 27, 572–579 (2004).
11. Desvousges, W. H. et al. Measuring Nonuse Damages Using Contingent 47. McNamara, R. A., Willard, A. K., Norenzayan, A. & Henrich, J. Weighing
Valuation: An Experimental Evaluation of Accuracy 2nd edn (RTI outcome vs. intent across societies: how cultural models of mind shape moral
International, 1992). reasoning. Cognition 182, 95–108 (2019).
NAture HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Nature HuMaN BeHaviour Articles
48. Barrett, H. C. et al. Small-scale societies exhibit fundamental variation in the P. Choi for their help in formatting the manuscript and editing the figures; and the John
role of intentions in moral judgment. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 113, Templeton Foundation for financial support. The funders had no role in study design,
4688–4693 (2016). data collection and analysis, decision to publish or preparation of the manuscript.
49. Small, D. A. & Simonsohn, U. Friends of victims: personal experience and
prosocial behavior. J. Consum. Res. 35, 532–542 (2008). Author contributions
50. DeScioli, P., Bruening, R. & Kurzban, R. The omission effect in moral cognition:
All authors edited the manuscript and approved the final version. B.B. and M.H.
toward a functional explanation. Evol. Hum. Behav. 32, 204–215 (2011).
designed the studies and wrote the manuscript, in consultation with M.N. B.B. collected
51. Dana, J., Weber, R. A. & Kuang, J. X. Exploiting moral wiggle room:
and analysed the data. The study designs were based on theory developed by M.H.
experiments demonstrating an illusory preference for fairness. Econ. Theory
33, 67–80 (2007).
52. Andreoni, J., Rao, J. M. & Trachtman, H. Avoiding the Ask: A Field Competing interests
Experiment on Altruism, Empathy, and Charitable Giving Report No. w17648 The authors declare no competing interests.
(National Bureau of Economic Research, 2011).
53. Dana, J., Cain, D. M. & Dawes, R. M. What you don’t know won’t hurt me:
costly (but quiet) exit in dictator games. Organ. Behav. Hum. Decis. Process.
Additional information
100, 193–201 (2006).
54. Trivers, R. L. The evolution of reciprocal altruism. Q. Rev. Biol. 46, Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/
35–57 (1971). s41562-020-00950-4.
55. Weber, E. U. et al. Asymmetric discounting in intertemporal choice: a Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to B.B.
query-theory account. Psychol. Sci. 18, 516–523 (2007).
Peer review information Primary handling editor: Charlotte Payne.
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Acknowledgements
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
We thank E. Yoeli, A. Bear, M. Singh, J. Jordan and P. DeScioli for their feedback on this
published maps and institutional affiliations.
manuscript; N. Baloch, Y. Mehra Bardoloi, K. Barolak, B, Davis, O. Lala and H. Mullins
for their help in calculating and awarding the bonuses; S. Ryan, A. Viser, E. Wilson and © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2020
NAture HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
1
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Corresponding author(s): Bethany Burum
Last updated by author(s): Jun 28, 2020
Reporting Summary
Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency
in reporting. For further information on Nature Research policies, see Authors & Referees and the Editorial Policy Checklist.
Statistics
For all statistical analyses, confirm that the following items are present in the figure legend, table legend, main text, or Methods section.
n/a Confirmed
The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
A statement on whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided
Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.
A description of all covariates tested
A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
A full description of the statistical parameters including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient)
AND variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)
For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted
Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.
For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated
Our web collection on statistics for biologists contains articles on many of the points above.
Software and code
Policy information about availability of computer code
Data collection We used Amazon Mechanical Turk in conjunction with TurkPrime.com to recruit subjects, and Qualtrics to build and host the survey.
Data analysis We used Microsoft Excel and SPSS Data Analysis Software to process and analyze the data.
For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors/reviewers.
We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Research guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.
Data
Policy information about availability of data
All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable:
- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets
- A list of figures that have associated raw data
- A description of any restrictions on data availability
All data and materials available upon request.
Field-specific reporting
Please select the one below that is the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.
Life sciences Behavioural & social sciences Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences
For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/documents/nr-reporting-summary-flat.pdf
2
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Behavioural & social sciences study design
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
Study description We collected quantitative data from online experiments, with random assignment to condition.
Research sample Amazon Mechanical Turk workers in the United States and Canada.
Sampling strategy We requested large samples from Amazon Mechanical Turk (study Ns ranging from 221-1006) to ensure ample power. We requested
large samples because we were often testing novel manipulations of uncertain strength, and because, in our experience, effects online
are often more subtle than those collected from subjects who come in person to the lab. These samples were generally larger than the
samples required for ample power in studies of similar topics. For example, the effect size from a relevant online study of discounting, a
topic related to our study 1, suggests that one would need 29 people per condition to have an 80% chance of detecting an effect of
equivalent strength (Weber et al., 2007, study 1); in study 1a we had 151 to 153 subjects per condition (comparing the effect of a
multiplier on savings versus donations), and in study 1b we had 251-253 per condition for this contrast. For follow-up studies we used
the previous study as a guide, as well as predictions about when an effect might be more subtle and thus require a larger sample (e.g.,
we expected empathy effects to be more subtle than giving--i.e., willingness to pay--effects because we consider empathy to be one of
several motivators to give). We set the sample size for each study at the beginning by requesting a certain round number of subjects via
Turkprime.com, and then let the study run to completion without ever altering the sample size. Studies typically returned a few more
subjects than we requested (e.g., 1006 when we requested 1000), probably because some people completed the survey (hosted by
Qualtrics) without entering their completion code into Amazon Mechanical Turk and being counted by that system.
Reference: Weber, E. U., Johnson, E. J., Milch, K. F., Chang, H., Brodscholl, J. C., & Goldstein, D. G. (2007). Asymmetric discounting in
intertemporal choice: A query-theory account. Psychological science, 18(6), 516-523.
Data collection Subjects completed the studies online, from a computer or other Internet-enabled device compatible with Qualtrics software (e.g., smart
phone or tablet). Subjects were randomly assigned to condition by the Qualtrics software; no one was present with the subject during
the study who knew the subject's condition. We cannot know whether other people unrelated to the study were in the room with the
subject while they completed the study.
Timing Studies 1a and 1b were run on May 30, 2017. Study 2a was run on June 25, 2017. Study 2b was run on December 5 and 6, 2017. Study
3a was run on October 6, 2016. Study 3b was run on November 13 and 14, 2017. Study 4 was run on October 7, 2016. Study 5 was run on
October 29 and 30, 2016.
Data exclusions No data were excluded from analysis.
Non-participation Subjects opt-in to participating in this study through Amazon Mechanical Turk. They are of course free to stop participating at any point
mid-survey, as they can easily close the browser window at any time. We report here everyone who started participating in any way that
we have recorded, but did not complete our primary questions (and so were not counted in the study N or included in our analyses). In
study 1a, one person completed the first study question (which followed asking for their Amazon Mechanical Turk ID, the consent form,
and some basic instructions), and then stopped taking the survey. This question asked participants to select their favorite charity from a
list of relatively well-known charities (e.g. The American Cancer Society). In study 1b, nine people entered their Amazon Mechanical Turk
ID and saw some introductory instructions (e.g., about study length, payment, and how to enter the completion code), but did not go
further in the study, and four people stopped participating after seeing some further study information but before answering any study
questions. In study 2a, four people entered their ID but did not go further, and five people entered their ID and saw some introductory
instructions but did not go farther. In study 2b, eight people entered their ID and saw some introductory instructions but did not go
farther. In study 3a, fourteen people entered their ID and saw some introductory instructions but did not go farther, and eleven people
completed the very first study question (which was the same as in study 1a), but did not go farther. In study 3b, two people entered their
ID but did not go farther, two people exited after they saw some introductory instructions, one person exited after the consent form, and
six people completed the very first study question (which was the same as in study 1a), but did not go farther. In study 4, one person
entered their ID and did not go further, and fifteen people entered their ID and saw some introductory instructions but did not go
further. Ten people answered the very first question (which was the same as in study 1a) but did not go further. In study 5, three people
entered their ID and saw some introductory instructions but did not go farther. One person answered the very first question (which was
the same as in study 1a) but did not go further. Because they exited so early, none of these participants who stopped after beginning a
study made it to any material that differed between conditions.
Randomization Participants were randomly assigned to condition. This random assignment was coded into the survey flow using Qualtrics.com.
Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods
We require information from authors about some types of materials, experimental systems and methods used in many studies. Here, indicate whether each material,
system or method listed is relevant to your study. If you are not sure if a list item applies to your research, read the appropriate section before selecting a response.
3
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Materials & experimental systems Methods
n/a Involved in the study n/a Involved in the study
Antibodies ChIP-seq
Eukaryotic cell lines Flow cytometry
Palaeontology MRI-based neuroimaging
Animals and other organisms
Human research participants
Clinical data
Human research participants
Policy information about studies involving human research participants
Population characteristics Demographic information about our human research participants (e.g., age, sex) is included in the Methods section.
Recruitment We recruited subjects using Amazon Mechanical Turk. We kept the study description vague (Title: "Short Academic Survey";
Description: "This is a short academic survey followed by some demographic questions") to minimize self-selection on the basis
of topic.
Ethics oversight Harvard University Institutional Review Board; Yale University Institutional Review Board
Note that full information on the approval of the study protocol must also be provided in the manuscript.