
===== PAGE 1/16 =====
Meta-Psychology, 2019, vol 3, MP.2017.840, Open data: Yes Edited by: Rickard Carlsson
https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2017.840 Open materials: Yes Reviewed by: Katherine S. Corker, Donald R. Williams,
Article type: Original Article Open and reproducible analysis: Yes Stephen R. Martin, David Manheim
Published under the CC-BY4.0 license Open reviews and editorial process: Yes Analysis reproduced by: Jack Davis
Preregistration: No All supplementary files can be accessed at OSF:
https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/C4WN8
Cumulative Science via Bayesian Posterior Passing:
An introduction
Charlotte O. Brand James P. Ounsley
University of Exeter, Penryn Campus, University of St Andrews,
College of Life and Environmental Science School of Biology
Daniel J. van der Post Thomas J.H. Morgan
University of St Andrews, Arizona State University, School of
School of Biology Human Evolution and Social Change
This paper introduces a statistical technique known as “posterior passing” in
which the results of past studies can be used to inform the analyses carried out
by subsequent studies. We first describe the technique in detail and show how
it can be implemented by individual researchers on an experiment by experi-
ment basis. We then use a simulation to explore its success in identifying true
parameter values compared to current statistical norms (ANOVAs and GLMMs).
We find that posterior passing allows the true effect in the population to be
found with greater accuracy and consistency than the other analysis types con-
sidered. Furthermore, posterior passing performs almost identically to a data
analysis in which all data from all simulated studies are combined and analysed
as one dataset. On this basis, we suggest that posterior passing is a viable means
of implementing cumulative science. Furthermore, because it prevents the ac-
cumulation of large bodies of conflicting literature, it alleviates the need for tra-
ditional meta-analyses. Instead, posterior passing cumulatively and collabora-
tively provides clarity in real time as each new study is produced and is thus a
strong candidate for a new, cumulative approach to scientific analyses and pub-
lishing.
Keywords: Bayesian statistics, metascience, cumulative science, replication crisis, stereotype
threat, psychological methods
The past two decades have seen a great increase collaboration of scientists failed to replicate 64 of
in the study of the scientific process itself, a field 100 findings published in top psychology journals in
dubbed ‘metascience’ (Munafo et al. 2017). The 2008 (Open Science Collaboration 2015). Given this,
growth of this field has been driven by a series of re- many scientists have turned their efforts towards
sults that question the reliability of science as it is identifying potential improvements to the scientific
currently practiced. For instance, in 2015 a global process.

===== PAGE 2/16 =====
2 BRAND ET AL.
A key focus within metascience is how to im- across studies. Consequently, meta-analyses often
prove the use of statistical methods and the pro- differ in their interpretations of the literature, de-
cess of scientific publishing. Problems such as p- pending on the specific question that the authors
hacking, “HARKing” and the “file-drawer” effect are interested in. Moreover, in some cases meta-
have been discussed in science for many years analyses can actually increase uncertainty. For in-
with mixed opinions and widespread debate (e.g. stance, they can uncover evidence of publication
Bissell 2013; Bohannon 2014; Kahneman 2014; bias (as is the case with four of the stereotype threat
Schnall 2014; Fischer 2015; Pulverer 2015). Recent meta-analyses), or researcher effects, both of which
proposals such as guidelines against the mis-use undermine the credibility of individual studies. More
of p-values (Wasserstein & Lazar 2016), banning generally, the lack of objective inclusion criteria can
the p-value (Trafimow & Marks 2015), statistical render the conclusions of meta-analyses just as
checking software (Epskamp & Nuijten, 2016), rede- fraught as the results of individual studies. An exam-
fining statistical significance (Benjamin et al., ple of this is seen in the ‘cycle shift’ debate, which
2018), justifying your alpha (Lakens et al., 2018), asks whether women’s mate preferences change
pre-registering methods (Chambers et al. 2014; over their ovulatory cycle. Here, an initial meta-
van ’t Veer & Giner-Sorolla, 2016) and the Open Sci- analysis argued against the existence of an effect,
ence movement generally (e.g. Kidwell et al. 2016) only to be followed by another meta-analysis that
are propagating discussion and endorsement of found the exact opposite to be the case
substantial changes to scientific publishing and (Gildersleeve, Haselton, & Fales, 2014a, 2014b; Wood,
research methods. Kressel, Joshi, & Louie, 2014). Despite both being
One indication of the current scientific practice based on the aggregation of a large number of stud-
underperforming is the presence of large numbers ies (many of which were included in both meta-anal-
of publications presenting conflicting conclusions yses) one meta-analysis must be wrong. Given these
about the same phenomenon. This is the case, for difficulties, meta-analyses do not provide an unam-
instance, in the ‘stereotype threat’ literature, in biguous solution for resolving conflicted literatures.
which experiments are designed to “activate” a neg- Meta-analyses are not the only way to mathe-
ative stereotype in participants’ minds, and this matically combine the results of multiple studies.
leads to reduced performance in participants for Many recent proposals fall within the category of
which the stereotype is relevant. A common ques- “cumulative science”, a process in which each study
tion is whether being told that women typically per- incorporates prior work into its analyses. For this
form worse than men at mathematical or spatial reason, each study can be considered a meta-analy-
tasks depresses the performance of female partici- sis of sorts, with its conclusions reflecting the data
pants on these tasks (e.g. Flore & Wicherts 2015). De- collected both in that study as well as prior studies.
spite the seemingly straight-forward nature of this As such, there is no need for traditional meta-anal-
question, and the publication of over 100 papers on yses in a cumulative science framework. One exam-
this topic, there are no clear conclusions about the ple of cumulative science is the use of Sequential
veracity of stereotype threat. Bayes Factors, which can be used to update the ex-
Traditionally, meta-analyses are conducted to tent to which evidence is weighted in favour of the
clarify the existence of a purported effect in the lit- presence of an effect based on new data
erature. This is also true of the stereotype threat lit- (Schönbrodt, Wagenmakers, Zehetleitner, & Peru-
erature, which includes seven meta-analyses (Wal- gini, 2017). Similarly, ‘Curate Science’, and measures
ton & Cohen 2003; Nguyen & Ryan 2008; Walton & of replication success, have gained support (LeBel,
Spencer 2009; Stoet & Geary 2012; Picho, Rodriguez Vanpaemel, Cheung, & Campbell, 2018; Zwaan, Etz,
& Finnie 2013; Flore & Wicherts 2014; Doyle & Voyer Lucas, & Donnellan, 2017). Here, we describe and
2016). However, in many cases meta-analyses do not test another approach to cumulative science, “pos-
lead to increased certainty (Ferguson 2014; Lakens terior passing”, which is a straightforward extension
et al., 2017; Lakens, Hilgard, & Staaks, 2016). One rea- of Bayesian methods of data analysis. In what follows
son is that meta-analyses are not just used to deter- we first cover Bayesian inference, which is the the-
mine whether an effect truly exists but can also be oretical background of posterior passing. We then
used to reveal the underlying causes of variation describe how posterior passing can be implemented

===== PAGE 3/16 =====
CUMULATIVE SCIENCE VIA BAYESIAN POSTERIOR PASSING 3
in practice. Finally, using the case study of stereo- seek these out.
type threat mentioned above, we use a simulation to Consider an urn containing a mix of blue and
compare the ability of traditional analytic tech- white pebbles and imagine we are interested in un-
niques and posterior passing to correctly identify derstanding what proportion of the pebbles are
effects of different sizes (including 0). We demon- blue. To start with, we have two competing hypoth-
strate that, given a representative number of studies eses: (1) 75% of the pebbles are blue, or (2) 75% of the
characteristic of the stereotype threat literature, pebbles are white (we assume that these are the only
posterior passing provides an up-to-date, accurate two possibilities). We will test these hypotheses by
estimation of the true population level effect with- collecting data; three times we will draw a pebble
out the need for a dedicated meta-analysis. Con- from the urn, note its color, and replace it. Before
versely, using traditional analytic techniques such as collecting data, let us note our prior beliefs (p(h) in
ANOVAs in “one-shot” analyses, produced an abun- the above equation). Without any knowledge we
dance of conflicting effect size estimates as is found could assign each hypothesis equal prior probability
in the stereotype threat literature at present. Fur- (i.e. 50% in both cases) but let us imagine we have
thermore, posterior passing produces almost iden- reason to suspect hypothesis 2 is more likely (per-
tical results to a ‘meta’ GLMM analysis in which all haps we know blue pebbles are rare, or we know that
available data were combined and analysed as one the urn was filled at a factory that produces more
dataset. white than blue pebbles, or maybe someone told us
that they glanced inside the urn and it looked mostly
white etc.). Given this we assign prior probabilities
Bayes Rule and Posterior Passing
of 0.4 and 0.6 to the two hypotheses.
Now to data collection; let us assume we happen
Bayes’ theorem (a.k.a. Bayes’ rule), is a method of
to draw three blue pebbles. We need to use this data
assigning probabilities to hypotheses. Given a set of
to calculate the likelihood for each hypothesis, i.e.
competing hypotheses and our beliefs about how
the probability of drawing three blue pebbles under
likely they are to be true, it provides us with the
each hypothesis (p(d|h) in the above equation). The
probability that each hypothesis is true when we
probability of drawing a blue pebble three times un-
collect more data. More formally this can be written
der hypothesis 1 is 0.753 , and 0.253 under hypothesis
as:
2. This is 0.42 and 0.016 respectively. Note that the
𝑝(ℎ)𝑝(𝑑|ℎ) likelihood is much higher for hypothesis 1, this
𝑝(ℎ|𝑑)= means that the data are more consistent with hy-
𝑝(𝑑)
pothesis 1 than with hypothesis 2 and so we should
expect Bayes’ theorem to shift the probabilities of
where p(h|d) is the probability that each hypoth-
each hypothesis in favor of hypothesis 1.
esis is true taking the data into account (the “poste-
The next step is to calculate the normalizing
rior”), p(h) is the probability of each hypothesis be-
constant, p(d), which is the probability of getting the
ing true prior to collecting data (the “prior”), and
data under any hypothesis. It is the sum of the prob-
p(d|h) is the probability that each hypothesis would
ability of getting the data under each hypothesis
have produced the observed data (the “likelihood”).
multiplied by the prior probability that each hypoth-
The denominator, p(d), can be conceptualized as the
esis is true, i.e. it is the sum of the likelihoods multi-
probability of getting the data under any hypothesis,
plied by the priors. In our case we only have two hy-
but in practice it acts as a normalizing constant to
potheses, so p(d) is p(h)p(d|h) + p(h)p(d|h ). We now
ensure that the posterior probabilities sum to 1. To 1 1 2 2
have all the necessary parts to execute Bayes’ rule
illustrate the application of Bayes theorem we will
and we can calculate the probability that each hy-
now walk through a simple example based on a
pothesis is true. The table below summarizes this
thought experiment used by the 16th century statis-
process, showing that because the data were more
tician Jacob Bernoulli. Other introductions to Bayes-
consistent with hypothesis 1 it is now the more likely
ian inference can be found elsewhere (van de Schoot
of the two hypotheses, even though it started with a
et al. 2014; Morgan, Laland & Harris 2014; McElreath
lower prior probability.
2016, Kruschke 2011) and we encourage readers to

===== PAGE 4/16 =====
4 BRAND ET AL.
Table 1. A summary of the example execution of Bayes’ theorem. The probability that
each hypothesis is true, taking the data into account (the “posterior”, column 5), is the prior
(column 2) multiplied by the likelihood (column 3) and divided by a normalizing constant
(the sum of column 4).
Hypothesis Prior, p(h) Likelihood, Prior * Likelihood, Posterior,
p(d|h) p(h)p(d|h) p(h|d)
1 0.4 0.42 0.17 0.95
2 0.6 0.016 0.009 0.05
This example can also illustrate how Bayes’ theo- Posterior passing in practice
rem facilitates cumulative science. Assume someone
else decides to draw more pebbles from the same While the above example is much simpler than
urn. How can they include our data in their anal- most scientific problems, it is relatively straightfor-
yses? The solution is straightforward: they simply ward to generalize the theory to continuous hy-
need to use our posterior as their prior. More gen- pothesis spaces as is characteristic of much scien-
erally, by using the posterior from a previous study tific research. For instance, say we are hypothesiz-
as the prior in the next one, the posterior of the sec- ing about the value of a parameter in a model. Rather
ond study will reflect the data collected in both than assigning prior probabilities to specific hypoth-
studies, forming a chain of studies each of which eses (such as “the parameter is 2.5”) we describe a
builds on the last to provide an increasingly precise probability density function across the range of pos-
understanding of the world. This method is referred sible values for the parameter. For instance, if we
to as “posterior passing” (Beppu & Griffiths 2009) have reason to believe the parameter is close to 10,
and is the focus of this manuscript. If posterior pass- we might use a normal distribution with a mean of
ing is effectively implemented, it is mathematically 10 and standard deviation of 1 (this permits any value
equivalent to collecting all the data in a single high- from positive to negative infinity, but 10 is the single
power study (Beppu & Griffiths 2009). In both a the- most likely value and 95% of the probability mass
oretical analysis and a lab experiment, Beppu and falls between 8 and 12). The likelihood, too, becomes
Griffiths (2009) found that posterior passing led to a function over the hypothesis space and the nor-
successively better inferences over time. Given this, malizing constant is calculated the same way as be-
posterior passing may offer a valuable addition to fore: the prior is multiplied by the likelihood and the
the scientific process, with particular benefits for resulting function is summed across the hypothesis
fields suffering from ambiguous literatures or repli- space. The posterior, again calculated as the prior
cation crises. The passing of posteriors across stud- multiplied by the likelihood and divided by the nor-
ies not only incorporates information from prior malizing constant, is also a probability density func-
studies, but also prevents any experimental dataset tion, allocating posterior probability over the pa-
from carrying too much weight. In the next section rameter space which can then be passed as the prior
we discuss how posterior passing can be imple- in subsequent studies.
mented as part of the Bayesian analysis of data. The application of Bayes’ rule to continuous hy-
pothesis spaces (such as in parameter estimation)
runs into problems, however, because it is often im-
possible to calculate the normalizing constant. The

===== PAGE 5/16 =====
CUMULATIVE SCIENCE VIA BAYESIAN POSTERIOR PASSING 5
samples
circumnavigation of this problem relied on the de- the same values of the posterior probability density
velopment of modern computers and new tech- function itself. For instance, the mean of the samples
niques such as Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) approaches the mean of the posterior probability
methods. The details of this technique are compli- density function, and an interval that contains 95%
cated (for accessible introductions to MCMC see of the samples will also contain 95% of the probabil-
McElreath 2016; Kruschke 2011), but it works by ity mass of the posterior distribution. So, even
providing the user with a series of values (called though the posterior probability density function
“samples”) that approximate values drawn from the technically remains unknown, we can nonetheless
posterior probability density function even though describe it in a variety of ways.
the exact density function itself remains unknown. In order to implement posterior passing we now
As the number of samples approaches infinity, need a means by which samples from the posterior
statistical descriptions of the samples converge on can be translated into a probability density function
ycneuqerF
−2 −1 0 1 2 3 4
00001
0008
0006
0004
0002
0
Sample histogram
Normal approximation
Gamma approximation
Normal with inflated variance
Gamma with inflated variance
Figure 1. The translation of a histogram of samples into a probability distribution. Here the samples (black histogram
of 50,000 samples) look somewhat normal, but they are all positive and the histogram is positively skewed. Using the
mean and variance to define a normal distribution (solid blue lines, scaled x10000) produces a reasonable fit, but the
lower tail places non-zero probability density on negative values while the peak appears to be slightly higher than the
peak of the histogram. Using a gamma distribution instead (solid red line) produces a perfect fit. Artificially inflating
the variance (dashed lines) changes the distributions. In the case of the normal distribution it greatly widens it, placing
increasing amount of probability mass below 0. In the case of the gamma distribution the positive skew grows, but all
the probability mass remains above 0. In this way the variance is increased but the mean of the probability distribution
remains the same as the mean of the samples.

===== PAGE 6/16 =====
6 BRAND ET AL.
that will be the prior in subsequent studies. The sim- methods. If even a point estimate for the effect size
plest approach is to assume the posterior is nor- is given then this can be used as the mean of the
mally distributed and then define the prior as a nor- prior with the variance set to a suitable value corre-
mal distribution with the same mean and standard sponding to the researcher level of uncertainty. Pre-
deviation as the samples generated. So, if the mean cisely how much a prior should be watered down in
of the samples is 5.3 and the standard deviation is cases such as these will depend on the similarity of
0.8, then this can be assumed to correspond to the the studies in question and discussion of this should
probability distribution N(5.3, 0.8). However, assum- be an important part of the peer-review and publi-
ing normality could lead to an inaccurate descrip- cation process. Moreover, where concerns are
tion of the posterior. To alleviate this concern re- raised, robustness analyses can be used in which the
searchers can inflate the standard deviation of the prior is varied and the resultant effect on the con-
passed posterior, for instance changing N(5.3, 0.8) to clusions described and discussed. In the short term,
N(5.3, 8). This will broaden the prior, effectively it may be beneficial to compare results with and
weakening its influence and so avoiding distorting without posterior passing to show the difference in
results due to the posterior passing process. By the inference that results from either approach.
same token, however, broadening the prior will also
lessen the influence of past research and potentially
The simulation
slow down scientific accumulation.
A more nuanced approach is to build bespoke
In this section we present a simulation of the sci-
priors for each set of posterior samples. The re-
entific process, testing the hypothesis that posterior
searcher can choose a probability distribution that
passing will benefit science relative to other meth-
closely matches the shape of the posterior samples
ods of data analysis and avoid the accumulation of
(e.g. normal, exponential, gamma or beta) and ap-
large, ambiguous literatures. We simulate a series of
propriate parameter values can be calculated from
experiments testing for an interaction between two
the samples. For instance, a normal distribution with
variables. We vary (i) the true effect size of the in-
the same mean and standard deviation as the sam-
teraction, (ii) the scale of between individual differ-
ples, or a gamma distribution with shape and rate
ences and (iii) the statistical technique employed by
parameters calculated from the mean and variance
scientists. The simulation is, in part, based on the
of the samples. As before, if the researcher wishes to
stereotype threat literature as this produced an am-
err on the side of caution by weakening the effect of
biguous and conflicted literature, as discussed pre-
the passed posterior on subsequent analyses they
viously. As such, we refer to the interacting variables
need to simply inflate the variance of the distribu-
as sex and condition, and various simulation param-
tion. Figure 1 shows an example of this in action il-
eters (e.g. the number of participants per study) are
lustrating that a highly suitable distribution is de-
set to values representative of the stereotype threat
rived in this manner. Inflating the uncertainty in the
literature.
prior also facilitates posterior passing in cases
We use the simulation to compare four different
where there are differences in experimental design
analysis methods; an analysis of variance (ANOVA), a
or analytic technique. Even within a single area of
generalised linear mixed model (GLMM), a Bayesian
research it is rare that any two studies are exactly
GLMM using MCMC estimation (henceforth
the same. These differences mean that the posterior
“BGLMM") and a Bayesian GLMM using MCMC esti-
produced by one study may not be entirely appro-
mation and posterior passing (henceforth “PP”).
priate for the prior in another. However, experi-
ANOVAs have been widely used in psychology for
ments do not have to be identical to engage in pos-
decades and still represent one of the most com-
terior passing: as long as they are addressing the
monly used analytic approaches (including for stud-
same theoretical “effect” then there is reason to
ies of stereotype threat), despite suggestions of
draw on previous knowledge. In these cases, the un-
their inadequacy for many types of experimental de-
certainty in the posterior should be inflated to ac-
sign (Jaeger 2008). A move towards using general-
count for differences in experimental design.
ised linear mixed models for categorical and bino-
Another possibility is that the prior could be
mial data has been suggested as more appropriate
based on a previous study that used non-Bayesian

===== PAGE 7/16 =====
CUMULATIVE SCIENCE VIA BAYESIAN POSTERIOR PASSING 7
than methods often used by psychologists and ecol- Data Collection
ogists (Jaeger 2008; Bolker et al. 2009) and so we in-
Datasets were generated by randomly selecting a
clude both a frequentist GLMM and a Bayesian
sample of 80 individuals who were then split into a
equivalent. Finally, we include “posterior passing”
control group and an experimental group (20 of each
(Beppu & Griffiths 2009) to examine whether imple-
sex in each group). Each simulated participant was
menting posterior passing as a form of cumulative
presented with 25 binary-choice trials and the num-
knowledge updating would be beneficial. Addition-
ber of trials they answered correctly was generated
ally, we performed a single BGLMM analysis over all
by sampling from a binomial distribution in which
simulated datasets combined (henceforth “meta
the likelihood of success per trial was:
BGLMM") in order to compare posterior passing
against the best possible scenario of a single high-
𝑝 =𝑙𝑜𝑔𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑐(𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑓𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒 +𝑒∗𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 ∗𝑠𝑒𝑥 )
power study. ( ( ( (
Each repeat of the simulation involved the fol-
where e is the unknown interaction effect that
lowing three steps: 1) a population of one million po-
the simulated experiments are attempting to iden-
tential experimental subjects was created, 2) 60 se-
tify. In the context of stereotype threat, it can be
quential experiments were carried out, each involv-
considered as the magnitude of the effect of the ste-
ing 80 participants taking part in 25 experimental
reotype threat condition on the behaviour of women
trials (numbers chosen as representative of the ste-
(i.e. participants of sex 1). Note that participants of
reotype threat literature) and 3) the 60 datasets
sex 0 (i.e. men) are insensitive to condition, and con-
were analysed using the four different analysis
dition 0 (the control condition) does not affect par-
methods. For each combination of parameter values,
ticipant behaviour.
we carried out 20 repeat simulations. Further details
Across simulations, we consider five different
are given below, and full model code is available at
values for e (the magnitude of the effect in question):
www.github.com/thomasmorgan/posterior-pass-
0, 0.5, 1, 1.5 and 2. Given that the average population
ing.
performance was 0 (equivalent to a 50% chance of
success per trial) these values increase the average
Population Creation
probability of success from 0.5 to 0.5, 0.62, 0.73, 0.82
Each of the 1,000,000 simulated participants is and 0.88 respectively. Thus, the cases we explored
defined by two values; their sex (0 or 1, with half of range from no interaction effect, up to a large effect,
the population having each value) and their perfor- exceeding the effect sizes reported in meta-anal-
mance at the experimental task relative to the pop- yses of the stereotype threat literature (e.g. Doyle &
ulation average (positive values indicate above aver- Voyer 2016).
age performance, and negative values below average
performance). Each participant’s performance value
was drawn randomly from a normal distribution Data Analysis
with mean 0 and with variance that varied across
We performed four methods of analysis on each
simulations (from 0 to 1 in steps of 0.25). For each
simulated dataset. The first is the predominant
participant there was another participant of the
method of analysis used in the stereotype threat lit-
same sex but with the opposite performance value,
erature; analysis of variance (2 x 2 ANOVA). Average
and another of the opposite sex, but with the same
success on the task (i.e. number of successes/num-
performance value. This ensured that the average
ber of trials) was subjected to a 2(Sex) x 2(Condition)
performance value in the population was exactly 0
ANOVA, that included a main effect of sex, a main
(equivalent to 50% success on a binary choice trial),
effect of condition, and an interaction between sex
and the variation in performance within each sex
and condition at a significance value of p<0.05.
was equal.
The second method is a generalised linear mixed
model (GLMM) which models number of successes
as a binomially distributed variable and uses a logit

===== PAGE 8/16 =====
8 BRAND ET AL.
Figure 2. Analysis estimates produced from a single simulation of 60 experiments. The true effect sizes (displayed by
the horizontal black line) are (a) 0 and (b) 2 (equivalent to an increase in the probability of responding correctly of 0.38).
In both cases there is no individual variation. Across experiments, the estimates produced by the ANOVA, GLMM and
BGLMM vary stochastically around the true population average, with the accuracy or certainty of each analysis
unrelated to its position in the series. Furthermore, in panel (b) the ANOVA estimates are considerably less certain than
those of the GLMM or bGLMM. In contrast to all other methods considered, posterior passing allows the analysis to
become more accurate and more certain over time. Note that a particularly skewed data set (data set 9, in panel a)
prompts all analyses to find a positive result, despite this, posterior passing is nonetheless able to correct itself by the
end of the simulation.
link function. The same outcome and predictor var- on the posterior from the most recent previous ex-
iables are used as in the ANOVA (i.e. a baseline effect, periment. As a deliberately coarse implementation
and effects of sex and condition as well as a of posterior passing we assumed the posterior was
sex*condition interaction), but a random effect for normal and defined it solely by its mean and preci-
participant is implemented. This method fits param- sion.
eters based on a maximum likelihood approach and
estimates the linear effect that our manipulation and Results
independent variables have on the log odds of suc-
cess in any given trial. Within each simulation, the general pattern was
The third approach uses the same model formu- for posterior passing to converge on the true effect
lation as the GLMM, but uses Bayesian MCMC meth- size while the other analysis types produce a series
ods to generate parameter estimates in JAGS. Mini- of independent results distributed stochastically
mally informative priors (normal distributions with around the true value with no convergence over
mean 0 and precision 0.01) were used for all param- time (see Fig. 2A and 2B). Five metrics were used to
eters, and so we expect that the outcomes of this more thoroughly examine the performance of each
analysis should be extremely similar to that of the analytic technique across simulations, 1) the average
frequentist GLMM. point estimate; 2) the true positive rate; 3) the false
The fourth approach is a Bayesian GLMM with positive rate; 4) the average width of the 95% confi-
“posterior passing,” (Beppu & Griffiths 2009) in dence/credible interval; and 5) the average differ-
which the prior for e (the interaction effect) is based ence between the effect estimate and the true value.

===== PAGE 9/16 =====
CUMULATIVE SCIENCE VIA BAYESIAN POSTERIOR PASSING 9
Figure 3. Average effect size estimates from the five analysis types over 20 simulations of 60 datasets (Bayesian GLMM
not shown as it is identical to the GLMM). The true population average is on the x axis, and the individual variation on
the y axis. Colour corresponds to effect size estimate according to the key to the right of the panels.
These were calculated for the analysis of each sim- True positive result rates
ulated data set, except in the case of posterior pass-
For all analyses, the ability to detect a positive ef-
ing where only the final analysis in each simulation
fect increased with the true effect size (Fig. 4). How-
was used. This is because, with posterior passing, in-
ever, for the ANOVA, GLMM and BGLMM increasing
formation from each dataset is incorporated into
individual variation decreased the true positive re-
subsequent analyses and so the final analysis con-
sult rate. With posterior passing, there is no such ef-
tains information from all 60 datasets.
fect; positive results are likely to be found whenever
the true effect is non-zero
Effect size estimates
All analysis types were generally effective at esti-
mating the size of the effect (see Fig. 3). However, as
the between-individual variation increases, the
ANOVA underestimates the effect size to a modest
extent.

===== PAGE 10/16 =====
10 BRAND ET AL.
Figure 4. Positive rate for the five analysis types over 20 simulations of 60 datasets (Bayesian GLMM not shown as it is
identical to the GLMM). The size of the true population average is on the x axis, and the individual variation on the y
axis. Colour gives the positive result rate, ranging from 0 - 1, according to the key to the right of the panels. An analysis
finds a positive effect in the population if the upper and lower bounds for its 95% confidence/credible interval do not
include zero, the proportion of analyses in which a positive effect is found is the positive results rate.
two false positives, while the meta BGLMM pro-
False positive result rates duced one.
When the true effect was 0, all analyses were un-
likely to produce (false-)positive results but did oc- Uncertainty
casionally do so (see Fig. 4). Across all datasets
In general, the width of the 95% confi-
(N=6000) the ANOVA produced 304 false positives
dence/credible intervals (henceforth “uncertainty”)
(5.1%, close to the expected false positive rate of 5%),
decreases with the true effect size, but increases
the GLMM 341 false positives (5.7%) and the BGLMM
with individual variation (Fig. 5). There are differ-
304 false positives (5.1%). For posterior passing (and
ences between analyses however. The ANOVA is
the meta BGLMM), we are concerned only with
much more sensitive to individual variation than to
whether the final analysis in each series produced a
the true effect size, i.e. increasing the true effect
false-positive result. Over 100 simulations in which
size only modestly reduces uncertainty, while in-
the true effect size was zero (i.e. 20 repeats of 5 dif-
creasing individual variation greatly increases un-
ferent variance levels), posterior passing produced
certainty. Both the GLMM and BGLMM produce

===== PAGE 11/16 =====
CUMULATIVE SCIENCE VIA BAYESIAN POSTERIOR PASSING 11
Figure 5. Analysis uncertainty measure for the five analysis types as a function of true population average and individual
variation (Bayesian GLMM not shown as it is identical to the GLMM). Colour represents the uncertainty of each analysis
as given by the key to the right of the panels.
confident results provided either the true effect size considered, except in the case of the ANOVA (Fig.6).
is high or individual variation is low, however if the This is because the ANOVA systematically underes-
effect size is small, but variation high, then model timates the value of the parameter when the true
estimates are highly uncertain. Finally, while the un- population average is high and individual variation is
certainty of both PP and the combined BGLMM is high (see Fig. 6).
sensitive to the effect size and individual variation,
it is only minimally so and confidence is very high
Discussion
across all of the parameter space we explored. The
meta BGLMM, in which all data are analysed in a sin-
This paper introduces posterior passing; a statis-
gle analysis, performs almost identically to posterior
tical technique, based on Bayes’ Theorem, that uses
passing.
the results of prior studies to inform future work. In
this way it allows the operationalization of cumula-
Error
tive science, allowing individual studies to build on
The average difference between the parameter each other, avoiding conflicted literatures and
estimates and the parameter’s true value was very
low across all of the parameter combinations we

===== PAGE 12/16 =====
12 BRAND ET AL.
Figure 6. Analysis estimate error as a function of true population average and individual variation (Bayesian GLMM not
shown as it is identical to the GLMM) . Colour gives the size of the error, ranging from -0.1 to 0.1, according to the key
to the right of the panels.
thereby reducing the need for dedicated meta-anal- analytic techniques have led to the build-up of an
yses. To test the performance of posterior passing ambiguous literature, such as that concerning ste-
we conducted a simulation of datasets sampled from reotype threat. Such literatures are defined by a mix
populations with varying effect sizes. Different sta- of positive and negative findings, and in practice
tistical techniques were used to analyse the datasets they have remained ambiguous despite multiple
and compared to a posterior passing approach over meta-analyses. In our simulations, examination of
the same datasets. We found that although no the positive result rate shows that such ambiguity is
method was perfect (e.g. all methods produced a common to all non-cumulative analyses when be-
non-zero number of false-positive results), poste- tween individual variation is high and when the ef-
rior passing leads to greater certainty over time fect size is small. Nonetheless, posterior passing is
about the existence and size of an effect compared highly successful at correctly identifying the effect-
with the other statistical methods considered. As size in these cases (only 2% of simulations produced
such this work supports the proposal that posterior a false-positive result).
passing is a viable means by which cumulative sci- These findings have important implications for
ence can be implemented. the way scientists conduct, analyse and publish their
One of the goals of this project was to test research. Firstly, the use of ANOVAs (the current
whether posterior passing could effectively identify norm in priming studies) is shown to be particularly
the true value of an effect in a context where other problematic. In our results, the ANOVA was the least

===== PAGE 13/16 =====
CUMULATIVE SCIENCE VIA BAYESIAN POSTERIOR PASSING 13
accurate at identifying the effect size, especially posterior passing. According to all of our metrics for
when the effect size was small and the variation evaluating the performance of different analytic
high. The priming literature is precisely when re- techniques, posterior passing was virtually indistin-
searchers predict effect sizes to be small and indi- guishable from this ‘meta Bayesian GLMM’. None-
vidual variation to be high, as the mechanism under- theless, further work could measure the effect of
lying the effect is unknown and some individuals are more refined implementations of posterior passing
expected to be more or less susceptible to the effect (including passing all parameters) as this may accel-
depending on various moderating variables (see erate the convergence of knowledge concerning the
Bargh 2012; Gelman 2016). Therefore, the fact that effects in question.
ANOVAs are less likely than other methods to be Posterior passing is not the only means to
able to accurately decipher an effect in these types achieve cumulative science, however, and, as men-
of datasets suggests that researchers studying tioned in the introduction, Sequential Bayes Factors
priming effects (as well as other small, variable ef- and Curated Replications hold similar promise. Our
fects) should move away from the ANOVAs and on to results cannot comment on the efficacy of these
other methods, as has been previously suggested methods relative to posterior passing, however,
(e.g. Jaeger 2008). there are some key differences between the ap-
A second implication of our results is that poste- proaches. First, the use of Bayes Factors is not un-
rior passing is considerably better than using Bayes- controversial and their application has been debated
ian methods per se. With minimally informative pri- elsewhere (e.g. Robert, 2016). One such argument is
ors, the Bayesian GLMM did not provide any detect- that Bayes Factors retain the “accept/reject” philos-
able improvement in performance compared to the ophy of null hypothesis significance testing,
frequentist GLMM. This was expected because the whereas other researchers have called for a shift to-
important difference between the GLMM and the wards more accurate parameter estimation and
Bayesian GLMM was the use of priors, but by using model comparison approaches (Cumming, 2013;
minimally informative priors we masked this differ- McElreath, 2016). We agree with the sentiment of
ence. This might appear to suggest that there is little Schönbrodt and colleagues (2017) that estimation
benefit to using Bayesian methods over frequentist and hypothesis testing answer different questions
methods if priors are implemented uninformatively. and have separate goals, reflected by a trade-off be-
However, other benefits exist that are not consid- tween accuracy and efficiency respectively. We ar-
ered in our simulation. For instance, the philosophy gue that ultimately scientists should value both ac-
of Bayesian inference is arguably more intuitive than curacy and efficiency, but not prioritise efficiency at
null hypothesis significance testing (McElreath the expense of accuracy. Furthermore, posterior
2016), with Bayesian credible intervals more readily passing offers a means of achieving both accurate
understood than frequently misinterpreted p-val- and (more) efficient estimates than the other analy-
ues and confidence intervals (Belia, Fidler, Williams, sis techniques included in our simulation, as poste-
& Cumming, 2005; Greenland et al., 2016). Nonethe- rior passing converges on the correct effect size
less, bearing these other benefits in mind, our sim- within 10-15 analyses (compared to the full 60 da-
ulation results clearly suggest that posterior passing tasets). With regards to Curated Replications and
is a major benefit to using a Bayesian approach. calls for measures of replication success (LeBel et al.,
Reassuringly, even our deliberately coarse imple- 2018; Zwaan et al., 2017), these approaches can be
mentation of posterior passing (in which only the distinguished from posterior passing in that they
posterior for the interaction term was passed, and it formalize the process of replication to ensure the
was assumed to be normal) was highly successful. robustness of findings. Posterior passing, con-
Moreover, even when spurious results are present versely, does away with the notion of replications as
(e.g. Fig.2a, dataset 9), posterior passing rapidly re- studies build on each other rather than specifically
verts to the true population effect. As a measure of testing the results of prior studies.
the success of posterior passing we compared it to Despite its success in our simulation, posterior
a single, “meta”, Bayesian GLMM conducted over all passing is unlikely to be a scientific cure-all. One
60 datasets combined, as this is equivalent to the factor identified as a problem in science, but not
greatest possible performance achievable through considered in our simulation, is publication bias (the

===== PAGE 14/16 =====
14 BRAND ET AL.
increased likelihood of publishing positive findings non-cumulative, analyses produce conflicting re-
compared to null findings). It is likely that the per- sults across multiple studies. The use of posterior
formance of posterior passing, along with the other passing in these contexts would potentially identify
analyses considered, will be negatively affected by the true effect with confidence, and without relying
publication bias. Indeed, posterior passing may ex- on meta-analyses that, in practice, often fail to re-
acerbate the problem of publication bias if research- solve debates. Nonetheless further work is needed
ers only put forward their positive results to be part to evaluate posterior passing, in particular, how well
of a posterior passing framework. That said, if avail- it fares when faced with other known problems in
able data from multiple studies are put towards a science, such as biases in publication.
cumulative analysis, regardless of their novelty, re-
searchers may be more motivated to publish their
Open Science Practices
null results, as well as replications, and so the imple-
mentation of posterior passing may reduce publica-
tion bias indirectly. Given these uncertainties, it
would be valuable for further work to ascertain how
sensitive each analysis type is to various levels of
publication bias.
This article earned the Open Data and the Open
Another assumption of our simulation is that all
Materials badge for making the data and materials
analyses are similar or comparable enough to use in
available. It has been verified that the analysis repro-
a posterior passing framework. In actual scientific
duced the results presented in the article. The entire
practice, however, scientists may struggle to use the
editorial process, including the open reviews, are
results of one analysis to inform the next one due to
published in the online supplement.
differences in experimental design or analytic model
structure. Moreover, even where a single model
structure is agreed this may systematically differ
from reality, introducing bias into model estimates.
References
Further work is needed to explore the effects of this
kind of mismatch on the performance of posterior
passing. Nonetheless, as previously discussed, pos- Bargh, J.A. (2012). Priming Effects Replicate Just Fine,
teriors can be watered down by increasing their var- Thanks. Psychology Today. from:
iance, thereby lessening the effect of prior work on www.psychologytoday.com
current findings. While such practice necessarily Belia, S., Fidler, F., Williams, J., & Cumming, G.
slows down scientific accumulation, it will reduce (2005). Researchers misunderstand confidence
the risks that inter-study incompatibilities pose to intervals and standard error bars. Psychological
posterior passing. This highlights how appropriate methods, 10(4), 389.
use of priors will be an important issue for research- Benjamin, D. J., Berger, J. O., Johannesson, M.,
ers, as well as editors and reviewers, and that it is Nosek, B. A., Wagenmakers, E. J., Berk, R., ... &
important that manuscripts make clear which priors Cesarini, D. (2018). Redefine statistical
were used and why. Researchers may also wish to significance. Nature Human Behaviour, 2(1), 6.
include robustness checks in which priors are mod- Beppu, A., & Griffiths, T. L. (2009). Iterated learning
estly adjusted and the subsequent change in results and the cultural ratchet. In Proceedings of the
included in supplementary materials. 31st annual conference of the cognitive science
In this manuscript, we have presented posterior society (pp. 2089-2094). Austin, TX: Cognitive
passing as one way in which cumulative science can Science Society.
be implemented. Among the benefits of posterior Bissell, M. (2013). Nature Comment: Reproducibility:
passing is that it is easy to implement as a simple ex- The risks of the replication drive. Nature, 503,
tension beyond standard Bayesian analyses of data. 333-334.
Moreover, our simulations suggest that posterior Bohannon J. (2014) Replication effort provokes
passing works well in contexts where traditional, praise—and ‘bullying’ charges. Science. 2014;
344:788–789.

===== PAGE 15/16 =====
CUMULATIVE SCIENCE VIA BAYESIAN POSTERIOR PASSING 15
Bolker, B. M., Brooks, M. E., Clark, C. J., Geange, S. misinterpretations. European journal of
W., Poulsen, J. R., Stevens, M. H. H., & White, J. epidemiology, 31(4), 337-350.
S. S. (2009). Generalized linear mixed models: a Jaeger, T. F. (2008). Categorical data analysis: Away
practical guide for ecology and from ANOVAs (transformation or not) and
evolution. Trends in ecology & evolution, 24(3), towards logit mixed models. Journal of memory
127-135. and language, 59(4), 434-446.
Chambers, C. D., Feredoes, E., Kahneman, D. (2014). A new etiquette for
Muthukumaraswamy, S. D., & Etchells, P. (2014). replication. Social Psychology. 45, 310–311
Instead of" playing the game" it is time to Kidwell, M. C., Lazarević, L. B., Baranski, E.,
change the rules: Registered Reports at AIMS Hardwicke, T. E., Piechowski, S., Falkenberg, L.
Neuroscience and beyond. AIMS S., ... & Errington, T. M. (2016). Badges to
Neuroscience, 1(1), 4-17. acknowledge open practices: a simple, low-
Cumming, G. (2013). Understanding the new cost, effective method for increasing
statistics: Effect sizes, confidence intervals, and transparency. PLoS Biol, 14(5), e1002456.
meta-analysis. Routledge. Kruschke, J. (2011). Doing Bayesian data analysis: A
Doyle, R. A., & Voyer, D. (2016). Stereotype tutorial with R, JAGS, and Stan. Academic
manipulation effects on math and spatial test Press.
performance: A meta-analysis. Learning and Lakens, D., Adolfi, F. G., Albers, C. J., Anvari, F.,
Individual Differences, 47, 103-116. Apps, M. A., Argamon, S. E., ... & Buchanan, E.
Epskamp S, Nuijten MB. statcheck: Extract M. (2018). Justify your alpha. Nature Human
statistics from articles and recompute p values. Behaviour, 2(3), 168.
R package version 1.0.1. http://CRAN.R- Lakens, D., Hilgard, J., & Staaks, J. (2016). On the
project.org/package=statcheck2015. reproducibility of meta-analyses: Six practical
Ferguson, C. J. (2014). Comment: Why meta- recommendations. BMC psychology, 4(1), 24.
analyses rarely resolve ideological Lakens, D., LeBel, E. P., Page-Gould, E., van Assen,
debates. Emotion Review, 6(3), 251-252. M. A. L. M., Spellman, B., Schönbrodt, F. D., …
Fischer, M. R. (2015). Replication–The ugly duckling Hertogs, R. (2017, July 9). Examining the
of science? GMS Z Med Ausbild, 32, 5. Reproducibility of Meta-Analyses in
Flore, P. C., & Wicherts, J. M. (2015). Does Psychology. Retrieved from osf.io/q23ye
stereotype threat influence performance of LeBel, E. P., McCarthy, R., Earp, B. D., Elson, M., &
girls in stereotyped domains? A meta- Vanpaemel, W. (2018). A Unified Framework To
analysis. Journal of School Psychology. Quantify The Credibility Of Scientific
Gelman, A. (2016, Feburary 12). Priming Effects Findings. OpenLeBel, Etienne P et al.“A Unified
Replicate Just Fine, Thanks. from Framework to Quantify the Credibility of
www.andrewgelman.com/2012 Scientific Findings”. PsyArXiv, 13.
Gildersleeve, K., Haselton, M. G., & Fales, M. R. McElreath, R. (2016). Statistical rethinking: A
(2014). Do women’s mate preferences change Bayesian course with examples in R and Stan
across the ovulatory cycle? A meta-analytic (Vol. 122). CRC Press.
review. Psychological Bulletin, 140(5), 1205. Morgan, T. J., Laland, K. N., & Harris, P. L. (2015).
Gildersleeve, K., Haselton, M. G., & Fales, M. R. The development of adaptive conformity in
(2014). Meta-analyses and p-curves support young children: effects of uncertainty and
robust cycle shifts in women’s mate consensus. Developmental science, 18(4), 511-
preferences: Reply to Wood and Carden (2014) 524.
and Harris, Pashler, and Mickes (2014). Munafò, M. R., Nosek, B. A., Bishop, D. V., Button, K.
Greenland, S., Senn, S. J., Rothman, K. J., Carlin, J. S., Chambers, C. D., du Sert, N. P., ... &
B., Poole, C., Goodman, S. N., & Altman, D. G. Ioannidis, J. P. (2017). A manifesto for
(2016). Statistical tests, P values, confidence reproducible science. Nature Human
intervals, and power: a guide to Behaviour, 1, 0021. Chicago.

===== PAGE 16/16 =====
16 BRAND ET AL.
Nguyen, H. H. D., & Ryan, A. M. (2008). Does underestimate the intellectual ability of
stereotype threat affect test performance of negatively stereotyped students. Psychological
minorities and women? A meta-analysis of Science, 20(9), 1132-1139.
experimental evidence. Journal of Applied Wood, W., Kressel, L., Joshi, P. D., & Louie, B. (2014).
Psychology, 93(6), 1314. Meta-analysis of menstrual cycle effects on
Open Science Collaboration. (2015). Estimating the women’s mate preferences. Emotion Re-
reproducibility of psychological science. view, 6(3), 229-249.
Science, 349(6251), aac4716. Zwaan, R. A., Etz, A., Lucas, R. E., & Donnellan, M. B.
Pulverer, B. (2015). Reproducibility blues. The EMBO (2017). Making replication mainstream. Behav-
journal, 34(22), 2721-2724. ioral and Brain Sciences, 1-50.
Picho, K., Rodriguez, A., & Finnie, L. (2013).
Exploring the moderating role of context on
the mathematics performance of females
under stereotype threat: A meta-analysis. The
Journal of social psychology, 153(3), 299-333.
Robert, C. P. (2016). The expected demise of the
Bayes factor. Journal of Mathematical
Psychology, 72, 33-37
Schnall, S. (2014). Clean data: Statistical artifacts
wash out replication efforts. Social Psychology,
45(4), 315-317
Schönbrodt, F. D., Wagenmakers, E. J., Zehetleitner,
M., & Perugini, M. (2017). Sequential hypothesis
testing with Bayes factors: Efficiently testing
mean differences. Psychological Methods, 22(2),
322.
Stoet, G., & Geary, D. C. (2012). Can stereotype
threat explain the gender gap in mathematics
performance and achievement? Review of
General Psychology, 16(1), 93
Trafimow, D, Marks, M. (2015). Editorial. Basic and
Applied Social Psychology, 37(1),1-2.
van de Schoot, R., Kaplan, D., Denissen, J.,
Asendorpf, J. B., Neyer, F. J., & Aken, M. A.
(2014). A gentle introduction to Bayesian
analysis: applications to developmental
research. Child development, 85(3), 842-860.
van't Veer, A. E., & Giner-Sorolla, R. (2016). Pre-
registration in social psychology—A discussion
and suggested template. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 67, 2-12.
Wasserstein, R. L., & Lazar, N. A. (2016). The ASA's
statement on p-values: context, process, and
purpose. The American Statistician.
Walton, G. M., & Cohen, G. L. (2003). Stereotype
lift. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 39(5), 456-467.
Walton, G. M., & Spencer, S. J. (2009). Latent ability
grades and test scores systematically