Articles
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-020-0823-z
Conservatives and liberals have similar
physiological responses to threats
Bert N. Bakker 1*, Gijs Schumacher 2, Claire Gothreau3 and Kevin Arceneaux 4
About a decade ago, a study documented that conservatives have stronger physiological responses to threatening stimuli than
liberals. This work launched an approach aimed at uncovering the biological roots of ideology. Despite wide-ranging scientific
and popular impact, independent laboratories have not replicated the study. We conducted a pre-registered direct replication
(n = 202) and conceptual replications in the United States (n = 352) and the Netherlands (n = 81). Our analyses do not sup-
port the conclusions of the original study, nor do we find evidence for broader claims regarding the effect of disgust and the
existence of a physiological trait. Rather than studying unconscious responses as the real predispositions, alignment between
conscious and unconscious responses promises deeper insights into the emotional roots of ideology.
I
n a study published in Science, Oxley et al.1 demonstrate that indi- conservatives will ever be able to see eye to eye. The significance of
viduals who express conservative political attitudes (for example, this message is reflected by the attention paid to this study’s finding
a preference for tradition, clear group boundaries and hierarchies) by the news media to date; it continues to garner extensive cover-
have stronger physiological reactions to threatening stimuli than age in major news agencies, including CNN15, the New York Times16,
those who express liberal views. One of the authors’ explanations for NPR17, Vox18, Forbes19, the BBC20, National Geographic21 and the
this association is that “political attitudes and varying physiological Daily Show22.
responses to threat may both derive from neural activity patterns” Neuropsychological processes are certainly an important factor
(p. 1669)1, which suggests a biological basis for the robust, positive in political attitude formation13, but the account of Oxley et al. is
correlation between political conservatism and self-reported mea- underspecified. Recent research calls into question the notion that
sures of sensitivity to uncertainty and threat2–5. Research by others, there is a direct and unmediated decision-making process that starts
including the Oxley et al. research team, shows that conservatives with automatic reactions (for example, physiological responses),
also have stronger physiological responses to disgusting stimuli than proceeds to cognitive assessments (for example, judgements about
liberals do6,7. These findings motivated members of the Oxley et al. threats) and ends with behavioural responses (for example, political
research team to further elaborate that conservatism is linked to a ideology)23. There is, at best, a loose correlation among physiologi-
more expansive form of negativity bias at a physiological level8. cal, cognitive and behavioural responses24,25. Save for individuals
This research helped usher in a new theory in psychology and who exhibit phobias, physiological responses to the types of distal
political science that offers a provocative perspective on the biologi- emotional stimuli that Oxley et al. employed (for example, pictures
cal roots of the centuries-old liberal/conservative divide9. It implies of spiders) are at best ambiguous indicators of psychological traits26.
that psychological traits, such as threat sensitivity, disgust sensitivity Not only are people capable of regulating the link between auto-
and negativity bias, can be captured in a straightforward and unob- matic responses and cognitive evaluations27, but the human mind is
trusive way with physiological reactions, and that these physiologi- also capable of considering and dismissing threats without engaging
cal traits have a direct and unmediated effect on political attitudes. in cognitive reflection26.
Their unified framework pushed the field to move beyond vague Considering this criticism and the impact of the findings of Oxley
theoretical models that ascribe the provenance of political attitudes et al. for science and society, it is crucial to replicate these findings.
to largely unspecified social processes (for example, socialization)8. Null findings in the social sciences are much less likely to be writ-
As such, the article has been widely cited (617 citations in Google ten up and to get published compared with studies with statistically
Scholar at the time of writing; 28 November 2019) and discussed8, significant findings28. Recent efforts to replicate important findings
and has fuelled a proliferating literature that connects neuropsy- in psychology show the need for direct replications29–31. Evaluating
chology to political attitudes10–13. the replicability of papers published in Science and Nature between
The findings of Oxley et al. also have considerable societal impli- 2010 and 2015, Camerer and colleagues32 replicated 13 (62%) out
cations. Oxley et al.1 conclude that if “political attitudes vary with of the 21 selected papers. Moreover, Camerer et al. found that the
physiological traits linked to divergent manners of experiencing and effect size of the replicated studies was approximately 50% compared
processing environmental threats”, their findings offer “one pos- with the original effect size reported in Science or Nature. This has
sible explanation for both the lack of malleability in the beliefs of led to an increased call for replication studies in prominent jour-
individuals with strong political convictions and for the associated nals. K. Smith and J. Hibbing—two of the lead authors of the Oxley
ubiquity of political conflict” (p. 1669). This conclusion bolsters et al. paper—acknowledged the need for replication, as they wrote
the media narrative that with increasing polarization in the United that the question of whether or not their findings replicate cannot
States and beyond14, we should abandon the hope that liberals and be known “until other laboratories have weighed in”33. The need
1Amsterdam School of Communication Research, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. 2Department of Political Science, University
of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. 3Center for American Women and Politics, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ, USA. 4Department of
Political Science, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, USA. *e-mail: b.n.bakker@uva.nl
NAture HumAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles Nature HumaN BeHaviour
for a direct replication is even more pressing since—to the best of a
our knowledge—the only published conceptual replications offer Maggots 1
conflicting conclusions34–36 (for details, see Supplementary Results).
results Wounded 1 −0.3
We conducted a pre-registered, more direct replication (https://mfr.
osf.io/render?url=https://osf.io/w3f2k/?action=download%26m Spider 1 −0.04 −0.04
ode=render; see OSF page at https://osf.io/d5g72/) in the United
SS tt aa tt ee ss (( nn
=
=
3
2 50 22 )) ,
a
na ds tw he el l
N
a es
t
hc eo rn lac ne dp stu (a nl =r e 8p 1l )i c ta ht ai to n ws
e
ri en
n
t oh te
p
U ren -rit ee gd
-
Spider Wounded Maggots
istered. Our replications focused on the most prominent test of the
Oxley et al. study that physiological responses to threatening images b c
9−11 1 Worms 1
correlate with ideology. We tested three claims: (1) that threat sensi-
tivity is a physiological trait; (2) that threat sensitivity, as measured Crowd 1 0.01 Vomit 1 0.12
by physiological responses, correlates with social conservatism; Dog 1 −0.090.13 Dead dog 1 0.04 0.02
and (3) that disgust sensitivity is a physiological trait and correlates Gun 1 0.01 0.03 0.30 Wound 1 0 −0.02−0.06
with conservatism7,8.
Wounded 1 −0.31−0.140.05−0.83 Toilet 1 −0.110.04−0.03−0.17
Our pre-registered replication was four times the sample size of
the original Oxley et al. study37,38. A power analysis (see Methods) Spider 1 −0.040.02 0.58−0.04−0.04 Maggots 1 0.01 0.04 0.06 0.13 0.15
i s On ta xf to li er s ym ti c ee a td l
a
u p l.s o Iwt th e ta urt
r
tw no
e
e d
d
w e t oo e uu c ttl d ta
h
nn
a
e tee f ad f e c1 c ot9 u9 a
p
sp
l
esa m r ot fai c l pli p eaa osn ptt lhs ee t
h
o o
a
nh dea mv re e
i
p ss sou irf nf t gi ec di ve abn ly -t Spid Wer ounded Gun Dog SC er pto ewd mber 11 Maggots Toilet Wou Dn ed ad dog Vomit Worms
ues on the physiological measures. This left us with a sample of 191 d e
participants in the analyses. Re-calculating the power, using the Gun 1
same parameters but with 191 participants, we arrived at a statisti- 9−11 1
cal power of 0.79, which is very close to the pre-registered power of Herding dog 1 0.25
0.80. In all three studies, we closely followed the protocol of Oxley
et al. and measured physiological responses using skin conductance Dog 1 −0.19 Dog 1 0.05 0.14
levels (SCLs). Following Chambers39, our pre-registered replication
tested the repeatability of Oxley et al. “by duplicating the methodol- Snake 1 0.08 0.23 −0.19
p
s
f
fo
a
atg
r
u
c
coy
e
edv
;a
y
i
ods
a
f
t
nee
od
a
dx a
mu
f
(c
r
3st
e
i
)l
gw
ay
hs
a
ia
u
t
nt
es
h
r ne
op
t
e
po
h
t dh
es
e
s
n
r
pti
e
hb
e
wal
r
rte
e
os
”
e
s
o
u
(
e
no
np
n
;r
d.
s
i
(4
ig
wt
28
i
i
)n
v)
i t
ia
a( htls
y
e
t
d
m:h
e
a(
r
aza
1e
gel )as
d
g
to
a
oe
inr
tnv
se
i
e
df
n
i.
r
i
n
g
y
v40 is)
idl
tt.
a
.i
uO
m
r
Lagx
ilu
e
kl le
w
ei
sy
p
iu
O
te
is
hdt
e
x
ea
d
lar
el .
i
yb
n
ok
l
en
i otn
t
h
o
td
ae
dhl liy
y
.er
,
Snake Snake1 D0 o. g77 September− 0 1. 159 Snake D Ho eg
rding
dog Gun
we interspersed negative images among 27 other images. To probe
the robustness of our results and to address the later claim con- Fig. 1 | Assessment of a latent threat sensitivity dimension.
cerning disgust sensitivity, we extended the replication to include: a–e, Correlation matrices containing Pearson correlation coefficients for
(4) more threatening images; and (5) more disgusting images (see comparisons between the physiological responses (skin conductance
Supplementary Methods for discussion). In the conceptual replica- responses) to the threatening images in the pre-registered replication of
tions, we used images that were similar to the threatening and dis- Oxley et al. (a; n = 202), the pre-registered extensions for threat sensitivity
gusting images used by Oxley et al. and subsequent publications of (b; n = 202) and disgust sensitivity (c; n = 202), and the conceptual
members of this research team7,41. replications in the United States (d; n = 352) and the Netherlands
Oxley et al. combined skin conductance responses to three (e; n = 81). A darker red background represents a strongly positive
images as a measure of a physiological trait. If such a trait exists, correlation, whereas darker blue represents a strongly negative correlation
there should be positive and high inter-correlations between the and white means that the correlation was close to zero. Frequentist
physiological responses to the different images. Although these inferential statistics are reported in full in Supplementary Tables 9 (a),
inter-correlations were not reported in the original study, we pre- 10 (b), 11 (c), 12 (d) and 13 (e).
registered to test this. Fig. 1 plots the Pearson correlation coefficients
between the physiological responses to the images. In the direct rep-
lication (Fig. 1a), zero out of three correlations were positive (Fig. 1
and Supplementary Table 9). In the pre-registered extensions, only opposition to taxes, support for free markets and so on). We also
two out of 30 correlations were positive and relatively strong (that included the same control variables as they did (income, education
is, r > 0.3; Fig. 1b,c and Supplementary Tables 10 and 11). In the and gender identity), along with the necessary controls for study
conceptual replications in the United States, we found one out of characteristics (see Methods). The top row shows the results from
three correlations (Fig. 1d and Supplementary Table 12) and in the the pre-registered direct replication that combined skin conduc-
Netherlands, we found zero out of six correlations to be positive and tance responses to the exact images in the Oxley et al. study into a
strong (Fig. 1e and Supplementary Table 13). In summary, we found single index. Like Oxley et al., we found no statistically significant
weak and even negative correlation coefficients. This undermines association between skin conductance response to their threaten-
the notion that there is an overarching latent physiological trait of ing images and economic conservatism (Fig. 2 (right-hand panel of
either threat or disgust sensitivity. row 1) and Supplementary Table 15). More crucially, however, we
Fig. 2 summarizes the main results from our replications. found no statistically significant association between skin conduc-
Following Oxley et al. and our pre-analysis plan, we separated tance response and social conservatism (slope coefficient (b) = 0.01;
political attitudes into two indices: (1) social conservatism (for 95% confidence interval (CI) = −0.02 to 0.04; s.e. = 0.01; P = 0.62;
example, support for traditional values, opposition to immigra- t = 0.50) (Fig. 2 (left-hand panel of row 1) and Supplementary
tion and so on); and (2) economic conservatism (for example, Table 14). Our standardized coefficient was 37 times smaller than
NAture HumAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Nature HumaN BeHaviour Articles
Social Economic
conservatism conservatism
Direct
replication of
Oxley et al.
Pre-registered
extensions
(threat sensitivity)
Pre-registered
extensions
(disgust sensitivity)
United States
Netherlands
Pooled
the statistically significant and substantive effect (d = 0.37) reported signs. If we focus on the 28 results pertaining to social conservatism
by Oxley et al. in Fig. 2 (which is where Oxley et al. found a statistically significant
To discover whether the connection between physiological reac- positive correlation with skin conductance response), 19 have a
tions to images and political conservatism lurked elsewhere in the positive sign, while nine have a negative sign. The Bayes factors in
data, we conducted a number of follow-up tests, as specified in our the direction of the null hypothesis42 for the main analyses of each
pre-registered analysis plan. We failed to find a statistically signifi- study are reported in Table 1 (none of the Bayesian analyses were
cant positive relationship between skin conductance response to the pre-registered). We calculated the Bayes factors with JASP version
individual images used by Oxley et al. and measures of political con- 0.9.2. Following the recommendation of Wagenmakers et al.42, we
servatism (Fig. 2 (row 1) and Supplementary Table 14). We did not used the stretched beta distribution for the prior (width = 1). With
find a single statistically significant relationship between skin con- respect to the hypothesis that social conservatives have stronger
ductance response to the additional threatening images included in physiological responses to threatening and disgusting images,
our pre-registered replication, whether we analysed them combined the data offer moderate to strong evidence in favour of the null
in an index or separately (Fig. 2 (row 2 and Supplementary Tables 16 hypothesis43. As such, these samples provide virtually no support
and 17). Furthermore, we did not find any statistically significant for the claim that socially conservative individuals display stron-
relationship between political conservatism and skin conductance ger physiologically responses to threatening, disgusting or simply
response to the disgusting images included in our pre-registered negative images.
replication (Fig. 2 (row 3) and Supplementary Tables 20 and 21). In Sixteen robustness checks (see Table 2) provided compelling
the conceptual replications conducted in the United States (Fig. 2 evidence that these null findings were robust against alternative
(row 4) and Supplementary Table 22) and the Netherlands (Fig. 2 measures and explanations (results for each of the questions in
(row 5) and Supplementary Table 24), we also found no statisti- Table 2 are either provided in the Supplementary Results or can
cally significant positive associations between threat sensitivity and only be derived from the replication files on our public OSF page;
social conservatism. Even when we pooled the data into one dataset, https://osf.io/d5g72/). Even though our studies were conducted in
we found no evidence of a positive and statistically significant corre- areas where liberals outnumber conservatives, our pooled analy-
lation between skin conductance responses to negative images and ses consist of approximately 4.5 times more conservatives than the
conservatism (Fig. 2 (row 6) and Supplementary Table 26). sample of Oxley et al. (see question 1 and Supplementary Results).
In summary, across multiple samples and multiple tests, we Our samples show meaningful associations between self-reported
observed point estimates that were very close to zero, as well as psychological traits and conservatism and between the socio-
confidence intervals that included zero, and inconsistently positive economic covariates and conservatism, suggesting that the null
01.0− 50.0− 0 50.0 01.0 01.0− 50.0− 0 50.0 01.0
Index
Spider
Wounded man
Maggots
Index
Spider
Wounded man
Dog
Gun
September 11
Crowd beating man
Index
Maggots
Dead dog
Toilet
Vomit
Worms
Wound
Index
Dog
Snake
September 11
Index
Dog
Gun
Snake
Herding dog
Index
Standardized OLS regression coefficient
Fig. 2 | Associations between threat sensitivity and social and economic conservatism. Plot of the standardized ordinary least squares (OLS) regression
coefficients of the models in which social conservatism (left) and economic conservatism (right) were regressed on threat sensitivity, controlling for the
covariates that Oxley et al. used. Circles represent point estimates, with 90% (thick) and 95% (thin) confidence intervals. The results for the composite
index are shown in black and those for the individual items are shown in grey. The results from the pre-registered direct replication (n = 202) are provided
in row 1 (shaded). Below this (from top to bottom) are the results for: the pre-registered extensions for threat sensitivity (row 2; n = 202) and disgust
sensitivity (row 3; n = 202); the conceptual replications in the United States (row 4; n = 352) and the Netherlands (row 5; n = 81); and the results from
the pooled analyses (row 6; n = 635). Regression outputs, with all frequentist inferential statistics and the sample size per model, are provided in the
Supplementary Results (Supplementary Tables 14 and 15 for direct replication of Oxley et al.; Supplementary Tables 16, 17 and 18 for the pre-registered
extension for threat sensitivity; Supplementary Tables 19, 20 and 21 for the pre-registered extension for disgust sensitivity; Supplementary Tables 22 and
23 for the United States sample; Supplementary Tables 24 and 25 for the Netherlands sample; and Supplementary Table 26 for the pooled analyses).
NAture HumAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles Nature HumaN BeHaviour
Table 1 | Bayes factors in the direction of the null hypothesis for each study
Study Social conservatism Bayes factor interpretation economic conservatism Bayes factor interpretation
Direct replication 10.77 Strong 10.52 Strong
Extension (threat sensitivity) 4.27 Moderate 3.43 Moderate
Extension (disgust sensitivity) 11.03 Strong 11.02 Strong
United States 12.39 Strong 7.63 Moderate
Netherlands 6.00 Moderate 6.69 Moderate
Pooled 8.57 Moderate 13.99 Strong
Bayes factor interpretation according to Jeffreys43. 95% credibility intervals for effect sizes and additional sensitivity analyses are provided in Supplementary Table 27.
results are not a product of an odd sample pool (see question 2 and measured ways44. Politics should be no different, especially given
Supplementary Table 30). Our measures of skin conductance pass the complex personal experiences that politics evokes.
basic manipulation checks; participants did in fact respond to neg- Failed replications always raise questions about why the origi-
ative images more strongly than other types of images (see ques- nal study’s findings were not supported. One possibility is that the
tion 3 and Supplementary Tables 31–33). It does not matter if we underlying theory was either incorrect or bounded by unstated
change the operationalization of the threat sensitivity index (see scope conditions. Another possibility is that differences between
question 4 and replication materials) or if we decompose the anal- the original study and replication account for the discrepancy. Like
yses by specific policy attitudes (see question 5 and Supplementary all replications, ours differed in a few ways from the original study
Figs. 10–17). Also, splitting ideology at the median (or midpoint) by Oxley et al.. First, our sampling strategy and sample character-
makes no difference (see question 6 and Supplementary Tables istics did not match one-on-one the sampling strategy and sample
34–38). We also do not find a reliable correlation between skin of Oxley et al. We believe that this is an unlikely explanation for
conductance responses and other measures of conservatism (for our failed replication. In line with recent work in the personality
example, social principles, authoritarianism, racism, partisanship and politics literature45,46, and replication attempts in social psychol-
and ideology) (see question 7 and Supplementary Figs. 18–20). It ogy31, we find no evidence for a stronger association between threat
does not matter if we use physiological responses to non-threat- sensitivity and social conservatism once we constrain our sample
ening/non-disgusting images as a point of comparison, like Oxley to people who more closely resemble those in the Oxley et al.
et al. did in a robustness check (see question 8 and Supplementary sample with respect to age and race (question 10; Supplementary
Tables 39 and 40). Our results do not depend on whether par- Figs. 32–45) or the distribution of social conservatism (question 11;
ticipants are knowledgeable about or interested in politics (see Supplementary Fig. 46). Yet, other unknown differences caused by
question 9 and Supplementary Figs. 23–31) or on the participants’ the different sampling strategies could potentially explain the differ-
racial or gender identification or their age (see question 10 and ent findings across the two studies. Replicating Oxley et al. using the
Supplementary Figs. 32–45). We continue to observe null results same sampling strategy would provide a more definite answer, but
even if we restrict our sample such that we have a bimodal distri- even if our sample were the explanation for our null results, it would
bution of social conservatism, like Oxley et al. did (see question 11 imply an unstated scope condition in the original study: namely,
and Supplementary Fig. 46). Physiological responses are also not that it only applies to a particular population of people, as opposed
associated with attitude extremity (see question 12 and replication to a general explanation for conservatism.
materials), nor do we find evidence that variance in physiological Second, our pre-registered replication consisted of the exact
responses to threatening images is associated with conservatism same threatening stimuli that Oxley et al. used. Oxley et al. inter-
or attitude extremity (see question 13 and replication materials). spersed these among a sequence of 33 images, some of which were
We also collected physiological measures designed to capture positive. Yet, the exact content of the other images was not known to
negative emotional reactions using electromyography (specifi- us. We interspersed the three threatening images among a sequence
cally, corrugator and labii activity). Analysing these measures, we of 30 images (mostly taken from the International Affective Picture
find no evidence for a latent physiological trait of threat sensitivity System (IAPS)), which were validated to be negative, positive or
or disgust sensitivity, nor do we find that these measures corre- neutral. The basic procedure thereby matches the procedure of
late with conservatism (see question 14 and Supplementary Figs. Oxley et al. We doubt that the different images we chose condi-
47–50). Using the different physiological measures (skin conduc- tioned the results. Like Oxley et al., we randomized the order in
tance, corrugator and labbi), we find no evidence for an overarch- which the images were shown. Recent work shows that the order in
ing physiological trait of threat sensitivity, disgust sensitivity or which threatening images are shown does not affect the response
negativity bias, and these dimensions do not correlate with con- that people have to the images34. Indeed, our threatening images
servatism (see question 15 and replication materials). Finally, we passed a basic manipulation check. Therefore, we do not think that
also do not find evidence for the later claim made by members of the failure to replicate Oxley et al. can be attributed to unknown
the Oxley et al. team41 that a broader measure of right-of-centre differences between the content of the other images used by Oxley
political orientations correlates with physiological responses to et al. versus our images.
negative images compared with positive images (see question 16 Third, we collected data in another part of the United States
and replication materials). and the Netherlands. We can only speculate whether contextual
differences explain the absence of a statistically significant asso-
Discussion ciation. On a theoretical level, Oxley et al. assert that the asso-
Reluctantly, we reject the foundational assumption of the work con- ciation between threat sensitivity and conservatism should be
ducted by Oxley et al. Nonetheless, we do not think that this should universal1,7,8. Consequently, if context conditions the link between
be the end of the biology and politics theory Oxley et al. helped physiological responses and conservatism, it would imply a scope
initiate. Other fields have found that while the structure of the condition unstated by Oxley et al. On an empirical level, large-
brain affects human behaviour, it does not do so in direct and easily scale replication projects in social psychology do not give much
NAture HumAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Nature HumaN BeHaviour Articles
We see multiple opportunities for further research. Our study
Table 2 | Summary of the 16 robustness checks
shows that using the exact same threatening (and disgusting) stim-
Number Question Answer reported uli, as well as conceptually similar stimuli in the conceptual replica-
tions, leads to the same null findings. In our view, these null results
1 Do our samples have a sufficient Yes SR
are in line with the lack of theoretical and empirical evidence for the
number of conservatives?
presence of an overarching physiological threat sensitivity dimen-
2 Do we find associations between Yes SR
sion in recent neuroscience research. Of course, our view could be
self-reported psychological traits
incorrect, and additional research could uncover a link between
and social conservatism?
physiological responses and political ideology. For instance, it is
3 Are negative images more Yes SR possible that there are distinct sub-dimensions of physiological
physiologically arousing in responses that tap into specific non-political threats (for example,
general?
snakes and spiders) as well as political threats (for example, vio-
4 Does the operationalization of the No Replication lence), and these sub-dimensions could have distinct correlates with
physiological responses condition specific ideological sub-dimensions. Pre-registered, well-powered
the results? designs could speak to this question.
5 Are the results conditional on the No SR Furthermore, there is a long line of research in psychophysiology
policy attitude? showing that negative stimuli evoke arousal fuelled by activation of
the sympathetic nervous system49. Perhaps, the use of still images as
6 Do we replicate the results of No SR
Oxley et al. using a median split stimuli is not the best way to evoke the kind of arousal that would
of ideology signal individual differences in threat sensitivity. Stronger and more
immersive stimuli, such real physical threats (for example, a spi-
7 Are other measures of (social) No Replication
der in the room)50 or threats in a virtual reality environment51, are
conservatism associated with
perhaps better equipped to capture individual differences in threat
threat sensitivity?
sensitivity. We welcome the next generation of research that would
8 Does controlling for physiological No SR
make use of more immersive stimuli.
reactions to non-threatening
Our study has broader implications for the literature in psychol-
images matter?
ogy and political science on the ideological asymmetry between
9 Are the results conditional on No SR liberals and conservatives. This literature predominantly relies on
sophistication? cross-sectional surveys in which self-reported traits are correlated
10 Are the results conditional on No Replication with ideology52. The association between threat sensitivity and ide-
race, age or gender? ology has been considered an important piece of supporting evi-
11 Does drawing a distribution of No SR dence for the asymmetry thesis8. However, our failure to replicate
social conservatism similar to the biological correlates of ideology aligns with recent work that
that of Oxley et al. change our questions the robustness of the personality and ideology associa-
findings? tion53. For instance, the content overlap between psychological traits
and ideology might explain the association between personality and
12 Are physiological reactions to No Replication
politics54. More troubling, panel studies failed to find evidence for
threatening images associated
the assumed causal effect of personality on ideology55,56, and the
with attitude extremity?
causal arrow may be reversed: people’s ideology might motivate
13 Is variance in physiological No Replication
them to express certain trait characteristics57. Therefore, while sur-
reactions to threatening images
vey-based cross-sectional studies report consistent (albeit weak3)
associated with conservatism or
associations between personality and ideology, our study aligns
attitude extremity?
with a small but growing body of literature that suggests a more
14 Do alternative physiological No SR
critical assessment of the ideological asymmetry between liberals
indicators of reactions to
and conservatives.
threatening images correlate with
To conclude, the field should move beyond the simplistic prem-
conservatism?
ise that unconscious reactions indicate real predispositions. Rather,
15 Do different physiological No Replication unconscious reactions are one aspect of how the brain operates
measures form an overarching and one input into how people make decisions. One fruitful line
threat sensitivity dimension?
of research would be to consider whether individual differences
16 Do we replicate Dodd et al.41 No Replication in the alignment between physiological reactions and experienced
(study 1)? emotions explains the extent to which people’s political attitudes are
rooted in intuitions versus being regulated by top-down processes.
This table provides an overview of the 16 robustness checks and their answers. It also lists whether
the results can be found in the Supplementary Results (SR) or derived from replication files This may also help scholars sort out when expressed political beliefs
(replication) on our public OSF page (https://osf.io/d5g72/). and attitudes are sincere and when they are expressive. Whatever
the case, we urge more, not less, research at the intersection of neu-
roscience and politics. It will not be easy, but profitable avenues of
reason to presume that context conditions the outcome of replica- research rarely are.
tion studies31. At the same time, Malka and colleagues47 showed
that the link between self-reported personality traits and social methods
conservatism is stronger in countries with more ideological con- Ethics. The studies conducted in the United States were approved by Temple
straint. This would imply that we would find even weaker asso- University’s Institutional Review Board. The study in the Netherlands was approved
ciations between threat sensitivity and social conservatism in by the Ethical Review Board of the University of Amsterdam. We obtained
informed consent from all participants at the start of the study.
countries with less ideological constraint. The only way to answer
this question is to conduct more research using cross-country Statistical analysis. Data collection and analysis were not performed blind to the
designs (see ref. 48 for a recent example). conditions of the experiments. We did not systematically exclude respondents
NAture HumAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles Nature HumaN BeHaviour
from the analyses. We followed the procedures described by Oxley et al. (see their The two social conservatism dimensions were very highly correlated (r = 0.98; 95%
supplementary material), and our equations for the multiple regression models CI = 0.97 to 0.99; t(200) = 71.26; P < 0.001).
reported in the main text and Supplementary Results are structured along the lines In the pre-registered, more direct replication, we measured economic
of equation (1): conservatism using six items; namely: (1) increased banking regulations; (2)
increased spending on public education; (3) increased environmental regulations;
Socialconservatism ¼β 0þβ 1threatsensitivity iþXΓ þϵ i ð1 Þ (4) reduced income inequality; (5) government-funded health care; and (6)
raised taxes for the rich. We created a scale ranging from (0) economic liberalism
where β0 is the y-intercept, β1 the regression coefficient for threat sensitivity, X is to (1) economic conservatism (α = 0.72; M = 0.24; s.d. = 0.16; minimum = 0;
the matrix of control variables in the direct replication (i.e., income, education, age, maximum = 1). As expected, economic conservatism was positively correlated
gender identity, indicator of the first eight participants, study event, payment and with the social conservatism dimension used in the direct replication (r = 0.48;
whether the SCL is above or below 2 microSiemens), Γ is a vector of coefficients 95% CI = 0.36 to 0.58; t(200) = 7.69; P < 0.001) and the pre-registered extensions
belonging to the control variables, and εi is the error term for individual i. In the (r = 0.50; 95% CI = 0.39 to 0.60; t(200) = 8.21; P <0.001). A confirmatory factor
pre-registered extension, we also controlled for race. In the conceptual replication analysis showed that the items loaded highly on the designated latent ideology
in the United States, we included similar covariates. In the Netherlands, we dimension (see Supplementary Table 1).
controlled for gender, age and education (other covariates were not measured).
Following Oxley et al., all tests reported are two-sided and we did not control for Covariates. We measured age in years (M = 25.86; s.d. = 11.06; minimum = 18;
multiple comparisons. We tested the regression assumptions for all models and maximum = 82). Respondents could indicate whether they were female (n = 128;
these can be derived from the replication files. 63.4%) or male (n = 69; 34.2%) or identified as another gender (n = 5; 2.4%).
To measure race, respondents were asked “What general racial or ethnic
Pre-registered replication. Pre-registration. The pre-analysis plan was deposited category do you consider yourself (select all that apply)” and they could choose
on 29 June 2018 and can be found on our OSF page (https://mfr.osf.io/ from white, black, Latino, Asian or another race. We coded people as belonging
render?url=https://osf.io/w3f2k/?action=download%26mode=render). We did not to a group if this was the only group they mentioned. All other respondents were
inspect the data before uploading the pre-analysis plan to OSF. put in the ‘other’ category. Our sample was racially diverse: white (n = 85; 42.08%);
black (n = 62; 30.69%); Latino (n = 10; 4.95%); Asian (n = 30; 14.85%); or another
Power analysis. The pre-registered replication was conducted between 7 February race (n = 15; 7.43%).
and 30 June 2018 at a large university on the east coast of the United States. This Income was measured using the question “We want to classify people into
sample size was based on a pre-registered analysis. The effect sizes in the published broad income groups. This information is completely confidential. Please indicate
literature are small1,6,7,34,41. Using G*Power 3.1.9.2, we calculated the sample size we the category that corresponds to your family’s annual income.” and scored in ten
would need to achieve a power of 0.8 given the α (0.05) and expected ΔF2 of 0.04. categories ranging from under US$15,000 to over US$200,000. The median income
This resulted in a sample size of 199 respondents. Therefore, we aimed for at least was between US$65,000 and US$79,999 (M = 5.33; s.d. = 2.47; minimum = 1;
199 participants completing the study. To account for some drop-outs, a total of maximum = 10).
202 participants took part in the study. Education was measured using the question “What was the last level of
schooling you completed?” and participants could answer “less than high school
Recruitment. The study lasted 1 h and was conducted by a trained laboratory graduate”, “high school graduate”, “some college”, “currently a college student”,
assistant. We relied on respondents recruited among university students, “college graduate” or “postgraduate”. We grouped “less than high school graduate”
advertisements on Craigslist and people recruited via temporary employment and “high school graduate” as there were only few respondents in these groups.
agencies. As such, we provided different levels of compensation. Student We set “high school or less” as the reference category (n = 20; 9.90%). The sample
participants were compensated for their participation with US$10 (either in cash had some variance in educational background but was fairly highly educated: some
or as an Amazon gift card of the same value), which is above the hourly minimum college (n = 35; 17.33%); currently a college student (n = 102; 50.49%); college
wage. Craigslist participants received US$30 and temporary agency participants graduate (n = 23; 11.39%); postgraduate (n = 22; 10.89%).
were compensated in accordance with the rates set by the temporary employment
agency (US$16 per hour). We did this so that participants were not asked to forgo Affective stimuli. The affective pictures were shown at the end of the study. The
income as a condition of participating in the study. images were drawn from the IAPS and images used by Oxley et al. The first image
was always a neutral image; namely, the basket (IAPS 7010). The 29 remaining
Design. After participants signed the informed consent form, the trained images were randomly presented to the participants.
laboratory assistant first cleaned parts of their face with water and a non-oily facial To directly replicate Oxley et al., we included the exact same images Oxley
cleanser on a cotton pad to remove any make-up that would prevent the adhesive et al. used in their study: (1) a very large spider on the face of a frightened person
disposable electrodes from sticking onto the face. Next, they began the survey (non-IAPS); (2) a dazed individual with a bloody face (IAPS 3550); and (3) an open
and socioeconomic background details (age (in years), gender, race, income (in wound with maggots in it (non-IAPS). To extend our measure of threat sensitivity
categories) and their highest completed educational level) were collected. For in the pre-registered extensions, we also included images of: (1) a dog (IAPS 1300);
descriptive statistics see the section ‘Covariates’ below. (2) a gun pointing at the screen (IAPS 6260); (3) the Twin Towers exploding (IAPS
Participants also completed a series of survey batteries tapping into their 9940); and (4) a crowd fighting with a man (non-IAPS). These were also used by
political attitudes and beliefs, political knowledge and political interests, as well as members of the Oxley et al. team in other publications41,58.
their personality (authoritarianism, agreeableness and a ‘reading the mind in the We also included a series of disgusting images. We included four of the five
eyes’ test). These survey batteries were presented in a random order and completed images that were included by Smith et al.7; namely: (1) a man eating worms; (2)
by all participants. This was followed by a series of three survey experiments. The human excrement floating in a toilet; and (3) a bloody wound. The fourth image
full survey is provided on our OSF page (https://osf.io/d5g72/). Smith et al. used was the image of the open wound with maggots in it. Note that
Upon completing the survey, participants were connected to the physiological the image of the maggots was used to measure threat sensitivity in Oxley et al. and
measures and exposed to a series of party symbols (one of the Republican disgust sensitivity in Smith et al. We pre-registered to use the image of the maggots
Party and one of the Democratic Party), party leaders (five democrats and five as an index of threat sensitivity in the direct replication (Oxley et al.), but also as an
republicans) and six issue statements (the order of these blocks was randomized). index of disgust sensitivity in the remainder of the analyses, like Smith et al. Finally,
Participants were also given noise-cancelling headphones (Bose) to black we included two images featuring: (5) vomit; and (6) a dead dog (IAPS 9570).
background noise. Afterwards, they were exposed to the affective stimuli that were Aside from these threatening and disgusting images, we also
part of this study. included five happy images, five neutral images and five exciting images
(see Supplementary Table 2).
Political ideology. In the direct replication, we measured social conservatism
using 12 items that were directly included by Oxley et al.1; namely: (1) the death Physiological measures. We recorded physiological data using a Biopac system
penalty; (2) school prayer; (3) biblical truth; (4) gay marriage; (5) legalized running on Windows 7 with a sampling rate of 1,000 Hz. The stimuli were shown
abortion; (6) protected gun rights; (7) increased military spending; (8) deportation using E-Prime 2.0 and the physiological data were acquired using Acknowledge
of undocumented immigrants; (9) restricted legal immigration (such as work 4. The experiment was part of a larger study assessing physiological responses to
visas); (10) warrantless searches; (11) patriotism; and (12) foreign aid. The index politics. We measured arousal using electrodermal activity; negative affect using
was scored to range from 0 (social liberalism) to 1 (social conservatism) and electromyography of the corrugator supercilii; and disgust using the levator labii
was internally consistent (α = 0.80; mean (M) = 0.38; s.d. = 0.21; minimum = 0; superioris. Here, we discuss the electrodermal activity, as this measure was used in
maximum = 1). the pre-registered direct replication. The results using eletormyography (corrugator
In the pre-registered extensions, we measured social conservatism with the 12 and labii) are discussed in the Supplementary Results (see the section belonging to
items included by Oxley et al. and three additional items; namely: (1) pre-marital question 14, as well as Table 2).
sex; (2) women’s equality; and (3) the separation of church and state. The index We measured individual differences in sensitivity based on participants’
was scored to range from 0 (social liberalism) to 1 (social conservatism) and was electrodermal response to the affective stimuli and a set of other images. This is a
internally consistent (α = 0.82; M = 0.40; s.d. = 0.23; minimum = 0; maximum = 1). standard approach to gauging physiological sensitivity. We did this using Biopac’s
NAture HumAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Nature HumaN BeHaviour Articles
disposable Ag/AgCL electrodes, which were pre-gelled with isotonic gel (0.5% rights; and (6) increased military spending. Across the three protocols, there
chloride gel). The electrodes were 27 mm wide, 36 mm long and 1.5 mm thick and were additional items that were included in some but not all protocols; namely:
had a 11-mm contact area. The electrodes were placed on the distal phalanges (7) legalized marijuana (protocol 1); (8) stopping immigration (protocol 1); (9)
of the index finger and the middle finger of the non-dominant hand. Using this illegal immigration (protocol 2); (10) biblical truth (protocol 2); (11) deportation
set-up, we measured the SCL during the study. The SCL is a standard measure of of undocumented immigrants (protocol 3); and (12) restricted legal immigration
electrodermal activity or the degree to which people sweat, which is an index of (such as work visas) (protocol 3). After re-coding the reverse-coded items, we
people’s emotional arousal generated by the sympathetic nervous system. Because calculated the mean social conservatism score (for each participant over the items
the sympathetic nervous system is difficult to control through conscious effort, the that they completed) on a scale from most socially liberal (0) to most socially
SCL provides an unobtrusive measure of emotional arousal caused by threatening conservative (1) in our sample (M = 0.39; s.d. = 0.23; α = 0.74).
and disgusting stimuli. If we create a social conservatism dimension out of these six items (M = 0.39;
Participants were exposed to each image for 12 s, with a blank screen s.d. = 0.23; α = 0.71), we see a strong positive correlation with the social
between each one. This interstimulus interval (ISI) was also 12 s. Electrodermal conservatism battery used in the main text (r = 0.95; 95% CI = 0.94 to 0.96;
response was measured by taking the difference between the SCL recorded while t(349) = 56.98; P < 0.001). Using this alternative dependent variable, we also find
participants viewed the picture and the SCL recorded during the ISI that preceded no evidence that threat sensitivity is associated with social conservatism (see
the specific image. To minimize the effects of extreme values, we pre-registered to Supplementary Table 4).
follow Oxley et al. and took the average of the natural log of SCL during the image Economic conservatism was measured using seven items: (1) increased
and the ISI. Equation (2) summarizes this approach: banking regulations; (2) increased spending on public education; (3) increased
environmental regulations; (4) reduced income inequality; (5) government-funded
PSi¼ 1 j ¼2; 100 10 2ln ;½ 0S 0C 0L ðT Þij
�
1 j ¼2; 1000 1l 2n ;½S 0C 00L ðISI Þij ð2
Þ
h we ea rl et h sc coar re e;
d
( 6 u)
s
ir ne gd u thc ee d
s
aw me elf a Lr ie
k
es rp te -n tyd pin
e
g r;
e
sa pn od
n
( s7 e) sr ca ai ls ee d
a
st a thx ee s
s
f oo cr
i
at lh ce
o
r nic sh er. vA al tl
i
sit mem s
P P
items. We created a scale ranging from economic liberalism (0) to economic
Where PS i is the physiological sensitivity score for participant i, SCL(T) ij is conservatism (1) (M = 0.28; s.d. = 0.19; α = 0.84).
the SCL recorded every jth millisecond for participant i during exposure to the
image, and SCL(ISI) is the SCL recorded every millisecond for participant i during Covariates. The sample consisted of 223 females (66.71%), 124 males (35.43%)
ij
exposure to the preceding blank screen (that is, the ISI). Because participants and 3 (0.85%) people who did not identify as female or male. The mean age of the
were exposed to the blank screen and image for 12 s each, we recorded the SCL participants was 25.14 years (s.d. = 11.89; minimum = 18; maximum = 71).
for 12,000 ms for each image and ISI. We summed this for the response to each of Race was measured using the question “What general racial or ethnic category
the six threatening images. This resulted in an index of physiological sensitivity as do you consider yourself (select all that apply)?” and participants could choose
expressed by SCLs in the same way that Oxley et al. operationalized this. Using the between white, black, Latino, Asian or another race. We coded people as belonging
same equation, we calculated indices of disgust sensitivity. Supplementary Table 3 to a group if this was the only group they mentioned. All other respondents were
provides the descriptive statistics for the indices and individual images that have put in the ‘other’ category. Our sample was racially diverse: white (n = 168; 48%);
been reported in this paper. black (n = 99; 28.29%); Latino (n = 14; 4%); Asian (n = 51; 14.57%); and other
(n = 18; 5.14%).
Missing data. We experienced some drop-out due to failed readings of the We measured income using the following item: “We want to classify people
physiological data (n = 9; 4.95%). The respondents who dropped out did not into broad income groups only. This information is completely confidential.
differ from the other respondents in terms of sex, age, race, education and income Please indicate the category that corresponds to your family’s situation?”, with
(results can be derived from the replication file). categories ranging between under US$15,000 (1) and over US$200,000 (10).
The median income was between US$50,000 and US$64,999, and income ranged
Conceptual replication in the US. Sample. The data were collected as part of over the full range of the income categories (M = 5.3; s.d. = 2.71; minimum = 1;
three larger study protocols. Data collection and analysis were not performed maximum = 10).
blind to the conditions of the experiments. No statistical methods were used to Education was measured using the following question: “What was the last level
pre-determine sample size, but our sample size was larger than those reported in of schooling you completed?” Our sample consisted of the people who answered
previous publications1,7,34–36,41. Specific periods of data collection were between: “less than high school graduate” (n = 29; 8.2%), “high school graduate” (n = 159;
27 October 2014 and 12 December 2014 (protocol 1; n = 105); 24 June 2015 and 45.2%), “some college” (n = 48; 13.6%), “currently a college student” (n = 98;
28 November 2016 (protocol 2; n = 106); and 16 February 2017 and 30 January 27.8%), “college graduate” (n = 9; 2.6%) or “post-college degree” (n = 8; 2.3%).
2018 (protocol 3; n = 141). The full sample consisted of students and non-student
adults (n = 352). For discussion of the differences between the protocols, see the Affective stimuli. The images were part of a larger study measuring physiological
Supplementary Methods. responses to politics. At the end of the protocol, we included 11 images that
were drawn from the IAPS database, which includes hundreds of images coded
Recruitment. The study lasted 1 h and was conducted by a trained laboratory for emotional reactions. Participants began by viewing a neutral and mundane
assistant who was blind to the expectations of the study. We relied on respondents image (a basket; IAPS 7010), and the order of the remaining 10 images was
recruited among university students, as well as people recruited via temporary randomly assigned. Threat sensitivity was measured using the images of the Twin
employment agencies. As such, we provided different levels of compensation. Towers exploding (IAPS 9940), the dog (IAPS 1300) and the snake (IAPS 1050).
Students recruited from campus were paid US$10 (or the equivalent in a currency Otherwise, we included four positive and three sad images (see Supplementary
that students could use in campus shops) in return for participation. Adults who Table 5 for details).
were recruited from a temporary employment agency were paid in line with the
hourly rate of the agency (US$16 per hour). We did this so that participants were Physiological measures. We recorded physiological data using a Biopac system
not asked to forgo income as a condition of participation in the study. running on Windows 7, with a sampling rate of 1,000 Hz. The stimuli were shown
using E-Prime 2.0 and the physiological data were acquired using Acknowledge
Design. Upon signing the informed consent form, participants completed a survey. 4. The experiment was part of a larger study assessing physiological responses to
Information on socioeconomic background (age (in years), gender, race, income politics. We measured arousal using electrodermal activity.
(in categories) and highest completed educational level) was captured. Next, We measured individual differences in sensitivity based on participants’
participants were asked to complete a series of batteries tapping into their political electrodermal response to the affective stimuli and a set of other images. This is a
attitudes and beliefs, as well as their personality. These are discussed below (for standard approach to gauging physiological sensitivity. We did this using Biopac’s
detailed discussion of other measures, see the Supplementary Methods). disposable Ag/AgCL electrodes, which were pre-gelled with isotonic gel (0.5%
Upon completion of the survey, participants were connected to the chloride gel). The electrodes were 27 mm wide, 36 mm long and 1.5 mm thick and
physiological measure (skin conductance) and started the second part of the study. had an 11-mm contact area. The electrodes were placed on the distal phalanges
Note that skin conductance was measured on the non-dominant side of the body of the index finger and the middle finger of the non-dominant hand. Using this
so that participants had their hand available to use the computer mouse. The three set-up, we measured the SCL during the study. The SCL is a standard measure of
protocols all ended with the affective stimuli that were part of this replication electrodermal activity or the degree to which people sweat, which is an index of
study. Participants were also given noise-cancelling headphones (Bose) to block people’s emotional arousal generated by the sympathetic nervous system.
background noise. Participants were exposed to each image for 20 s, with a blank screen between
each one. The ISI was also 20 s. Electrodermal response was operationalized using
Political ideology. Social conservatism was measured using a series of questions the same procedures as the pre-registered replication. We took the difference
designed to determine people’s attitudes to certain issues. These closely resembled between the SCL recorded while participants viewed the picture and the SCL
those used by Oxley et al., including items such as same-sex marriage. Participants recorded during the ISI that proceeded the specific image. To minimize the effects
indicated their answers on a scale from 1 (strongly oppose) to 6 (strongly support). of extreme values, we followed Oxley et al. and took the average of the natural log
All respondents reported their attitudes on: (1) legalized abortion; (2) same- of SCL during the image and the ISI. The descriptive statistics for the indices and
sex marriage; (3) prayer in school; (4) the death penalty; (5) protection of gun individual images are provided in Supplementary Table 6.
NAture HumAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles Nature HumaN BeHaviour
Missing data. We experienced some drop-out due to failed readings of the We also included one neutral image of a spoon (IAPS 7004). The order of these five
physiological data (n = 10; 2.8%). The respondents who dropped out did not differ images was randomized (see Supplementary Table 7 for details).
from the other respondents in terms of sex, age, race, education and income (the
results can be derived from the replication file). Physiological measures. We recorded physiological data using the Versatile Stimulus
Response Registration Program (1998)60 software on stationary computers running
Conceptual replication in the Netherlands. We report the results form a on Windows 7. The stimuli were shown using Presentation 20.3. The experiment
laboratory study conducted at a large Dutch university. No statistical methods was part of a larger study; therefore, we collected electrodermal activity as well as
were used to pre-determine the sample size, but our sample size was larger than corrugator supercilii activity using facial electromyography measures as well as
those reported in previous publications1,7,34,41. Data collection and analysis were not heart rate. We sampled our data at 2,000 Hz.
performed blind to the conditions of the experiments. Electrodermal activity was measured using two reusable Ag/AgCl electrodes
Data collection ran from 7 November through 2 December 2016. In total, 120 of 20 mm × 16 mm. The electrodes were attached with adhesive tape on the medial
participants completed the study but the first 39 observations could not be used phalanx surfaces of the index and ring finger of the non-dominant hand, since
because the randomization of the images was not correctly stored. Therefore, we other components of the study required respondents using the mouse. SCLs are
relied on a sample of 81 respondents. reported in microSiemens. We created indices of physiological responses to the
four images using the same procedures as specified for the conceptual replication
Recruitment. The protocol lasted 45 min and was conducted by a trained in the United States. Supplementary Table 8 provides the descriptive statistics for
laboratory assistant who was blind to the expectations of the study. Participants the physiological responses to the images.
were recruited via flyers and the online portal of the laboratory of the university
where we conducted the study. Participants received participation credits or Missing data. We followed the same procedures for missing data as in the direct
€7.50 (this amount is in line with the ethical procedures of the University of replication and the conceptual replication in the United States (see above).
Amsterdam and was above the minimum wage in the Netherlands at the time
the study was conducted). Reporting Summary. Further information on research design is available in the
Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Design. After signing the informed consent, participants first completed a survey
(using Qualtrics), which tapped, among other things, social conservatism and Data availability
economic conservatism, as well as socioeconomic background. The survey also The data reported in this paper and in the Supplementary Methods and
contained measures of left/right ideological self-placement, policy attitudes Supplementary Results can be found on our public OSF page at https://osf.io/d5g72/.
towards immigration, climate and political cynicism, as well as the salience
of attitudes towards immigration, economy, climate and social dominance Code availability
orientation. The full survey (in Dutch) can be found on our public OSF page
The analysis codes for both the aggregate data and each individual replication, as
(https://osf.io/d5g72/).
well as the results reported in the Supplementary Methods and Supplementary
After participants completed the questionnaire, they were connected to the
Results can be found on our public OSF page at https://osf.io/d5g72/.
physiological measures. Participants were also given noise-cancelling headphones
(Bose). First, participants watched a series of short clips that contained political
Received: 21 June 2019; Accepted: 7 January 2020;
messages (part of an unrelated project not reported here). Next, participants
received a series of images drawn from the IAPS. Following the same procedures Published: xx xx xxxx
as in the US samples, participants were randomly exposed to each image for 20 s,
with a blank screen between each one (that is, a 20-s ISI). First, participants were references
exposed to a mundane object (in line with the US studies, the image of a basket).
1. Oxley, D. R. et al. Political attitudes vary with physiological traits. Science
Next, the affective images were presented at random.
321, 1667–1670 (2008).
2. Adorno, T. W., Frenkel-Brunswik, E., Levinson, D. J. & Sanford, R. N. The
Political ideology. Social conservatism was measured using the 14-item social Authoritarian Personality (Haper & Brothers, 1950).
principles index. The social principles index was introduced by Smith et al.59 as a 3. Jost, J. T., Glaser, J., Kruglanski, A. W. & Sulloway, F. J. Political conservatism
measure of social conservatism. Participants were told: “There are different ways as motivated social cognition. Psychol. Bull. 129, 339–375 (2003).
to organize society. We are interested in the ways in which you think society would 4. Wilson, G. D. The Psychology of Conservatism (Academic Press, 2013).
work best.” Next, participants were exposed to a series of binary choices, such as: 5. Altemeyer, B. Enemies of Freedom: Understanding Right-wing Authoritarianism
“Society works best... (A) when people live according to traditional values or (B) (Jossey-Bass, 1988).
when people adjust their values to fit changing circumstances”. Participants could 6. Aarøe, L., Petersen, M. B. & Arceneaux, K. The behavioral immune system
choose one of the two options. The items can be found in the survey uploaded on shapes political intuitions: why and how individual differences in disgust
our Open Science Framework page or in the paper by Smith et al.59. We re-coded sensitivity underlie opposition to immigration. Am. Pol. Sci. Rev. 111,
the items so that they scored from liberal to conservative. The index theoretically 277–294 (2017).
ranges from −14 (social liberalism) to +14 (social conservatism), and we re-coded 7. Smith, K. B., Oxley, D., Hibbing, M. V., Alford, J. R. & Hibbing, J. R. Disgust
the scale to range from 0 (social liberalism) to 1 (social conservatism) (M = 0.35; sensitivity and the neurophysiology of left–right political orientations. PLoS
s.d. = 0.20; minimum = 0; maximum = 1; α = 0.67) (see Supplementary Methods ONE 6, e25552 (2011).
for item wording). 8. Hibbing, J. R., Smith, K. B. & Alford, J. R. Differences in negativity bias
Economic conservatism was measured using two questions: “Income underlie variations in political ideology. Behav. Brain Sci. 37, 297–307 (2014).
inequality is too big in the Netherlands. People with the lowest income should 9. Laponce, J. A. Left and Right: The Topography of Political Perceptions (Univ.
receive the highest salary increase” (reverse coded); and “Income differences Toronto Press, 1981).
should become smaller” (reverse coded). The items correlated highly with each 10. Nam, H. H., Jost, J. T., Kaggen, L., Campbell-Meiklejohn, D. & Van Bavel, J. J.
other (r = 0.76; 95% CI = 0.64 to 0.84; t(79) = 10.27; P < 0.001). We created an Amygdala structure and the tendency to regard the social system as
economic conservatism dimension ranging from 0 (economic liberalism) to 1 legitimate and desirable. Nat. Hum. Behav. 2, 133–138 (2018).
(economic conservatism) (M = 0.42; s.d. = 0.24). As expected, social conservatism 11. Schreiber, D. et al. Red brain, blue brain: evaluative processes differ in
and economic conservatism correlated positively and modestly with each other democrats and republicans. PLoS ONE 8, e52970 (2013).
(r = 0.48; 95% CI = 0.29 to 0.63; t(79) = 4.87; P < 0.001). 12. Pedersen, W. S., Muftuler, L. T. & Larson, C. L. Conservatism and the neural
circuitry of threat: economic conservatism predicts greater amygdala-BNST
Covariates. The sample we used consisted of 58 females (71.60%) and 23 connectivity during periods of threat vs safety. Soc. Cogn. Affect. Neurosci. 13,
males (28.40%). The mean age of the participants was 23.86 years (s.d. = 4.70; 43–51 (2017).
minimum = 19; maximum = 46). Of our 81 respondents, 71 (91.36%) were 13. Jost, J. T., Nam, H. H., Amodio, D. M. & Van Bavel, J. J. Political
students. We did not ask respondents to report their income. The sample of 81 neuroscience: the beginning of a beautiful friendship. Pol. Psychol. 35,
respondents used in this study did not seem to differ from the full sample 3–42 (2014).
14. Lauka, A., McCoy, J. & Firat, R. B. Mass partisan polarization: measuring a
Affective stimuli. The images were part of a larger study measuring physiological relational concept. Am. Behav. Sci. 62, 107–126 (2018).
responses to politics. At the end of the protocol, we included six images that were 15. Mooney, C. Politics may be partly genetic, now what? CNN http://lightyears.
drawn from the IAPS database. The order of the pictures was randomly assigned, blogs.cnn.com/2012/04/07/politics-may-be-partly-genetic-now-what/ (2012).
but participants would always start with a neutral and mundane image (the basket; 16. Worthen, M. Is there such a thing as an authoritarian voter? The New York
IAPS 7010). Threat sensitivity was measured using four images. We included two Times (15 December 2018).
threatening images that were also included in the conceptual replication in the 17. Vedantam, S., Lu, T., Boyle, T. & Vargas-Restrepo, C. Nature, nurture and
United States; namely, the Dog (IAPS 1300) and the Snake (IAPS 1050), as well as an your politics. NPR https://www.npr.org/2018/10/03/654127241/nature-
image of a gun pointing at the screen (IAPS 6260) and a herding dog (IAPS 1302). nurture-and-your-politics (2018).
NAture HumAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Nature HumaN BeHaviour Articles
18. Roberts, D. Why mass shootings don't convince gun owners to support gun 48. Soroka, S., Fournier, P. & Nir, L. Cross-national evidence of a negativity bias
control. Vox https://www.vox.com/2015/12/4/9845146/mass-shootings-gun- in psychophysiological reactions to news. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 116,
control (2018). 18888–18892 (2019).
19. Morgan, N. What's the difference between a liberal and a conservative 49. Lang, P. & Bradley, M. M. in Handbook of Emotion Elicitation and Assessment
audience? Forbes (16 October, 2014). (eds Coan, J. A. & Allen, J. J. B.) 29–46 (Oxford Univ. Press, 2007).
20. Danzico, M. Fear factor: the science behind America's red/blue divide. BBC 50. Soeter, M. & Kindt, M. An abrupt transformation of phobic behavior after a
https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/av/magazine-16770593/fear-factor-the-science- post-retrieval amnesic agent. Biol. Psychiatry 78, 880–886 (2015).
behind-america-s-red-blue-divide (2012). 51. Diemer, J., Alpers, G. W., Peperkorn, H. M., Shiban, Y. & Mühlberger, A. The
21. Hibbing, J. Is political difference biological? National Geographic https://www. impact of perception and presence on emotional reactions: a review of
youtube.com/watch?v=BAc8MKTjC5E (2017). research in virtual reality. Front. Psychol. 6, 26 (2015).
22. Stewart, J. Paging Dr. Mandvi—political genes. The Daily Show http://www. 52. Federico, C. M. & Malka, A. The contingent, contextual nature of the
cc.com/video-clips/44stzn/the-daily-show-with-jon-stewart-paging-dr-- relationship between needs for security and certainty and political
mandvi---political-genes (2008). preferences: evidence and implications. Pol. Psychol. 39, 3–48 (2018).
23. Miller, G. A., Rockstroh, B. S., Hamilton, H. K. & Yee, C. M. 53. Crawford, J. T. Are conservatives more sensitive to threat than liberals?
Psychophysiology as a core strategy in RDoC. Psychophysiology 53, It depends on how we define threat and conservatism. Soc. Cogn. 35,
410–414 (2016). 354–373 (2017).
24. Bradley, M. M. & Lang, P. J. in Cognitive Neuroscience of Emotion (eds Lane, 54. Malka, A., Lelkes, Y. & Holzer, N. in Politics of Social Psychology 126–146
R. & Nadel, L.) 242–276 (Oxford Univ. Press, 2000). (Psychology Press, 2017).
25. Lang, P. J. Fear reduction and fear behavior: problems in treating a construct. 55. Hatemi, P. K., Crabtree, C. & Smith, K. B. Ideology justifies morality: political
in Research in Psychotherapy (ed. Shlien, J. M.) 90–102 (American beliefs predict moral foundations. Am. J. Pol. Sci. 63, 788–806 (2019).
Psychological Association, 1968). 56. Hatemi, P. K. & Verhulst, B. Political attitudes develop independently of
26. LeDoux, J. E. & Pine, D. S. Using neuroscience to help understand fear and personality traits. PLoS ONE 10, e0118106 (2015).
anxiety: a two-system framework. Am. J. Psychiatry 173, 1083–1093 (2016). 57. Ludeke, S., Tagar, M. R. & DeYoung, C. G. Not as different as we want
27. Butler, E. A., Gross, J. J. & Barnard, K. Testing the effects of suppression and to be: attitudinally consistent trait desirability leads to exaggerated
reappraisal on emotional concordance using a multivariate multilevel model. associations between personality and sociopolitical attitudes. Pol. Psychol. 37,
Biol. Psychol. 98, 6–18 (2014). 125–135 (2016).
28. Franco, A., Malhotra, N. & Simonovits, G. Publication bias in the social 58. Gruszczynski, M. W., Balzer, A., Jacobs, C. M., Smith, K. B. & Hibbing, J. R.
sciences: unlocking the file drawer. Science 345, 1502–1505 (2014). The physiology of political participation. Pol. Behav. 35, 135–152 (2013).
29. Collaboration, O. S. et al. Estimating the reproducibility of psychological 59. Smith, K. B., Oxley, D. R., Hibbing, M. V., Alford, J. R. & Hibbing, J. R.
science. Science 349, aac4716 (2015). Linking genetics and political attitudes: reconceptualizing political ideology.
30. Klein, R. A. et al. Investigating variation in replicability. Soc. Psychol. 45, Pol. Psychol. 32, 369–397 (2011).
142–152 (2014). 60. Molenkamp, B. Vsrrp98 Manual, Version 8.0 (Univ. Amsterdam, 2011).
31. Klein, R. A. et al. Many labs 2: investigating variation in replicability across
samples and settings. Adv. Methods Pract. Psychol. Sci. 1, 443–490 (2018). Acknowledgements
32. Camerer, C. F. et al. Evaluating the replicability of social science experiments We thank K. Smith, J. Hibbing, M. Hibbing and the other authors of Oxley et al.1 for
in nature and science between 2010 and 2015. Nat. Hum. Behav. 2, support of this project and for providing the original stimuli used in direct replication.
637–644 (2018). We also thank N. Anspach, M. Boyer, J. Jennings, S. Kunst, A. M. Alvarez, E. Fried,
33. Peterson, J. C., Smith, K. B. & Hibbing, J. R. Physiology and political beliefs: I. Rebasso and D. van de Wetering for assistance during the data collection. M. Brandt,
a response to Knoll, O‘Daniel, and Cusato. Res. Pol. 3, https://doi. J. Bullock, J. Crawford, C. Dawes, C. Federico, S. Feldman, J. Fowler, C. Johnston, J. Jost,
org/10.1177/2053168016662892 (2016). L. Laustsen, Y. Lelkes, M. Bang Petersen, J. Mansell, M. Osmundsen, V. Parma, K. Smith,
34. Arceneaux, K., Dunaway, J. & Soroka, S. Elites are people, too: the effects of S. Soroka, B. Spruyt, M. Tessler and J. Tybur, as well as panellists at the American Political
threat sensitivity on policymakers’ spending priorities. PLoS ONE 13, Science Association meeting (2018), Midwest Political Science Association meeting
e0193781 (2018). (2017), Dutch Political Psychology meeting, University of Mannheim, Free University
35. Knoll, B. R., O’Daniel, T. J. & Cusato, B. Physiological responses and political Amsterdam, Politicologenetmaal (2018), Amsterdam School of Communication
behavior: three reproductions using a novel dataset. Res. Pol. https://doi. Research, Amsterdam Interdisciplinary Centre for Emotion and Hot Politics Lab,
org/10.1177/2053168015621328 (2015). provided helpful comments and suggestions during this project. This research was
36. Coe, C. M., Canelo, K. S., Vue, K., Hibbing, M. V. & Nicholson, S. P. The funded by the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme
physiology of framing effects: threat sensitivity and the persuasiveness of under grant agreement number 750443 (B.N.B.), the European Research Council under
political arguments. J. Politics 79, 1465–1468 (2017). the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant
37. Simonsohn, U. Small telescopes: detectability and the evaluation of replication agreement number 759079 (G.S.), the Amsterdam School of Communication Research
results. Psychol. Sci. 26, 559–569 (2015). (B.N.B.) and the Behavioral Foundations Laboratory at Temple University (K.A.). The
38. Munafò, M. R. et al. A manifesto for reproducible science. Nat. Hum. Behav. funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish or
1, 0021 (2017). preparation of the manuscript.
39. Chambers, C. The Seven Deadly Sins of Psychology: A Manifesto for Reforming
the Culture of Scientific Practice (Princeton Univ. Press, 2017). Author contributions
40. Patil, P., Peng, R. D. & Leek, J. A visual tool for defining reproducibility and
B.N.B. and K.A. designed the study and contributed to data collection, analyses and
replicability. Nat. Hum. Behav. 3, 650–652 (2019).
write-up. G.S. contributed to the analyses and write-up. C.G. contributed to the data
41. Dodd, M. D. et al. The political left rolls with the good and the political right
collection and write-up.
confronts the bad: connecting physiology and cognition to preferences. Phil.
Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 367, 640–649 (2012).
Competing interests
42. Wagenmakers, E.-J., Lodewyckx, T., Kuriyal, H. & Grasman, R. Bayesian
hypothesis testing for psychologists: a tutorial on the Savage–Dickey method. The authors declare no competing interests.
Cogn. Psychol. 60, 158–189 (2010).
43. Jeffreys, H. The Theory of Probability (Oxford Univ. Press, 1961). Additional information
44. Schnack, H. Brain and behavior: assessing reproducibility in association
Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/
studies. eLife 8, e46757 (2019).
s41562-020-0823-z.
45. Vitriol, J. A., Larsen, E. G. & Ludeke, S. The generalizability of personality
effects in politics. Eur. J. Pers. 33, 631–641 (2019). Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to B.N.B.
46. Clifford, S., Jewell, R. M. & Waggoner, P. D. Are samples drawn from Peer review information Primary Handling Editor: Aisha Bradshaw.
Mechanical Turk valid for research on political ideology? Res. Pol. https://doi.
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
org/10.1177/2053168015622072 (2015).
47. Malka, A., Soto, C. J., Inzlicht, M. & Lelkes, Y. Do needs for security and Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
certainty predict cultural and economic conservatism? A cross-national published maps and institutional affiliations.
analysis. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 106, 1031–1051 (2014). © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2020
NAture HumAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
1
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Corresponding author(s): Bert Bakker
Last updated by author(s): 2019/07/06
Reporting Summary
Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency
in reporting. For further information on Nature Research policies, see Authors & Referees and the Editorial Policy Checklist.
Statistics
For all statistical analyses, confirm that the following items are present in the figure legend, table legend, main text, or Methods section.
n/a Confirmed
The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
A statement on whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided
Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.
A description of all covariates tested
A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
A full description of the statistical parameters including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient)
AND variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)
For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted
Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.
For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated
Our web collection on statistics for biologists contains articles on many of the points above.
Software and code
Policy information about availability of computer code
Data collection In all three studies survey data was collected using Qualtrics Survey Software. Participants were seated behind a computer running on
Windows 7 and completed the Qualtrics survey online. In the U.S. (pre-registered replication & conceptual replication) the physiological
data was collected on using a Biopac system (MP150). The stimuli were shown using E-prime 2.0 and the physiological data was acquired
using Acknowledge 4. In the Netherlands (conceptual replication), the physiological data was collected using custom made equipment by
the University of Amsterdam to collect physiological data. The stimuli were shown using Presentation 20.3. The physiological data was
acquired using the Versatile Stimulus Response Registration Program 1998 -- a custom made software program made by the laboratory
staff of the University of Amsterdam.
Data analysis All data was analysed using upon source statistical software: R version 3.5.2. All required packages to run the analyses are specified in the
replication code.
For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors/reviewers.
We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Research guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.
Data
Policy information about availability of data
All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable:
- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets
- A list of figures that have associated raw data
- A description of any restrictions on data availability
The analysis codes for both the aggregate data and each individual replication, as well as the results belonging to the supplementary materials, are available from
our OSF page: https://osf.io/d5g72/
2
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Field-specific reporting
Please select the one below that is the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.
Life sciences Behavioural & social sciences Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences
For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/documents/nr-reporting-summary-flat.pdf
Behavioural & social sciences study design
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
Study description The studies reported in this paper are quantative studies with human subjects conducted in laboratories of our universities in the United
States (Temple University) and the Netherlands (University of Amsterdam). All data reported here is quantatitive data.
Research sample To replicate Oxley et al. and study the association between physiological responses to threatening images and conservatism we needed
relatively large samples (at least 4 times the size of their sample). For our pre-registered replication in the U.S. we recruited respondents
among university students, advertisements on Craigslist as well as people recruited via temporary employment agencies. Our goal was to
get a diverse sample. The sample consisted of 128 females (63.4%), 69 males (34.2%) 5 (.2.4%) persons who did not identify as female or
male. The mean age of the participants was 25.86 (SD=11.06, Min=18, Max=82). Our sample was racially diverse: White (N=85; 42.08%),
Black (N=62; 30.69%), Latino (N=10, 4.95%), Asian (N=30; 14.85%) or another race (N=15; 7.43%). The median self-reported household
income was “between $65,000 and $79,999”. Finally, there is variance in the highest level of completed education: “Some
college” (N=35, 17.33%), “Currently a college student” (N=102, 50.49%), “College graduate” (N=23, 11.39%) or “Post graduate” (N=22,
10.89%). The sample is not representative of the US population but there is considerable variance in the demographic background
variables.
For our conceptual replication in the U.S. we recruited respondents among university students and via temporary employment agencies.
Our goal was to get a large sample to complete the study. The sample consisted of 223 females (66.71%), 124 males (35.43%) and 3
(.85%) persons who did not identify as female or male. The mean age of the participants was 25.14 (SD=11.89, Min=18, Max=71). Our
sample was racially diverse: White (48%; N=168), Black (28.29%; N=99), Latino (4%; N=14), Asian (14.57%; N=51) or another ethnicity
(5.14%; N=18). The median self-reported household income was “Between $50,000 and $64,999”. Finally, there is variance in the highest
level of completed education: “Less than high school graduate” (N=29, 8.2%), “High school graduates” (N=159, 45.2%), “Some
college” (N=48, 13.6%), “Currently a college student” (N=98, 27.8%), “College graduate” (N=9, 2.6%) and “Post college degree” (N=8, 2.3\
%). The sample is not representative of the US population but there is considerable variance in the demographic background variables.
Finally, for our conceptual replication in the Netherlands participants were recruited via flyers and the online portal of the laboratory of
the university where we conducted the study (the University of Amsterdam). The sample consisted of 58 females (71.60\%) and 23
males (28.40\%). The mean age of the participants was 23.86 (SD=4.70, Min=19, Max=46). 71 (91.36%) of our 81 respondents were
students. We did not ask respondents to report their income.
Sampling strategy In all three samples we rely upon convenience samples.
Our pre-registered replication is four times the sample in the original Oxley et al. (2008, Science) study. A power analysis (see Methods
section in paper) informed us that we would need 199 participants to have sufficient statistical power to detect a small effect as the one
reported by Oxley et al. In turned out that a couple of people had missing values on the physiological measures. This leaves us with a
sample of 191 participants in the analyses. Re-calculation the power, using the same parameters but with 191 participants, we arrive at
the statistical power of .79, very close to the pre-registered of .80.
For the conceptual replications in the U.S. and the Netherlands we did not perform a power analysis before the start of the study. The
studies were part of larger protocols in which the goal was to study the connection between physiology and politics. In both studies, we
tried to collect as much responses as possible given time and budget constraints. The sample sizes in the conceptual replications are still
much larger than Oxley et al. (2008, Science) which relied upon 46 respondents. The conceptual replication in the U.S. is more than 7.5
times larger than the Oxley et al. study. While the conceptual replication in the Netherlands is still 1.75 times larger than the Oxley et al.
study. As such these samples are much larger than the original Oxley et al. (2008) paper. Especially in the pooled analyses in Figure 1
(main text of the paper) this provides a much better powered test of the association between threat sensitivity and conservatism
compared to Oxley et al.
Data collection In all three studies survey data was collected using Qualtrics Survey Software. In the U.S. (pre-registered replication & conceptual
replication) the physiological data was collected on using a Biopac system (MP150) connected to a desktop computer running on
Windows 7. The stimuli were shown using E-prime 2.0. The physiological data was acquired using Acknowledge 4.
In the Netherlands (conceptual replication), the physiological data was collected using a custom made equipment by the University of
Amsterdam to collect physiological data. The stimuli were shown using Presentation 20.3 which ran on a desktop computer running on
Windows 7. The physiological data was acquired using the Versatile Stimulus Response Registration Program 1998 -- a custom made
software program made by the laboratory staff of the University of Amsterdam. In all three studies participant were asked to put on
noise cancelling headphones (Bose) when the physiological measures were collected.
The studies were performed by trained lab assistants. Aside from the trained lab assistant(s), there were no other people present during
3
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
the study. The trained lab assistants were blind to the hypotheses tested in this study.
Timing Pre-registered replication: data was collected between February 7, 2018 and June 30, 2018.
Conceptual Replication US: the data were collected as part of three larger study protocols. Specific periods of data collection were:
between October 27, 2014 and December 12, 2014 (protocol 1: N=105); June 24, 2015 and November 28, 2016 (protocol 2: N=106); and
February 16, 2017 and January 30, 2018 (protocol 3: N=141).
Conceptual Replication Netherlands: data was collected between November 7 and December 2 2016.
Data exclusions No data was exlcuded.
Non-participation No participants dropped out or declined participation
Randomization This study is not an experiment. The images (threatening and non-threatening) were presented in a random order.
Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods
We require information from authors about some types of materials, experimental systems and methods used in many studies. Here, indicate whether each material,
system or method listed is relevant to your study. If you are not sure if a list item applies to your research, read the appropriate section before selecting a response.
Materials & experimental systems Methods
n/a Involved in the study n/a Involved in the study
Antibodies ChIP-seq
Eukaryotic cell lines Flow cytometry
Palaeontology MRI-based neuroimaging
Animals and other organisms
Human research participants
Clinical data
Human research participants
Policy information about studies involving human research participants
Population characteristics See above
Recruitment We recruited participants among university students, advertisements on Craigslist as well as people recruited via temporary
employment agencies. In all instances, we advertised our study using a generic messages stating that we “are recruiting
participants for a new study. We examine how people form their preferences” or a message very similar content.
As such, people opted-in to participate in the study. One might wonder whether people with more interest and/or knowledge in
politics might be more likely to participate in such a study as they might be interested figuring out how they “form their
preferences”. Yet, in all three data collections our samples show a lot of variance in self-reported interest in politics and factual
knowledge about politics measured using a set of quiz items (see Supplementary Materials, Question 9).
There might be less socially conservative participants available at the sites where we conducted our studies – laboratories at the
campus of large universities. Therefore, we also advertised our pre-registered replication on Craigslist and we recruited
participants using temporary employment agencies. We show in the Supplementary Materials (Question 1) that we have 4.45
times as many socially conservative respondents as Oxley et al. relied upon in their Science paper.
Ethics oversight The studies conducted in the United States were approved by Temple University's Institutional Review Board. The study in the
Netherlands was approved by the Ethical Review Board of the University of Amsterdam. We have obtained informed consent
from all participants at the start of the study.
Note that full information on the approval of the study protocol must also be provided in the manuscript.