Articles
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-019-0543-4
Insufficient sleep reduces voting and other
prosocial behaviours
John B. Holbein 1*, Jerome P. Schafer2 and David L. Dickinson 3,4,5
Insufficient sleep is a growing public health concern in industrial societies. Although a lack of sleep is known to negatively
affect private behaviours—such as working or going to school—comparatively little is known about its consequences for the
social behaviours that hold society and democracy together. Using three complementary methods, we show how insufficient
sleep affects various measures of civic participation. With survey data from two countries, we show that insufficient sleep
predicts lower voter turnout. Next, with a geographical regression discontinuity design, we demonstrate that individuals from
the United States who tend to sleep less due to circadian impacts of time-zone boundaries are also less likely to vote. Finally,
we experimentally manipulate short-term sleep over a two-stage study. We observe that the treatment decreases the levels
of civic engagement, as shown by their willingness to vote, sign petitions and donate to charities. These results highlight the
strong negative consequences that current levels of insufficient sleep have on vitally important measures of social capital.
In recent years, many industrialized societies have seen a decrease (conditional on observables) less likely to vote—a vitally important
in the levels of sleep of their citizens1. In the United States, for prosocial behaviour necessary for the health of democratic institu-
example, polls show that over the past six decades, the number of tions25. As this first study leaves open the possibility of bias from
citizens getting inadequate levels of sleep has increased fourfold2–4. unobserved factors, in study 2, we turn to a large-scale nationwide
Based on these trends, sleep scientists estimate that between 50 and natural experiment that leverages discontinuous differences in sleep
70 million Americans suffer from chronic sleep deprivation5. This patterns in the vicinity of US time-zone boundaries (an approach
problem is not restricted to the United States alone—indeed, studies that has been used in the past to study sleep’s effects on health
have shown that insufficient sleep is a growing concern in developed and productivity). Our results suggest that individuals nudged to
countries across the globe6. Given the negative effects of insufficient lower levels of sleep are also less likely to vote. Finally, in study 3,
sleep on individual health (for an overview of research on this topic, we experimentally manipulate short-term sleep over a two-stage
see refs. 7–11), scholars and public officials have become increasingly protocol. Among those participating in both stages, we observe a
concerned with these patterns—with some calling the recent sleep decreased willingness to take part in various real-world prosocial
trends a public health ‘crisis’12,13. The importance of research on engagement behaviours, consisting of signing a real petition in sup-
sleep is evidenced by the recent (2017) awarding of the Nobel Prize port of increased recycling in their community, credibly commit-
in Physiology and Medicine for research on circadian rhythms14, ting to donate to a charitable organization and planning to vote.
which fundamentally shape the sleep patterns of individuals. Although we acknowledge the limitations of each of these designs,
In this paper, we focus on the consequences of insufficient we also show that they provide complementary evidence, which
sleep for civic attitudes and behaviours: a vital component of corroborates the notion that insufficient sleep decreases individu-
societal well-being. Extensive research has shown the negative als’ willingness to be civically engaged in their communities and
consequences of insufficient sleep for private behaviours—such as democracy as a whole.
working, living a healthy lifestyle and attending school (for example, Our work contributes to a better understanding of the implica-
refs. 8,9,15–21). Other research has explored whether insufficient sleep tions of sleep deprivation—we provide rich empirical evidence of
affects bystanders, as in the case of sleepy driving22–24. However, little the link between sleep and field measures of civic participation. Our
work has focused on how sleepiness affects real-world prosocial results have important implications given growing concerns over
behaviours, such as the ones we explore—that is, proactive mea- patterns of insufficient sleep and stagnant (at best) or decreasing
sures of civic participation such as voting, volunteering or donating (at worst) levels of social engagement25. These shed light on one
to charity. This gap is unfortunate, as it limits our ability to fully reason why many people fail to be civically active: because of
understand the broader societal consequences of current trends insufficient sleep, many citizens are too tired and lack the attached
towards less sleep. Simply put, it leaves us wondering whether bundle of downstream health27 and skills28 required to participate.
sleep patterns merely have private consequences or, instead, influ- These results have special meaning given the socially stratified
ence vitally important metrics of social capital, prosociality and distribution of sleep29, which, as we suggest below, may serve to
social connectivity25,26. exacerbate socioeconomic gaps in prosocial engagement.
Here, we provide evidence from multiple sources of the broader
consequences of sleep deprivation. Our first approach (study 1) Conceptual framework
uses survey microdata from two countries, paired with control Prosocial acts of civic participation—such as voting, volunteering
strategies to show that individuals who get insufficient sleep are also and donating—help to hold the fabric of society together. These
1Department of Political Science, Brigham Young University, Provo, UT, USA. 2Department of Political Science, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich,
Germany. 3Department of Economics, Appalachian State University, Boone, NC, USA. 4IZA, Bonn, Germany. 5Economic Science Institute, Chapman
University, Orange, CA, USA. *e-mail: john_holbein@byu.edu
Nature HumaN BeHavIour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NATUre HUmAN BeHAvIoUr
behaviours shape communities’ vitally important levels of social behaviours and may have limited validity in real-world environ-
capital25. In addition to being important in their own right, previous ments. Our goal is to examine more direct links between insuffi-
research has shown that measures of prosociality may have mul- cient sleep and field behaviours that directly reflect prosociality in
tiplier effects in society, with these strongly predicting beneficial domains important to the health of democratic institutions.
macro-outcomes, such as economic growth30 and reduced govern- In this paper, we use three different methods to elicit the effect
ment corruption26. However, by many accounts, the levels of pro- of sleep restriction on measures of civic participation: a conditional
sociality have stagnated or declined in recent years. on observables approach, a natural experiment approach and a ran-
domized controlled experiment approach. All of these come with
theoretical channels: why insufficient sleep and civic their own strengths, weaknesses and assumptions, which we discuss
participation in some detail below. Although none of these methods is perfect,
There are multiple direct and indirect reasons to expect that sleep together they help us to test whether a lack of sleep decreases proso-
influences prosocial behaviours. Insufficient sleep may negatively cial behaviour. In each of the cases below, however, the data met the
affect behaviour in social environments, either directly or through assumptions of the statistical tests used.
its downstream effects on mental bandwidth and health. Engaging
in civic behaviours is costly: it takes time, energy, self-control and Study 1: observational evidence
cognitive capacity28. Individuals who sleep less and who are chroni- To explore the effects of insufficient sleep on prosocial measures
cally fatigued may struggle to engage, even if they want to do so. of civic engagement, we first conducted an analysis of survey data
Such individuals may lack the motivation, capacity and social con- from both the United States and Germany. For the United States,
nections to overcome the hurdles, distractions or costs that get in we used data from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent
the way of participating in social processes that benefit society. Lack to Adult Health (Add Health). This data set is nationally represen-
of sleep may lead one to sacrifice engagement in prosocial activities tative of the cohort it surveys (youth in 1994–1995) and is one of
to preserve their energy for activities that directly benefit oneself. the few data sets in the United States that pairs multiple measures
Insufficient sleep may also influence prosocial behaviours indi- of sleep with measures of voting. The Add Health Tiredness Scale
rectly through its bundle of downstream consequences. A broad is constructed from the battery of sleep questions and allows us to
literature indicates that sleep deprivation affects a host of human code an indicator for insufficient or poor sleep (see Supplementary
behaviours that work in political science has shown to be associated Information Appendix). In addition, Add Health includes a large
with political participation. For example, chronic sleep deprivation subsample of sibling pairs that allows for statistical control of many
causes a noticeable deterioration of individual health8,16, and schol- unobserved characteristics in the analysis. The second data source
ars have recently shown that health levels seem to influence forms of comes from the German Socioeconomic Panel (SOEP), which is
participation such as voting27. Tiredness may also decrease produc- also a nationally representative longitudinal survey of about 20,000
tivity16,31, hence reducing another channel linked to participation32. voting-age Germans. In addition to questions on voting, the SOEP
Similarly, a lack of sleep may lead to noticeable declines in cognitive includes questions about sleep patterns that allowed us to code an
ability18,33—a known predictor of voter turnout32. Finally, experi- indicator variable for insufficient sleep (a self-reported sleep level of
mental work suggests that sleep deprivation lowers self-control34 less than the medically recommended 7 h per night on weekends,
and social skills35, which have recently been experimentally linked given that German Elections are held on Sundays). We include more
to forms of engagement such as voting28. In addition to lowering information about these samples, the measures used and the statisti-
the overall levels of engagement, insufficient sleep may also widen cal controls included in the models below in the SI Appendix.
participatory gaps in communities, discouraging participation from We note that this study design using observational compari-
disadvantaged segments of the population who do not have the sons is inherently limited. The goal of this analysis is to establish a
resources to overcome these additional hurdles to their engagement. baseline, to see whether any relationship exists between insufficient
Our hypothesis that insufficient sleep will reduce prosocial sleep and measures of civic engagement. To show that individual
behaviours, such as voting and signing petitions, among others, differences in sleep levels might play a role in political behaviour,
is also consistent with the literature on sleep deprivation and we control for a host of covariates (such as age, gender, income and
deliberative thinking. Deliberative thinking is active in prefrontal education, to name a few) and provide evidence from two countries
brain regions that are particularly at risk under conditions of sleep with different political systems. In some of our specifications in the
deprivation36–38. In addition, researchers have documented the Add Health sample, we isolate our comparisons down to sibling
importance of deliberative thinking in the formation of prosocial pairs in an attempt to control for certain unobserved factors (such
behaviours39–42. This has been suggested in laboratory experiments as shared home culture or environment). However, as our findings
as a hypothesized mechanism to explain how insufficient sleep may still run the risk of exposure to bias from unobserved factors, read-
harm prosocial behaviours43, but here, we also note the additional ers should be careful in over-interpreting these correlational results.
effort that prosociality and civic engagement may require in real- Fig. 1 shows a coefficient plot of our estimates of the effect of
world field settings. insufficient sleep across three modelling approaches: bivariate
(that is, no controls), controls and sibling fixed effects. The esti-
evidence from previous work mates provided in Fig. 1 across two waves of Add Health data and
Previous empirical evidence on how sleep affects social decisions is the SOEP data show consistent evidence that poor and insufficient
relatively sparse. Still, we can take some hints from previous work. sleep predict lower voter turnout. Using the Add Health data, we
A recent examination of total sleep deprivation in highly controlled estimate that poor sleep is associated with a 7–14 percentage point
conditions showed negative effects on measures of simple bargain- (p.p.) decrease in reported voting. These estimates are sizeable and
ing and trust in a stylized two-person decision environment35. More not statistically distinct from each other across model specification.
externally valid, but somewhat less controlled, levels of chronic Among the estimated coefficients for the insufficient sleep indica-
partial sleep restriction have also recently been shown to affect tor, 4 out of 6 are significant at the 5% level. One other model finds
behaviour in simple trust and dictator games43. Finally, recent work a marginally insignificant effect at the 5% level (wave 4 voting, with
found that sleep restriction may increase responsiveness to the control ordinary least squares (OLS) effect estimates: −6.6 p.p.;
threat of norm enforcement through punishment44. In short, previ- two-tailed P = 0.055; N = 11,277; 95% CI: −13.2 p.p. to 0.0 p.p.), and
ous work in this area has been limited, and what is available focuses in the Add Health wave 3 model with sibling fixed effects, the
on laboratory measures of prosociality that abstract away from field effect of the high Add Health Tiredness Scale is not statistically
Nature HumaN BeHavIour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NATUre HUmAN BeHAvIoUr Articles
Bivariate
Controls
Sibling
fixed effects
−0.3 −0.2 −0.1 0 0.1 −0.3 −0.2 −0.1 0 0.1 −0.3 −0.2 −0.1 0 0.1
Turnout estimates
Fig. 1 | observational estimates for insufficient sleep on voter turnout (add Health and SoeP). Linear regression estimates for the relationship between
insufficient sleep and self-reported voter turnout are shown. Insufficient sleep is operationalized as a composite scale (0–1) in Add Health waves 3 and
4 (left and centre panels) and as reporting less than 7 h of sleep in the SOEP (right panel). Coefficients are shown as points, with corresponding 90%
(wider) and 95% (narrow) confidence intervals. Model statistics (effect, N, confidence interval) from top to bottom: Add Health wave 3: −8.7 p.p., 14,796,
−15.4 p.p. to −2.1 p.p.; −7.7 p.p., 11,280, −14.7 p.p. to −0.8 p.p.; −6.9 p.p., 3,798, −20.6 p.p. to 6.9 p.p.; Add Health wave 4: −8.2 p.p., 14,316, −14.7 p.p. to
−1.7 p.p.; −6.6 p.p., 11,277, −13.2 p.p. to 0.0 p.p.; −14.4 p.p., 3,797, −28.2 p.p. to −0.5 p.p.; SOEP: −4.8 p.p., 14,673, −6.6 p.p. to −3.1 p.p.; −5.4 p.p., 14,673,
−7.1 p.p. to −3.6 p.p.
discernible from 0 (OLS effect estimates: −6.9 p.p.; two-tailed across states split by time-zone boundaries. Scholars who have used
P = 0.30; N = 3,798; 95% CI: −20.7 p.p. to 6.9 p.p.). Although some this design previously have shown that this exogenous decline in
results are less precise—in part because of the reduced sample sleep times is not confounded by shared state boundaries, contex-
of siblings in the Add Health data—our point estimates are con- tual effects, county-specific factors (such as the administration of
sistently negative and on a similar order of magnitude. In the specific elections), the random allocation of counties around the
German sample, the association between insufficient sleep and self- cut-off, or the strategic location of more affluent or differential
reported turnout is consistent, being −4.8 p.p. in the bivariate model demographic patterns on either marginal side of the cut-off (to
and −5.4 p.p. in the model with controls, and much more precisely name a few)16,45. As best as we can tell with observable balance tests
estimated given the higher sample size (two-tailed P < 0.001 in and fixed-effect or permutation tests, within states precise sorting
both models). around the time-zone boundaries is negligible. Time-zone bound-
Overall, these results provide observational evidence that insuf- aries, being (largely) determined a century ago, seem to be orthogo-
ficient sleep and sleepiness predict lower levels of voter turnout—a nal to the factors that influence voter turnout today. Although time
core form of civic participation—in advanced democracies. Given (and sleep as a result) is disrupted at the cut-off, this seems to be the
previous research on voter turnout, these relationships are fairly primary mover. However, even though this cut-off has faced exten-
large. To help benchmark the magnitude of these effects, they are sive validation, it is possible that at the time-zone boundary there is
about half the size of the effect of finishing high school in the Add some other compound treatment of relevance that confounds our
Health siblings sample. However, the null effects in one of the two estimates. Thus, this design gets us a long way towards causality,
sibling pair models are enough to give pause to a conclusion that although it comes with assumptions (which we more fully outline
sleep matters, as our results may be partially driven by bias from and explore in the SI Appendix).
unobserved confounds. Hence, to determine whether sleep affects We first seek to replicate the finding that motivates the use of this
prosocial behaviour, we require a plausibly exogenous source of design for our purposes: sleep declines at the time-zone boundary.
sleep deprivation. To do so, we use data from the American Time Use Survey and com-
bine these data with demographic information from the US Census.
Study 2: natural experiment In the SI Appendix, we also provide evidence from sleep tracker
Our second analytic approach builds on recent research showing data supporting the notion that individuals living on the eastern
that time-zone boundaries create an as-good-as-random assign- side of US time zones sleep less than those on the western side. As
ment (that is, orthogonal to confounding factors) of individuals shown in the SI Appendix, we are able to validate that individu-
to different levels of sleep. For reasons discussed in detail in the als living on the marginally eastern side of the time-zone boundary
SI Appendix, individuals living near the immediate eastern side of sleep significantly less, but do not seem to differ on factors other
the US time-zone boundaries have been shown to achieve a signifi- than sleep. We then estimate the effect of living on the marginally
cant 20–25 min less sleep per night (on average) than those living eastern side of the time-zone boundary on voter turnout using geo-
near the immediate western side of the same time-zone bound- graphical regression discontinuity design models. Our preferred
ary16,45, and to exhibit the negative health consequences of insuf- specification for these geographical regression discontinuity design
ficient sleep10,16. Thus, we can make comparisons on either side of models includes fixed effects to absorb unobserved state-level dif-
the time-zone boundary in an attempt to see whether individuals ferences that might confound our estimates. The voter turnout data
exogenously nudged towards less sleep are less likely to engage. for these models come from a proprietary sample of a nationwide
The advantages of this approach are many. It provides plausibly voter file from Catalist LLC (see the SI Appendix for more details),
exogenous variation in sleep times that runs orthogonal to many which allows us to use one of the few validated measures of civic
of the factors that contribute to voter turnout. In contrast to many behaviour as our outcome measure.
geographical discontinuities, which follow state boundaries, time- Figure 2 shows the results from this natural experiment at the
zone boundaries do not always follow state lines. As such, we can US time-zone boundaries. As we would expect if insufficient sleep
amplify a standard geographical regression discontinuity design reduced civic behaviours, individuals who live on the marginally
with state fixed effects (which we include in all our models, along eastern side of the time-zone boundary are less likely to vote than
with year and state-by-year fixed effects) that force comparisons all-else-equal individuals living on the marginally western side of
Nature HumaN BeHavIour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NATUre HUmAN BeHAvIoUr
effects of sleep deprivation may weigh most heavily on socially
disadvantaged segments of the population. As such, it may serve
not only to reduce the overall levels of prosocial behaviour but
GRD + FE (5°) also to further exacerbate social stratification in this vitally impor-
tant domain32,46.
Placebo tests: what does sleep restriction not affect?
It is possible that when nudged towards lower levels of sleep, indi-
GRD + FE (1°) viduals reduce not only prosocial behaviours but also all forms of
private behaviours. If this were the case, what we would be observ-
ing would not be unique to the prosocial domain. However, our
natural experiment allows us to perform placebo tests that contrast
the effects of sleep on prosocial behaviours with potential effects on
GRD (5°) other types of behaviours.
We note that our goal in this paper is to focus on prosocial
behaviours related to civic participation. This represents a vital
contribution, as most of the literature on sleep deprivation focuses
on private behaviours (with a few exceptions noted above). To be
GRD (1°) clear, we are not arguing that private behaviours are not affected by
a lack of sleep. Claiming that sleep deprivation does not also affect
some private behaviours would be incorrect, as a host of previous
work with credible research designs shows that a lack of sleep affects
−0.10 −0.05 0 0.05
non-prosocial behaviours—in the health and educational domains,
Effect on voter turnout (proportion voting) for instance8,9,15–21. Still, if every individual behaviour, prosocial and
non-prosocial, decreased as a response to a lack of sleep, our find-
ings might be less valuable. Although not the primary focus of our
paper, we think that it is valuable to start to establish the boundaries
of where commonly experienced levels of insufficient sleep do not
play a role.
To do so, we run a series of placebo tests on behaviours not
previously studied by sleep scientists in a causal framework.
Although some studies have looked at the conditional-on-observ-
ables relationship between sleep and certain private outcomes
(for example, tobacco use47 and television consumption48), these
studies tend to leverage small sample sizes and leave open the
possibility of bias from unobserved factors. For our placebo tests,
we focus on our quasi-experimental design because it has better
causal properties than the observational designs (study 1) and
can be paired with more private outcomes than our experiment
(study 3), which was preregistered and conducted to focus exclu-
sively on prosocial behaviours.
Figure 3 shows the effect of our quasi-experimental treatment
on our placebo outcomes. These behaviours are drawn from the
the boundary. Our regression discontinuity estimates suggest that American Time Use Survey—one of the largest, longest-running
individuals exogenously nudged towards lower levels of sleep vote at surveys on individual behaviours—and we use our regression dis-
a rate of 2–5 p.p. lower (regression discontinuity estimate statistics: continuity constructed sleep variable from the Fig. 2 analysis. With
N : 1,904,958, N : 11,171,064; two-tailed P value from bot- this data set, we estimate our geographical regression discontinuity
BW = 1° BW = 5°
tom to top: P = 0.031 and P < 0.001 in the rest; effect-size estimate design models for several behaviours that are much less prosocial
from top to bottom: −2.5 p.p., −2.8 p.p., −4.9 p.p. and −4.7 p.p.; 95% than our measures of voting, donating and petitioning for social
CI from bottom to top: −4.8 to −0.2, −3.8 to −1.8, −6.8 to −3.0 causes. These include: the amount of time one spends working, hav-
and −5.8 to −3.5; BW, bandwidth). These estimates are statistically ing free time, eating and drinking, cleaning their home, engaging in
precise, sizeable and are not the result of observable imbalances home repairs (by oneself), watching television, relaxing or thinking,
around the cut-off, state-level differences or precise sorting around using tobacco or drugs, reading for personal interest and using a
the time-zone boundary. computer for leisure. Although the American Time Use Survey con-
Interestingly, these demobilizing effects are magnified in socially tains many measures of individual behaviour, we have been inten-
disadvantaged communities. If we break our models out (at the tional in choosing variables that one tends to do (largely) for private
median level) by the percentage of individuals in the community that motives (for example, earning money at one’s job) or that one tends
are African American—a strong proxy for the socioeconomic status to do while alone (for example, relaxing or thinking).
of the area—we find that our treatment effects are nearly three times The first row in Fig. 3 plots the effect of our quasi-experimental
as large in disadvantaged communities (regression discontinuity design on sleep times (as a reference). The next ten rows plot the
β = −7.1 p.p.; N = 6,080,202; two-tailed P < 0.001; 95% CI: −8.5 to same time-zone cut-off effect on our placebo behaviours. As can be
−5.6) than in advantaged communities (regression discontinu- seen, when individuals are exogenously nudged towards lower lev-
ity β = −2.5 p.p.; N = 5,090,862; two-tailed P < 0.001; 95% CI: −3.7 els of sleep, they do not uniformly participate in fewer private activi-
to −1.3). When modelled together, this difference is highly signifi- ties. As shown in the sixth row, when individuals sleep less, they
cant (regression discontinuity β = −1.5 p.p.; N = 11,171,064; mechanically have more free time (that is, time net of sleep, work
difference
two-tailed P < 0.001; 95% CI: −2.2 to −0.8). This suggests that the and housework) (β = 40.3; N = 27,649; two-tailed P = 0.034; 95% CI:
ledoM
Fig. 2 | Quasi-experimental estimates of the effect of insufficient sleep on
voter turnout. Estimates for our quasi-experiment based on the proximity
to US time-zone borders (1° is ~50 miles). Coefficients show the effects of
living on the marginally eastern side of the cut-off compared to living on
the marginally western side. The outcome variable is the zip-code-level
voter turnout for 2008–2012 (primary and general elections). Data are from
the Catalist 1% sample timestamped May 2014. Models with fixed effects
(FE) have state, year and state-by-year fixed effects and, as such, leverage
states that are split between two time zones. Coefficient estimates are
shown as points, with corresponding 90% (thicker) and 95% (narrower)
confidence intervals. Regression discontinuity estimates: N : 1,904,958
BW = 1°
(3,769 zip codes), N : 11,171,064 (20,057 zip codes); two-tailed P
BW = 5°
value from bottom to top: P = 0.031, bottom, and P < 0.001, top three;
effect-size estimate from top to bottom: −2.5 p.p., −2.8 p.p., −4.9 p.p. and
−4.7 p.p.; 95% CI from bottom to top: −4.8 p.p. to −0.2 p.p., −3.8 p.p. to
−1.8 p.p., −6.8 p.p. to −3.0 p.p. and −5.8 p.p. to −3.5 p.p. GRD, geographical
regression discontinuity.
Nature HumaN BeHavIour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NATUre HUmAN BeHAvIoUr Articles
Sleeping
Working at job(s)
Eating and drinking
Cleaning home
Home repairs (by self)
Overall free time
Watching television or movies
Relaxing or thinking
Using tobacco or drugs
Reading for personal interest
Computer use for leisure
−50 0 50
Effect estimate (min)
Fig. 3 | Quasi-experimental placebo estimates. Estimates for our quasi-experiment based on the proximity to US time-zone borders. Coefficients show
the effects of living on the marginally eastern side of the cut-off. The outcome variables are drawn from the American Time Use Survey, 2003–2015.
Models have state, year and state-by-year fixed effects and, as such, leverage split states. Coefficient estimates are shown as points, with corresponding
90% (thicker) and 95% (narrow) confidence intervals. Coefficient (in min), N, P value and 95% CI from top to bottom: sleeping: β = −23.9, N = 37,059,
P = 0.006, 95% CI: −40.8 to −7.0; working at job(s): β = 14.5, N = 27,649, P = 0.09, 95% CI: −2.3 to 31.3; eating and drinking: β = −0.7, N = 36,418,
P = 0.83, 95% CI: −7.4 to 6.0; cleaning home: β = −7.1, N = 37,059, P = 0.17, 95% CI: −17.4 to 3.1; home repairs (by self): β = 0.8, N = 37,059, P = 0.71, 95%
CI: −3.5 to 5.0; overall free time: β = 40.3, N = 27,649, P = 0.03, 95% CI: 3.1–77.4; watching television or movies: β = 4.7, N = 36,418, P = 0.62, 95% CI: −14.2
to 23.6; relaxing or thinking: β = −3.0, N = 36,418, P = 0.25, 95% CI: −8.1 to 2.1; using tobacco or drugs: β = 0.5, N = 36,418, P = 0.008, 95% CI: 0.13–0.87;
reading for personal interest: β = 3.1, N = 36,418, P = 0.40, 95% CI: −4.2 to 10.5; computer use for leisure: β = 0.6, N = 36,418, P = 0.78, 95% CI: −3.5 to 4.7.
3.1–77.4). Herein lies a fascinating finding: although reduced sleep civic participation. That said, even these results are of necessity
implies people have more free time to participate, contrary to previ- limited to one type of prosocial behaviour (voting)—after all, other
ous theoretical work, we find that individuals with more free time measures of prosocial behaviour from surveys would probably be
do not necessarily put that quantity of time to prosocial uses. underpowered near the time-zone boundary—and leave open the
The effect on most other measures of private behaviour is small possibility that the time-zone effects may be driven by a mechanism
and not significant. Individuals who sleep less do not work less or other than sleep. Hence, we turn to our final methodology, which
spend less time eating or drinking, cleaning, repairing, watching comprised a randomized controlled experiment. This experiment
TV, reading or using a computer. They may use tobacco and drugs a comes with the added advantage of allowing us to gauge a longer,
bit more; however, this effect—although significant (P = 0.008)—is more diverse list of measures of prosocial engagement, although we
small (equivalent to 0.5 of a minute increase). lose some ecological validity compared to the natural experiment.
These results suggest that sleep deprivation does not systemati- Our (preregistered) randomized controlled trial utilized a two-
cally depress all forms of private behaviour. In addition, our placebo part survey on the Amazon Mechanical Turk platform, which
test results call into question whether previous conditional-on- is regularly used for survey research and has been shown to be a
observables results from small, select samples47,48 are really causal. fairly valid way to generate survey and behavioural data49,50. The
Our placebo (null findings) in conjunction with our treatment Amazon Mechanical Turk platform offers a ready workforce to
findings seem sensible; when exposed to (modestly) lower levels complete various types of ‘human intelligence tasks’ (HITs) for a
of sleep (as is the case in the quasi-experimental design), proso- payment specified by the employer. Surveys are a common type
cial behaviours are among the first things to be reduced. We know of HIT available on the Amazon Mechanical Turk. Our advertised
from previous research that the amount of time one engages in pri- HIT was a two-part survey that clearly specified HIT payment only
vate behaviours that demand a high cognitive load—studying for for completion of both the part-one and part-two surveys. At the
school, exercising or eating healthfully—also declines8,9,15–21. But, end of our part-one survey, participants were randomly assigned to
many non-prosocial behaviours that individuals engage in from day complete a part-two survey on prosocial attitudes and civic engage-
to day are not disrupted. Indeed, the literature16 suggests that some ment either in the afternoon (between 14:00 and 16:00; that is, the
non-prosocial behaviours—such as unhealthy eating—may actually control group) or during the middle of the night (between 03:00 and
increase in response to a lack of sleep. In addition, activities that 05:00; that is, the treatment group) until the end of the week. Local
may have negative spillover effects on others—these could therefore time-zone timestamps were used to assess compliance with this ran-
be considered antisocial behaviours—may also increase as a result dom assignment approach. In total, 72% of returners complied with
of insufficient sleep (for example, sleepy driving). Hence, the pro- their assigned treatment group. (If we use a slightly looser defini-
social effects that we document are not a reflection of insufficient tion of compliance—that is, within 1 h on either side of the assigned
sleep causing a uniform decline in all individual behaviours. time—compliance was 89%.) Because of the higher attrition risk
for those randomly assigned to the treatment group, a higher HIT
Study 3: experiment payment was offered to those night-assigned participants as a way
The results from our natural experiment go a long way towards estab- of balancing response and retention rates across conditions (see SI
lishing that insufficient sleep may be causally linked to decreased Appendix for further details). Data collection and analysis were not
Nature HumaN BeHavIour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NATUre HUmAN BeHAvIoUr
performed blind to the conditions of the experiments. In determin- detail in the SI Appendix that several risk management features are
ing the sample size, we preregistered that we ‘anticipated recruit- present in our randomized controlled trial. For example, our partici-
ing 1,500’ respondents who we hoped would take both waves of the pants were given multiple options regarding the exact day to com-
survey. The number was based on very conservative power calcu- plete the part-two survey—presumably, they would chose the day or
lations based on a pilot study that we ran (in which we also cali- night that would affect them the least. Furthermore, no restrictions
brated the payment rates). However, despite our best efforts, only were placed on sleepiness countermeasures before or during partici-
1,117 (treatment: 539; control: 578) unique respondents returned pation, the online nature of the study allowed participation from the
to participate in wave 2 during the study window, despite a reason- comfort and safety of one’s home, the experiment was designed to be
able over-sample of just under 1,700 individuals who participated in a short-term manipulation to sleep and participants could resume
wave 1. Among this sample, 58.2% were female, with a mean age of rest immediately following the survey completion.
36 years (range: 18–85 years). Figure 4 shows the experimental results from our short-term
Although this experimental design has been used in previous sleep manipulation on measures of prosocial engagement. Given
studies of the effects of sleep43, we acknowledge several limitations the random assignment to treatment and control conditions, here,
to its internal and external validity. First, although we check for a we focus on the raw difference of mean results with no controls. For
host (28) of potentially important imbalances in the respondents the sake of space, we report the results with our baseline controls in
who chose to return for the part-two (second wave) survey, and the SI Appendix, while also noting here where the results differ with
the retention rate was similar across treatment (65%) and control controls. Here, we are focusing on the intention to treat effects; in
(67%), we cannot be exactly sure that the same types of individuals the appendix, we report the local average treatment effects—that is,
returned to take the follow-up survey. (This is, in essence, a poten- the effects local to those who complied with the treatment.
tial threat for bias from attrition—a similar problem in all other The first row in Fig. 4 shows our four primary measures of civic
multi-period interventions.) Second, we measure outcomes at the participation: signing a petition, donating money, intending to vote
end of the second wave—that is, in the afternoon or at night—rather and a composite measure of the three. The second row shows our
than in a third wave during the following day. Ideally, one might preregistered placebo test (civic duty) and two attitudinal questions
want a treatment that allows for a separation in time between when about one’s place relative to the government and overall mood. As
the treatment is administered and the outcomes are measured. we would expect if insufficient sleep reduces prosocial engage-
Unfortunately, administering a third wave would significantly ment, individuals in the treatment group were less willing to sign
raise the cost of the experiment, (potentially) increase the rate of a petition to increase recycling in their community (β = −6.1 p.p.;
attrition and (potentially) not be conducive to a short-term sleep N = 1,117). This sizeable effect is significant at the 5% level (two-
manipulation (depending on when the follow-up study was done). tailed P = 0.04; robust P = 0.04; 95% CI: −11.9 to −0.3) and is the
Nevertheless, we acknowledge the absence of a third wave as a limi- most robust of any of the individual engagement items. There is
tation of study 3. In short, like the other designs that we leveraged, also some (albeit slightly less significant) evidence that those ran-
this study is not without flaws. But, it is useful in getting another domly assigned to less sleep are less willing to donate money to the
look at the potential effects of sleep restriction on various measures Red Cross (β = −5.5 p.p.; N = 1,117; two-tailed P = 0.062; robust
of civic participation. P = 0.063; 95% CI: −11.2 to 0.3) and have a lower intention to vote in
In the SI Appendix, we show the effect of our treatment (that an upcoming election (β = −4.3 p.p.; N = 1,117; two-tailed P = 0.09;
is, assignment to taking the survey at night) on individuals’ lev- robust P = 0.09; 95% CI: −9.1 to 0.6). However, as we show in the
els of self-reported sleepiness and the number of hours they slept SI Appendix, the vote intention result is sensitive to the inclusion
the previous night. As can be seen, our manipulation check shows of controls. When combined into a simple mean scale that reduces
a sizeable effect on both measures. Individuals in the treatment residual variance—and, as such, is the most reliable measure of
group report being nearly twice as tired (unadjusted mean: 2.7 on civic participation—the engagement effects are clear and robust:
the 9-item scale) as those in the control group (unadjusted mean: our short-term sleep deprivation treatment reduces engagement in
5.3)—an increase of 96.1% over the base rate. This effect is about the civic activities by 5.3 p.p. (N = 1,117; two-tailed P = 0.0036; robust
same size as what is reported in the literature that uses 1–2 nights P = 0.004; 95% CI: −8.8 to −1.7). As we expected, there was no
of controlled sleep restriction51. By another measure, individuals in effect on our preregistered placebo measure of whether individuals
the treatment group report having slept 0.66 h less than the control saw voting as a civic duty (β = −0.01, two-tailed P = 0.67). In short,
group—a decrease of 10% of the base rate (control group = 6.66 h) the strongest and most robust effects can be seen on measures of
or 38% of a standard deviation. Put differently, this short-term sleep actual engagement (signing and donating) rather than on measures
manipulation is roughly equivalent to the difference between (just of political motivation (vote intentions and civic duty); this suggests
below) recommended nightly sleep levels and the levels that cause that tiredness may be more about negatively affecting one’s ability to
the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (and others) to follow through to participate rather than their orientation towards
call insufficient sleep a public health problem. Both of these effects participating.
are substantively sizeable and estimated with a high degree of preci- Our auxiliary tests of individual attitudes, which admittedly
sion (N = 1,117; two-tailed P < 0.001, in both cases). These effects have slightly weaker theoretical predictions, show evidence of some
are robust to whether we specify it as a within-subjects design other interesting broader effects of sleep restriction. Somewhat sur-
(comparing changes within individuals from wave 1 to wave 2) or prisingly, individuals in the treatment group also expressed higher
a between-subjects design (comparing only part-two survey data levels of external political efficacy, perhaps as a result of lower
across response time treatment assignments). monitoring capacity or greater apathy (β = 0.12; N = 1,117; two-
In short, our treatment induced a robust short-term level sleep tailed P = 0.028; robust P = 0.029; 95% CI: 0.01–0.22). As we would
restriction that can be used to make causal inferences for the ques- expect, individuals in the treatment group also expressed lower lev-
tion at hand. Balance tests (SI Appendix) show that lower levels of els of overall well-being (β = −0.15; N = 1,117; two-tailed P = 0.072;
sleep seem to be the only factor that differentiates our two groups. robust P = 0.073; 95% CI: −0.31 to 0.01); however, this result is only
This design was approved by the Yale University Institutional Review significant at the 10% level. We explore other potential attitudinal
Board (2000020645) as posing minimal risk to participants. However, effects in the SI Appendix, finding mostly null effects.
our consent form informed participants about the potential risks As in our natural experiment, we find some evidence that
associated with short-term sleep restriction. In addition, although our negative engagement effects are largest among disadvan-
we induce significantly higher levels of sleepiness in participants, we taged subgroups. However, these effects—like many heterogeneity
Nature HumaN BeHavIour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NATUre HUmAN BeHAvIoUr Articles
0.5 0.8
0.6 0.6
0.4
0.6
0.3 0.4 0.4
0.4
0.2
0.2 0.2
0.2
0.1
0 0 0 0
Control Treatment Control Treatment Control Treatment Control Treatment
0.5
4
0.4 1.5
3
0.3
1.0
2
0.2
0.5
1
0.1
0 0 0
Control Treatment Control Treatment Control Treatment
Fig. 4 | randomized controlled trial estimate of the effect of sleep restriction on civic participation. The effect of our randomized controlled trial on
participants’ levels of civic participation. The top left panel shows individuals' willingness to sign a petition to increase recycling in their community. The
second panel on the top row displays individuals’ willingness to donate part of their bonus earnings to the Red Cross. The third panel reports individuals'
intention to vote in the 2018 Midterm Elections. The fourth panel shows a mean scale of the first three measures that is constructed by calculating the
proportion of activities an individual engages in. The bottom panels show the effects on measures of civic duty (our preregistered placebo) (left), external
efficacy (middle) and overall mood (right). The bars display the raw mean levels; the lines represent corresponding 90% (thick) and 95% (narrow)
confidence intervals. N = 1,117.
analyses—are, unfortunately, under-powered even in our fairly large what has been previously recognized. In addition to having nega-
experiment. We find that our adverse sleep treatment has a substan- tive effects on private metrics of productivity, health and academic
tively larger effect on less-educated individuals (as defined, again, performance, trends of reduced nightly sleep levels should concern
by the median value of this measure). This holds true when we look us owing to the deleterious effects of sleepiness on prosocial civic
at planning to vote (low education: β = −0.056, two-tailed P = 0.041; behaviours vital for community, societal and democratic well-
high education: β = 0.021, two-tailed P = 0.714; difference two-tailed being. Insufficient sleep may also serve to exacerbate participatory
P = 0.280), signing a petition (low education: β = −0.077, two-tailed inequality. This suggests that the public health problem of insuf-
P = 0.016; high education: β = 0.016, two-tailed P = 0.843; difference ficient sleep may also have downstream socioeconomic impacts
two-tailed P = 0.274), donating to a social cause (low education: not previously recognized. These results also help to explain why
β = −0.055, two-tailed P = 0.08; high education: β = −0.042, two- levels of civic participation or social capital have stagnated (or by
tailed P = 0.60; difference two-tailed P = 0.87) and our composite some accounts declined) in recent years25. Simply put, many people
engagement scale (low education: β = −0.063, two-tailed P = 0.001; may not contribute their time, money and energy to social causes
high education: β = −0.002, two-tailed P = 0.973; difference two- because they are too tired to do so.
tailed P = 0.236). We discuss other heterogeneities and potential From a theoretical perspective, our results point to the impor-
mechanisms in the SI Appendix. tance of a broader set of motivational inputs that are important for
In short, these results show that individuals randomly assigned to prosocial behaviour than have previously been noted. The extant
short-term lower levels of sleep are less likely to be socially engaged. literature has focused almost exclusively on motivation towards
Our results are also suggestive, but not conclusive, that such sleepi- a domain-specific act (for example, one’s interest in politics) that
ness serves to exacerbate inequalities in prosocial engagement. governs one’s decision to engage in that area (for example, voting).
Our results suggest that a broader, more generalized set of motiva-
Discussion tions (that is, sleepiness) matter for civic participation. Future work
Our complementary data sources and analytic techniques have would do well to try and break apart the mechanisms between these
shown that insufficient sleep reduces individuals’ civic behaviours. relationships, acknowledging the inherent difficulties in perform-
Descriptively, individuals who do not get enough sleep are less likely ing causal mediation analyses52.
to vote (above and beyond available control strategies). Similarly, From a policy perspective, our results suggest that interven-
individuals exogenously nudged towards lower levels of sleep tions affecting individuals’ levels of sleep may have broader con-
(because they live near the eastern side of a time-zone cut-off) are sequences than has been previously acknowledged. Not only may
less likely to vote. Finally, individuals who are randomly assigned to behavioural interventions—for example, at the workplace or target-
a short-term manipulation of lower levels of sleep are less likely to ing parents with infants—that promote sleep enhance productiv-
engage in prosocial behaviours, such as signing a petition, donating ity and health53–56 but they may also help to increase dismally low
money to a good cause or intending to vote. and unequal levels of social capital, cohesion or engagement. As
Our findings suggest that the levels of insufficient sleep that policymakers consider whether to intervene to help remediate trou-
are increasingly common in society have broader effects than bling sleep trends, they should realize that a lack of sleep threatens
Nature HumaN BeHavIour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NATUre HUmAN BeHAvIoUr
not only health, productivity and educational success but also 19. Mullington, J. M., Haack, M., Toth, M., Serrador, J. M. & Meier-Ewert, H. K.
threatens to break apart fragile social connections that form the Cardiovascular, inflammatory, and metabolic consequences of sleep
deprivation. Prog. Cardiovasc. Dis. 51, 294–302 (2009).
bedrock of society.
20. Harrison, Y. & Horne, J. A. The impact of sleep deprivation on decision
making: a review. J. Exp. Psychol. Appl. 6, 236–249 (2000).
Reporting Summary. Further information on research design 21. Heissel, J. & Norris, S. Rise and shine: the effect of school start times on
is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to academic performance from childhood through puberty. J. Hum. Resour.
this article. https://doi.org/10.3368/jhr.53.4.0815-7346R1 (2017).
22. Philip, P., Taillard, J., Quera-Salva, M. A., Bioulac, B. & Åkerstedt, T. Simple
reaction time, duration of driving and sleep deprivation in young versus old
Code availability
automobile drivers. J. Sleep Res. 8, 9–14 (1999).
The replication code that produced this report is available in the Supplementary 23. Aldrich, M. S. Automobile accidents in patients with sleep disorders. Sleep 12,
Information Appendix. The replication code for the Add Health study cannot be 487–494 (1989).
shared as we ‘cannot move files or data in or out of the [computing environment]’ 24. Philip, P. et al. Long distance driving and self-induced sleep deprivation
that houses the Add Health data/code (per Duke University’s PRDN data sharing among automobile drivers. Sleep 22, 475–480 (1999).
terms). 25. Putnam, R. D. Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Revival of American
Community (Simon and Schuster, New York, 2001).
Data availability 26. La Porta, R., Lopez-De-Silane, F., Shleifer, A. & Vishny, R. W. Trust in large
The following restrictions apply to data in studies 1 and 2: the Add Health organizations. Am. Econ. Rev. 87, 333–338 (1997).
(restricted) data set used in study 1, the SOEP data in study 1 and the Catalist 27. Burden, B. C., Fletcher, J. M., Herd, P., Moynihan, D. P. & Jones, B. M.
data used in study 2 are proprietary and cannot be shared by the authors. For How different forms of health matter to political participation. J. Polit. 79,
information about how to access the Add Health restricted-use data, see 166–178 (2017).
www.cpc.unc.edu/projects/addhealth/documentation/restricteduse. The SOEP 28. Holbein, J. B. Childhood skill development and adult political participation.
data are available after registration with the DIW Berlin, see www.diw.de/en/ Am. Polit. Sci. Rev. 111, 572–583 (2017).
diw_02.c.222829.en/access.html. Catalist is a subscription-based service; for 29. Moore, P. J., Adler, N. E., Williams, D. R. & Jackson, J. S. Socioeconomic
information about contracting with Catalist, see catalist.us/products/data- status and health: the role of sleep. Psychosom. Med. 64, 337–344 (2002).
subscriptions. The data that support the findings of study 3 are available from the 30. Knack, S. & Keefer, P. Does social capital have an economic payoff? A
corresponding author on request. cross-country investigation. Q. J. Econ. 112, 1251–1288 (1997).
31. Gibson, M. & Shrader, J. Time Use and Productivity: the Wage Returns to
Sleep No. 2015-17 (Department of Econmics, Williams College, 2015).
Received: 19 February 2018; Accepted: 25 January 2019;
32. Verba, S., Schlozman, K. L. & Brady, H. E. Voice and Equality: Civic
Published: xx xx xxxx
Voluntarism in American Politics (Cambridge Univ. Press, New York, 1995).
33. Giuntella, O., Han, W. & Mazzonna, F. Circadian rhythms, sleep and
references cognitive skills: evidence from an unsleeping giant. Demography 54,
1. Ford, E. S., Cunningham, T. J. & Croft, J. B. Trends in self-reported sleep 1715–1742 (2017).
duration among US adults from 1985 to 2012. Sleep 38, 829–832 (2015). 34. Anderson, C. & Platten, C. R. Sleep deprivation lowers inhibition and enhances
2. Jones, J. M. In U.S., 40% get less than recommended amount of sleep. Gallup impulsivity to negative stimuli. Behav. Brain Res. 217, 463–466 (2011).
(19 December 2013). 35. Anderson, C. & Dickinson, D. L. Bargaining and trust: the effects of 36-h
3. Hirshkowitz, M. et al. National Sleep Foundation’s updated sleep total sleep deprivation on socially interactive decisions. J. Sleep Res. 19,
recommendations. Sleep Health 1, 233–243 (2015). 54–63 (2010).
4. Watson, N. F. et al. Recommended amount of sleep for a healthy adult: a joint 36. Horne, J. A. Human sleep, sleep loss and behaviour: implications for
consensus statement of the American Academy of Sleep Medicine & Sleep the prefrontal cortex and psychiatric disorder. Br. J. Psychiatry 162,
Research Society. Sleep 38, 843–844 (2015). 413–419 (1993).
5. NHLBI. Sleep deprivation and deficiency. National Heart, Lung, and Blood 37. Muzur, A., Pace-Schott, E. F. & Hobson, J. A. The prefrontal cortex in sleep.
Institute https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health-topics/sleep-deprivation-and- Trends Cogn. Sci. 6, 475–481 (2002).
deficiency (NIH, 2017). 38. Chee, M. W. L. & Chuah, L. Y. M. Functional neuroimaging insights into how
6. Hafner, M., Stepanek, M., Taylor, J., Troxel, W. M. & van Stolk, C. Why sleep sleep and sleep deprivation affect memory and cognition. Curr. Opin. Neurol.
matters—the economic costs of insufficient sleep: a cross-country comparative 21, 417–423 (2008).
analysis. Rand Health Q. 6, 11 (2017). 39. Rilling, J. K. & Sanfey, A. G. The neuroscience of social decision-making.
7. Pilcher, J. J. & Huffcutt, A. J. Effects of sleep deprivation on performance: a Annu. Rev. Psychol. 62, 23–48 (2011).
meta-analysis. Sleep 19, 318–326 (1996). 40. Krajbich, I., Adolphs, R., Tranel, D., Denburg, N. L. & Camerer, C. F.
8. Cappuccio, F. P., D’Elia, L., Strazzullo, P. & Miller, M. A. Sleep duration and Economic games quantify diminished sense of guilt in patients with damage
all-cause mortality: a systematic review and meta-analysis of prospective to the prefrontal cortex. J. Neurosci. 29, 2188–2192 (2009).
studies. Sleep 33, 585–592 (2010). 41. McCabe, K., Houser, D., Ryan, L., Smith, V. & Trouard, T. A functional
9. Alhola, P. & Polo-Kantola, P. Sleep deprivation: impact on cognitive imaging study of cooperation in two-person reciprocal exchange. Proc. Natl
performance. Neuropsychiatr. Dis. Treat. 3, 553–567 (2007). Acad. Sci. USA 98, 11832–11835 (2001).
10. Gu, F. et al. Longitude position in a time zone and cancer risk in the United 42. Fehr, E. & Camerer, C. F. Social neuroeconomics: the neural circuitry of
States. Cancer Epidemiol. Biomarkers Prev. 26, 1306–1311 (2017). social preferences. Trends Cogn. Sci. 11, 419–427 (2007).
11. Jauhar, P. & Weller, M. P. Psychiatric morbidity and time zone changes: 43. Dickinson, D. L. & McElroy, T. Sleep restriction and circadian effects on
a study of patients from heathrow airport. Br. J. Psychiatry 140, social decisions. Eur. Econ. Rev. 97, 57–71 (2017).
231–235 (1982). 44. Clark, J. & Dickinson, D. L. The Impact of Sleep Restriction on Contributions
12. National Sleep Foundation introduces model legislation to advance drowsy and Punishment: First Evidence (IZA, 2017).
driving prevention. National Sleep Foundation https://www.sleepfoundation. 45. Schafer, J. P. & Holbein, J. B. When time is of the essence: a natural experiment
org/press-release/national-sleep-foundation-introduces-model-legislation- on how time constraints influence elections. J. Polit. (in the press).
advance-drowsy-driving (2014). 46. Leighley, J. E. & Nagler, J. Who Votes Now?: Demographics, Issues, Inequality,
13. Peaslee, S. Sleep deprivation is a national crisis. Huffington Post and Turnout in the United States (Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton, 2013).
(21 March 2016). 47. Hamidovic, A. & de Wit, H. Sleep deprivation increases cigarette smoking.
14. The Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine 2017. The Nobel Assembly at Pharmacol. Biochem. Behav. 93, 263–269 (2009).
Karolinska Institutet https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/medicine/2017/ 48. Tazawa, Y. & Okada, K. Physical signs associated with excessive television-
press-release/ (2017). game playing and sleep deprivation. Pediatr. Int. 43, 647–650 (2001).
15. Asken, M. J. & Raham, D. C. Resident performance and sleep deprivation: 49. Buhrmester, M., Kwang, T. & Gosling, S. D. Amazon’s Mechanical Turk: a
a review. J. Med. Educ. 58, 382–388 (1983). new source of inexpensive, yet high-quality, data? Perspect. Psychol. Sci. 6,
16. Giuntella, O. & Mazzonna, F. If You Don’t Snooze You Lose Health and Gain 3–5 (2011).
Weight: Evidence From a Regression Discontinuity Design (IZA, 2015). 50. Paolacci, G., Chandler, J. & Ipeirotis, P. G. Running experiments on Amazon
17. Li, S. et al. Sleep, school performance, and a school-based intervention Mechanical Turk. Judgm. Decis. Mak. 5, 411–419 (2010).
among school-aged children: a sleep series study in China. PLoS One 8, 51. Dickinson, D. L., Drummond, S. P. A. & McElroy, T. The viability of an
e67928 (2013). ecologically valid chronic sleep restriction and circadian timing protocol: an
18. Lim, J. & Dinges, D. F. A meta-analysis of the impact of short-term sleep examination of sample attrition, compliance, and effectiveness at impacting
deprivation on cognitive variables. Psychol. Bull. 136, 375–389 (2010). sleepiness and mood. PLoS One 12, e0174367 (2017).
Nature HumaN BeHavIour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NATUre HUmAN BeHAvIoUr Articles
52. Green, D. P., Ha, S. E. & Bullock, J. G. Enough already about black box The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish
experiments: studying mediation is more difficult than most scholars suppose. or preparation of the manuscript.
Ann. Am. Acad. Pol. Soc. Sci. 628, 200–208 (2010).
53. Omisade, A., Buxton, O. M. & Rusak, B. Impact of acute sleep restriction author contributions
on cortisol and leptin levels in young women. Physiol. Behav. 99,
J.B.H. and J.P.S. contributed to the observational, natural experimental and experimental
651–656 (2010).
analyses and write-up. D.L.D. contributed to the experimental design, analysis and
54. Spaeth, A. M., Dinges, D. F. & Goel, N. Effects of experimental sleep
write-up.
restriction on weight gain, caloric intake, and meal timing in healthy adults.
Sleep 36, 981–990 (2013).
55. Hiscock, H. & Wake, M. Randomised controlled trial of behavioural infant Competing interests
sleep intervention to improve infant sleep and maternal mood. BMJ 324, The authors declare no competing interests.
1062–1065 (2002).
56. Viola, A. U., James, L. M., Schlangen, L. J. M. & Dijk, D.-J. Blue-enriched
additional information
white light in the workplace improves self-reported alertness, performance
and sleep quality. Scand. J. Work Environ. Health 34, 297–306 (2008). Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41562-019-0543-4.
acknowledgements Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
J.B.H. thanks the NSF for its support (no. SES-1657821). J.P.S. thanks the Yale CSAP. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to J.B.H.
We are also grateful for the helpful feedback from V. Arceneaux, P. Aronow, E. Busby,
Publisher’s note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
J. Clinton, R. Enos, B. Fraga, A. Gerber, S. Hill, G. Huber, J. Kalla, L. Keele, M. Kryger,
published maps and institutional affiliations.
T. Mendelberg, M. Meredith, D. Mutz, J. Nagler, S. Nuamah, D. Rand, M. Rangel,
R. Tituinik and audiences at the APSA/MPSA meetings and at Princeton, Yale and BYU. © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2019
Nature HumaN BeHavIour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
1
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
April
2018
Corresponding author(s): John B. Holbein
Reporting Summary
Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency
in reporting. For further information on Nature Research policies, see Authors & Referees and the Editorial Policy Checklist.
Statistical parameters
When statistical analyses are reported, confirm that the following items are present in the relevant location (e.g. figure legend, table legend, main
text, or Methods section).
n/a Confirmed
The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
An indication of whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided
Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.
A description of all covariates tested
A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
A full description of the statistics including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient) AND
variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)
For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted
Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.
For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated
Clearly defined error bars
State explicitly what error bars represent (e.g. SD, SE, CI)
Our web collection on statistics for biologists may be useful.
Software and code
Policy information about availability of computer code
Data collection Experimental data from study 3 was collected using Qualtrics. The voter file data from study 2 was collected from Catalist. The data from
study 1 were taken from Add Health and the SOEP.
Data analysis All analyses were conducted in Stata and R.
For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors/reviewers
upon request. We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Research guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.
Data
Policy information about availability of data
All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable:
- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets
- A list of figures that have associated raw data
- A description of any restrictions on data availability
The data that support the findings of study 3 is available from the corresponding author upon request. Note, however, the following restrictions to data in studies 1
and 2: the Add Health (restricted) dataset used in study 1, the SOEP data in study 1, and the Catalist data used in study 2 are proprietary and cannot be shared by
2
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
April
2018
the authors. For information about how to access the Add Health restricted-use data, see www.cpc.unc.edu/projects/addhealth/documentation/restricteduse. The
SOEP data are available after registration with the DIW Berlin, see www.diw.de/en/diw\_02.c.222829.en/access.html. Catalist is a subscription-based service; for
information about contracting with Catalist, see catalist.us/products/data-subscriptions.
Field-specific reporting
Please select the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.
Life sciences Behavioural & social sciences Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences
For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/authors/policies/ReportingSummary-flat.pdf
Behavioural & social sciences study design
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
Study description This article provides evidence from an observational study, a natural experiment, and a randomized experiment showing that insufficient
sleep reduces prosocial behaviors such as voter turnout, donating to a charity, and signing petitions.
Research sample We use multiple datasets, including data from Add Health, the German SOEP, proprietary voter file data, and an original experiment run
among MTurk workers.
Sampling strategy Our sample sizes in studies 1 and 2 are determined by the survey designers (study 1) and the number of zipcodes around the time-zone
boundary cutoff. For study 3, we ran a pilot study that helped us create power calculations to obtain a sufficient sample size (which we
did) for our experiment.
Data collection The only data collection we engaged in was the two-wave MTurk study, wherein we administered two surveys to workers. The first
measured baseline characteristics. The second measured our civic engagement outcomes.
Timing Data was collected in early 2018.
Data exclusions No data were excluded.
Non-participation In our experimental study, between wave 1 and wave 2, we lost roughly 400 individuals due to attrition. The number of types of people
who attrited were similar across the treatment and control group, making it unlikely that this would bias our estimates.
Randomization In our experimental study, subjects were randomized at the individual level to treatment or control. The other two studies had no
randomization component.
Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods
Materials & experimental systems Methods
n/a Involved in the study n/a Involved in the study
Unique biological materials ChIP-seq
Antibodies Flow cytometry
Eukaryotic cell lines MRI-based neuroimaging
Palaeontology
Animals and other organisms
Human research participants
Human research participants
Policy information about studies involving human research participants
Population characteristics Study 1: the add health data is a representative sample of the cohort of middle/high school students starting in 1994-1995; the
SOEP is a representative survey of all adults in Germany; Study 2: Voter file data contains a 1% sample of every adult registered
to vote in the United States; Study 3: contains Mturk workers who were 58.2% female, with a mean age of 36 (range: 18-85).
Recruitment For study 3 (the only study with subject recruitment), we recruited MTurk workers through the standard protocol. We filtered
based on quality of respondent. Otherwise, all workers were allowed to participate.