Articles
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-019-0724-1
A randomized controlled trial of restorative
justice-informed treatment for domestic
violence crimes
Linda G. Mills 1,2,6*, Briana Barocas 1,2,6*, Robert P. Butters 3 and Barak Ariel 4,5
Recent innovation in domestic violence (DV) treatment suggests that when a batterer intervention programme (BIP) is com-
bined with clinical elements, including motivational or readiness to change strategies, subsequent incidents of violence can
be reduced. Prompted by previous research on restorative justice in reducing recidivism in crimes other than DV, a random-
ized controlled trial in Utah, USA, compared a typical BIP with one that included restorative justice-informed treatment, called
circles of peace (CP). The findings reveal that the ‘hybrid’ BIP-plus-CP resulted in statistically significant reductions in both
new arrests (53%) and crime severity scores (52%) for all offences, including DV, over a 24-month period. We conclude that a
hybrid BIP-plus-CP programme should be considered as a viable treatment option for DV offenders. Implications for DV victims
are discussed, as are the study’s limitations, including the fact that some elements typical of restorative justice programmes
could not be attained in this DV context.
D
omestic violence (DV) is a global phenomenon affecting It has also been reported that 14.2% of Utah women over the age of
individuals, families and communities. In the United States, 18 years have experienced IPV in their lifetime and 18.9% of Utah
every jurisdiction now criminalizes DV although defini- women have experienced IPV in the past 12 months (ref. 6). Finally,
tions and statutes vary by state1. The child welfare system also must between 2003 and 2008 on average, there were three DV-related sui-
address violence in families with a focus, for the most part, on the cides each month in Utah, most often committed by men7.
safety of the child2,3. DV criminal statutes now include violence Arrest, prosecution, jail time, no contact orders, judicial monitor-
perpetrated by an intimate partner as well as ‘current or previ- ing and court-mandated treatment are now considered appropriate
ous partners’, ‘person living in the household’, ‘one family member interventions to a DV incident in the USA, also sometimes referred
against another’ and so on1. The movement away from defining DV to as a ‘coordinated community response’8–10. Most courts rely on
as exclusively violence against women or intimate partner violence batterer intervention programmes (BIPs) to provide treatment to
(IPV) has had a considerable impact on how incidents are counted, DV offenders8,11; the second most common type of programme is
as well as how and to whom treatment is provided. cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT), which may be either an ele-
Between 2003 and 2012, broadly speaking, DV accounted for ment of a BIP approach9,10 or a stand-alone intervention8,12.
21% of all violent crime in the USA (15% IPV, 4% violence com- There are no reliable national statistics about the number of
mitted by immediate family members and 2% other relatives), BIPs or DV offender programmes that exist in the USA, since
with 76% of DV being committed against females and 24% against criminal justice-mandated treatment is both local and community-
males4. Additionally, more than half (55%) of all homicides based13 and there are no national databases that register these pro-
between 2003 and 2014 were committed by a current or former grammes12,13. It has been estimated14 that there are approximately
male intimate partner5. 2,500 unique BIPs nationwide, which was extrapolated from previ-
In 2013, according to the most recent statistics for Utah (the ous research based on two national surveys12,13.
site of this study), there were 14,782 DV-related offences6, a state Most commonly, BIPs use a psycho-educational approach that
law that incorporates IPV but also family members more broadly aims to hold offenders accountable for their crimes, drawing on the
(adult child and parent, siblings and so on) as well as roommates Duluth model of treatment8,10,12,15,16. Duluth was first developed in
(see Methods, Population and sampling). Boyfriend or girlfriend the early 1980s, specifically for IPV, with a focus on male offend-
was most often identified as the source for DV crimes (30%), fol- ers and female victims10. Typically, BIPs teach offenders to identify
lowed by married, heterosexual couples (18%)6. When common- maladaptive behaviours and to find non-violent alternatives, as well
law spouses, ex-spouses and homosexual relationships are also as to change attitudes regarding the gender imbalance between men
included, IPV accounts for 53% of all DV offences in Utah6. There and women and the accompanying power and control evident in
were 264 DV-related homicides reported between 2000 and 2013, abusive intimate heterosexual relationships8,17,18. Accountability
including current or former intimate partners, roommates or family for one’s violence is key to the BIP model8. The BIP curriculum is
members, for an average of 19 deaths per year6. Females are ten times offered in a group format; some programmes use male and female
more likely to die from DV than males7. DV homicides comprised co-facilitators12. Most BIP programmes now have at least one staff
42.9% of the murders committed between 2000 and 2013 (ref. 6). member with a master’s degree and many programmes include
1Center on Violence and Recovery, New York University, New York, NY, USA. 2Silver School of Social Work, New York University, New York, NY, USA.
3School of Social Work, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA. 4Institute of Criminology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. 5Institute of
Criminology, Faculty of Law, Hebrew University, Jerusalem, Israel. 6These authors contributed equally: Briana Barocas, Linda G. Mills.
*e-mail: linda.mills@nyu.edu; briana.barocas@nyu.edu
NAtuRe HuMAN BeHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NATURe HUmAN BeHAVIoUR
minimum educational standards for BIP facilitators12,15. The length ing that there remains a “need for more effective and coordinated
of BIP treatment is often dictated by a state’s DV treatment stan- individual, group and community-wide interventions”18.
dards12,19; a majority of states require a minimum of 24–26 weeks, New innovations and accompanying scholarship that supple-
with each session ranging from 60 to 120 min (ref. 19). ment BIPs are now showing both promise and potential. One group
In addition to the more typical curricular elements of BIP, used a randomized clinical trial (RCT) to test whether the addition
modules also often incorporate CBT11,12. Moreover, modules that of motivational strategies such as an “individualized motivational
address issues such as substance abuse and anger management are plan” (IMP) to a male-only BIP increased programme effective-
also often integrated into the BIP curriculum12, despite an ongoing ness30. This hybrid programme led to several statistically signifi-
debate regarding whether anger should be a component of a DV cant outcomes, including lower risk of recidivism as reported by
intervention9,19. participants and a lower likelihood of perpetrating physical vio-
Victims are rarely incorporated into an offender’s BIP treatment lence as reported by therapists30. Official recidivism data were in
plan, even though they are often contacted by BIP programmes the “expected direction” but did not show statistically significant
for various reasons, including when a threat is made12. When DV reductions, perhaps, as the authors surmised, because overall
treatment programmes were surveyed about couples therapy, only a rates of recidivism in these data for both conditions were low30.
small minority said that they offered it12. It was surmised that con- The researchers also found that the combination of IMP and
joint treatment is rare, both because it was “thought to be ineffec- BIP led to higher treatment dose and programme completion at
tive” but also “possibly dangerous”12. As a result of these concerns, a more advanced stage of change30. These results build on other
most states prohibit the use of conjoint approaches to DV inter- motivation-related research, suggesting that these and other more
ventions19,20. It is noteworthy that many studies now challenge the tailored strategies may provide more promising outcomes and are
assumption that conjoint treatment is never advised for DV, partic- worthy of further exploration25,30–32. Another group compared BIP-
ularly when it is provided under certain controlled conditions21–23. plus-IMP to a BIP-only programme and found that the partici-
Several rigorous studies on BIPs, often involving IPV and male pants in the former developed greater empathy, suggesting that an
offenders only, have revealed questions regarding their effectiveness improvement in cognitive abilities could also reduce incidents of
in reducing incidents of DV. Meta-analyses of quasi-experimental violence33.
and experimental designs on BIPs have found effects either in the In other treatment developments, an RCT was conducted to
“small range”, with “minimal impact on reducing recidivism beyond test the value of an approach called “acceptance and commitment
the effect of being arrested”24, or “no evidence of effectiveness rela- therapy (ACT)”, involving 101 participants, a majority of whom
tive to a no-treatment control group”25. Some evidence was found were women (68%)34. In comparison to the placebo control group,
to suggest that “programs offering alternatives to traditional BIPs the researchers found, according to participant reports, that ACT
based on readiness to change constructs are more promising across significantly reduced both physical and psychological aggression
a broad range of useful outcomes”25. Another meta-analysis found a following the intervention (as well as 6 months later)34. Drawing
“positive but non-statistically significant effect”26 after examining a on “mindful awareness of emotions and thoughts”34, ACT helped
“total of 19 Spanish and English language research articles … [with] offenders better tolerate unwanted feelings or experiences such as
49 effect sizes from a sample of 18,941 batterers”26. The researchers anger or jealousy, which prevented violent triggers and enhanced
concluded that “the evidence remains inconclusive and sharp con- the desire to “engage in valued behavior”34.
clusions cannot be drawn”26. Even a more recent ‘controlled’ study of One group examined the differences between a CBT substance
Swedish men found only ‘small’ differences27 between those enrolled abuse DV treatment with drug counselling for male offenders35.
in BIP and those who were not, leading the authors to conclude that They found that in the 3 months following the end of treatment,
there is “an urgent need to develop improved interventions for IPV the CBT/DV offenders perpetrated IPV “on significantly fewer
offenders”27. According to one author, however, experimental stud- days” when compared to participants in the drug-counselling con-
ies (including, for example, ref. 28), particularly those included in dition35. In another CBT-related study, an RCT was conducted to
meta-analyses of the type described, are riddled with methodologi- test the hypothesis that violent males would fare better in “case for-
cal limitations and fail to capture a complete picture of BIPs and mulation-based” individual treatment, as compared to group CBT36.
their potential9,29. Although treatment participation and uptake were statistically sig-
One author’s extensive research on BIPs does, in fact, reveal a nificantly higher in the individual treatment, the results revealed
more hopeful picture9,29. The author conducted a 4-year longitudinal that the group CBT exceeded a medium effect size for fewer inci-
follow-up study of four established batterer programmes in the USA dents of physical and emotional abuse, as reported by the partner
(in four different cities), involving 854 male offenders, showing “a (among other statistically significant findings)36. These results sug-
clear de-escalation of reassault and other abuse over time, with the gest that group CBT may in fact produce better outcomes insofar
vast majority of men reaching sustained non-violence”9. (For a suc- as the individual treatment approach created “challenges in session
cinct summary of the results, see ref. 9.) The same author reported agenda setting, homework implementation and formal aspects of
that, at 30 months after the programme intake, 80% of the men in relationship skills training”36.
the previous year had refrained from violence; at 48 months, 90% In another experiment in Southampton, UK, males convicted
had not been violent over the previous year9. In this study, women’s of first-time, low-risk IPV, and who admitted to their crimes
perceptions of their safety had also improved, leading the author to and received a conditional caution, were eligible to be randomly
report that looking at the BIP intervention as a “whole” may be opti- assigned either to 2-day “cautioning and relationship abuse” group
mal, rather than focusing on the “program effect”9. It was concluded workshops, described as “strengthening a person’s own motivation
that “[i]n light of the implementation problems in the experimental and commitment to change”37 or to no workshop at all. Participants
designs and the contradictory evidence from (Gondolf’s) multi-site were tracked for 1 year; re-arrest rates of workshop participants
study, a definitive dismissal of the Duluth program based on pro- were 27% lower than those of the control group37.
gram evaluations is unwarranted”9. Another recent RCT involved a CBT programme called “Strength
In other relevant recent research18, public records were used to at Home Couples”38 designed to prevent violence in military cou-
compare recidivism rates of those who completed BIP treatment ples. Both male service members and their female partners reported
and those who did not. Over an approximately 9-year period, the fewer acts of physical and psychological IPV following the CBT
researchers found “the percentage of reoffenders did not vary sig- intervention, as compared to a supportive group that provided only
nificantly between BIP completers and non-completers”18, conclud- “encouragement” by therapists who focused on conflict and violence
NAtuRe HuMAN BeHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NATURe HUmAN BeHAVIoUR Articles
Offender mandated to DV treatment by one of the six
presiding judges from the Salt Lake City Justice Court
Offender assessed for eligibility by the
treatment provider (n = 253)
Excluded (n = 31)
Did not meet the inclusion
criteria or met the exclusion
criteria (n = 31)
Random assignment
If fit for treatment, offender is randomly assigned to
one of two mandated treatment options (n = 222)
BIP-only (n = 96) BIP-plus-CP (n = 126)
Started treatment (n = 83) Started treatment (n = 114)
Excluded from starting intended treatment Excluded from starting intended treatment (n = 12)
(n = 13) In treatment elsewhere (n = 1)
In treatment elsewhere (n = 1) Referred to DV treatment elsewhere (n = 2)
Referred to DV treatment elsewhere (n = 1) Did not appear for treatment (n = 6)
Did not appear for treatment (n = 8) Dismissed by judge (n = 1)
Participated in individual treatment (n = 1) Work schedule conflict, referred back to court (n = 1)
In rehabilitation or substance abuse treatment (n = 1) Data missing (n = 1)
Relocated (n = 1)
Completed treatment (n = 83)
Excluded from completing intended treatment (n = 31)
Completed treatment (n = 65)
Deemed not appropriate for assigned treatment (n = 2)
Excluded from completing intended treatment In treatment elsewhere (n = 4)
(n = 18) Relocated (n = 1)
Deemed not appropriate for assigned treatment Terminated from treatment (n = 17)
(n = 2) Completed treatment after only 12 weeks of group due to
In treatment elsewhere (n = 1) circle staffing issues (n = 1)
Relocated (n = 1) Completed treatment after 12 weeks of group and 3
Terminated from treatment (n = 12) circles (n = 1)
Case closed by judge (n = 1) Completed 18 weeks of group-only treatment (n = 1)
Work schedule conflict, referred back to court (n = 1) Removed from assigned treatment due to victim already
being in the study as an offender (dual-arrest case) (n = 1)
Case closed by judge (n = 1)
Data missing (n = 2)
Intention-to-treat analysis
(24-month follow-up)
BIP (n = 96) BIP-plus-CP (n = 126)
Fig. 1 | CoNSoRt flowchart. Flowchart from the point of random assignment until completion of treatment. Criteria for inclusion: (i) DV (intimate
partner and/or family violence) cases only; (ii) cases of misdemeanour arrest in Salt Lake City; (iii) mandated to DV treatment after 8 February 2012;
(iv) offender over 18 years of age; (v) offender admitted guilt for their charges; and (vi) offender speaks English sufficiently proficiently to participate in
English-speaking treatment. Criteria for exclusion: (i) offender actively psychotic or in need of acute detoxification or hospitalization; (ii) offender currently
engaged in DV treatment (within the past 30 days) with another treatment provider; (iii) defendant currently subject to the jurisdiction of another court
and is receiving DV, drug court or mental health court treatment services through that court; (iv) offender currently involved with the Utah Department of
Human Services; (v) offender facing jail time within treatment period; and (vi) related second offender to appear for an evaluation in dual-arrest cases (for
example, cases in which the victim/partner was already randomly assigned as an offender to treatment for the study).
prevention38. The authors concluded that the results are “promising” restorative-informed practice (RP), when combined with BIP, may
for preventing “IPV in trauma-exposed at-risk couples”38. provide another promising approach for DV treatment, particu-
Taken together, these studies suggest that treatment innova- larly because RJ is tailored to the specific set of circumstances and
tions, including enhancements to BIP, are revealing positive out- therefore can accommodate a range of offender characteristics or
comes. Restorative justice (RJ) or elements of RJ, referred to as factors that might otherwise be ignored or neglected, including
NAtuRe HuMAN BeHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NATURe HUmAN BeHAVIoUR
heterosexual female and lesbian, gay and gender-non-conforming able; empower those who are victimized; allow for the expression
offenders who might have unique treatment needs15. of feelings; clarify facts about the crime; provide an opportunity to
Another reason why a restorative approach may hold promise address the impact of the crime on the survivors and those around
is that it can accommodate victims who want to participate in DV them; and come to an agreement about how the offender can make
treatment. Victim participation in DV treatment is illegal or strongly amends”40.
discouraged in many US states19,20; in some states, it is permitted To our knowledge, there has been only one RCT on a restorative
only after a period of offender-only treatment (for example, Utah). programme, designed specifically for DV. A CP model was tested in
A few states allow the victim to participate from the beginning of an Nogales, Arizona, with 152 DV cases randomly assigned to either
offender’s course of treatment (for example, Arizona). These statu- BIP or CP22. The experiment showed that CP participants expe-
tory variations, together with the view that couples counselling is rienced less recidivism than BIP during the 24-month follow-up
ill-advised in DV cases, have influenced both the likelihood of using period, but the study did not produce statistically significant results,
RJ for DV and how DV/RJ treatment has developed programmati- except at 12 months post-random assignment where statistically
cally. It is noteworthy that there is existing evidence to suggest that significant differences were found between CP and BIP in favour of
various forms of RJ can address IPV in the child welfare context, CP for non-DV arrests22. At the very least, the Arizona experiment
where it has been both more robust and better accepted than when found similar results between BIP and CP, leading the authors to
a case enters the criminal justice system2,3. conclude that CP could be a safe alternative to offender-only treat-
Restorative justice, broadly speaking, is dialogue-based, seek- ment for victims who choose to participate22. In Arizona, 62% of
ing to address the social harms caused by crime. As described by the CP cases had victims voluntarily participate in at least one CP
one author, “because crime hurts, justice should heal”39. A typical session22.
element of an RJ programme is that victims and offenders choose/ There is ample evidence that RJ can improve both efficacy and
consent to participate40. Restorative justice can include various cost-effectiveness for certain crimes42,43. In one meta-analysis of 60
approaches to bringing parties together, including victim–offender unique studies, the results of 84 different evaluations of RJ meetings
mediation, family group conferencing, peacemaking, sentencing between youth delinquents and a victim or community represen-
circles as well as circles of peace (CP)40. CP, the restorative-informed tative were reported44. The results “showed a moderate reduction
approach used in this study, are administered by trained circle keep- in future delinquent behavior relative to more traditional juvenile
ers, for a designated number of sessions, following each jurisdic- court processing”44, accompanied by a cautionary note that the most
tion’s required length of DV offender treatment. CP also include the rigorous studies revealed smaller results, “raising concerns about
offender, a trained volunteer community member, support people the robustness of the overall finding”44. There were also some mixed
for the victim and offender, and other family members depending results depending on the kind of programme used. Despite this, the
on who volunteers to participate in the circle41. Unlike in typical RJ authors found that victims reported higher levels of satisfaction and
programmes, DV victims are limited in the ways they can choose to fairness when offered an RJ option44. Overall, the researchers con-
participate in CP—some states simply prohibit victims from partici- cluded that this RJ research “is promising” but also cautioned that,
pating in offender treatment. As a result, victim participation in the due to several methodological limitations, this does “not allow for a
DV context can range from coming to sessions to sending a support strong positive conclusion”44.
person, and/or conversing with the circle keepers before, during In 2013 (ref. 43) and 2015 (ref. 42), meta-analyses were reported
or after the CP session, depending on the jurisdiction and the vic- on a select group of RJ programmes to answer whether RJ confer-
tim’s desires. Since key elements of typical RJ programmes cannot ences (RJCs) were effective in reducing repeat offending, following
be applied to this DV context, including the fact that offenders are face-to-face conferences between offenders and victims. In a review
required to attend treatment, some victims would like to participate of the ten most rigorous studies, with a focus on recidivism rates of
but are prohibited from doing so due to state mandates, and the the 1,879 accused or convicted offenders, the researchers concluded
reality that DV treatment uses ‘offender’ to describe treatment par- that “on average, RJCs cause a modest but highly cost-effective
ticipants, whereas RJ typically uses more neutral nomenclature— reduction in the frequency of repeat offending”42.
the term RP rather than RJ is used to describe the CP model applied For some time, critics have argued that RJ and restorative-type
in this study40. programmes should not be applied to DV cases on the grounds that
Since this study was conducted in Utah, the rules governing they are concerned that victim safety could be jeopardized due to
treatment length and modality followed Utah’s state standards dur- victim participation45; others have argued that these approaches per-
ing the study period, which also incorporated local treatment pro- petuate the state’s role in instigating violence against women46. And
vider input. All offenders were required to attend DV treatment for while, for the most part, these concerns have been addressed based
a total of 18 weeks; each session, regardless of assignment, lasted on previous research and carefully designed interventions2,22, there
90 min, and male and female offenders participated in group treat- remains a degree of scepticism among advocates and others regard-
ment together. Offenders were randomly assigned to one of two ing the use of RJ and restorative-type programmes in response to
treatments: 18 weeks of BIP treatment or 12 weeks of BIP plus 6 DV crimes45,46. Despite these concerns, there has been an increased
weeks of CP. interest in applying restorative principles to DV criminal cases,
Drawing on both restorative and DV practices, the CP sessions including in Austria, Canada, New Zealand, Norway, Arizona,
focus on topics that are relevant to this offender’s crime, including: Utah and South Africa1,2,39,47,48, to name but a few. Other develop-
events leading up to the arrest, family history of abuse, triggers of ments, including the Black Lives Matter movement and research on
violence, methods for addressing triggers and other factors that hyper- and mass incarceration in the USA, have led some advocates
might be relevant to the offender’s circumstances, including gender to become more sympathetic to non-incarceration options for DV
identity, race, culture, religion and socio-economic status22. The CP crimes49. RJ and RP for DV is positioned to gain further momen-
model uses a social compact, signed by circle participants, including tum, particularly if RJ and RP nomenclature and related values can
the offender, that holds him/her accountable for his/her behaviours be better incorporated.
each week. The social compact provides the expectations for change,
but also keeps CP focused on behaviours that will restore what has Results
been lost due to the crime as well as monitors developments by the The study took place in Salt Lake City, Utah, where we compared
offender that can lead to productive and non-violent outcomes. In a typical court-mandated BIP (BIP-only) with the hybrid BIP and
summary, CP for DV offenders “seek to hold offenders account- RP approach (BIP-plus-CP). All eligible offenders (n = 222) were
NAtuRe HuMAN BeHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NATURe HUmAN BeHAVIoUR Articles
Table 1 | Pretreatment sample characteristics (at time of intake assessment): BiP-only versus BiP-plus-CP
BiP-onlya BiP-plus-CPa Statisticsb
Racial identity/ethnicity of offender Caucasian 52.1 52.8 χ2(6) = 5.227; P = 0.515
(%)
African American 5.2 3.2
Hispanic 15.6 24.8
American Indian 6.3 2.4
Asian 1.0 0.8
Other, including mixed 11.5 8.8
No data 8.3 7.2
Mean age of offender (in years) 33.1 (12.0) 34.8 (13.2) t(215) = −0.990; P = 0.323
Job status (%) Employed 59.4 71.2 χ2(3) = 7.563; P = 0.109
Unemployed 29.2 19.2
Other 1.0 4.0
No data 9.4 5.6
Participants with suicidal Yes 3.1 4.0 χ2(2) = 0.276; P = 0.871
tendencies (%)
No 86.5 87.3
No Data 10.4 8.7
Offender’s relationship status (%) Single or never married 31.3 23.0 χ2(8) = 13.060; P = 0.110
Living with someone as a couple 21.9 16.7
Married for the first time 11.5 22.2
In a relationship 9.4 4.8
Divorced 12.7 6.3
Remarried 5.2 8.7
Separated 3.1 4.8
Widowed 1.0 0.0
No data 10.4 7.1
Offender living with the primary Yes 35.4 42.9 χ2(2) = 1.279; P = 0.528
victim (%)
No 54.2 48.4
No data 10.4 8.7
Offender’s gender (%) Male 63.5 69.8 χ2(2) = 3.250; P = 0.197
Female 34.4 30.2
No Data 2.1 0.0
Mean number of children (under 18) living with offender (at time of 0.73 (1.43) 0.61 (1.08) t(196) = 0.703; P = 0.483
arrest)
Dual-arrest cases (%) Yes 13.5 9.5 χ2(2) = 1.115; P = 0.573
No 77.1 82.5
Unknown 9.4 7.9
Type of violence in case (%) Family violence 22.90 26.20 χ2(7) = 1.555; P = 0.980
IPV no child involved 29.2 31.0
IPV child involved 21.9 17.5
IPV and other family involved 1.0 2.4
IPV and multiple others 10.4 9.5
IPV and other person involved 4.2 4.0
IPV same-sex couple 2.1 2.4
No data 8.30 7.10
ain this column, numbers in parentheses indicate s.d.; bin this column, numbers in parentheses indicate d.f.
randomly assigned by the treatment provider to either the BIP- all offenders were sent to the treatment provider that administered
only (standard treatment) or the BIP-plus-CP (hybrid treatment) both the standard treatment (control group) and the hybrid treat-
during the 24-month study time frame, with a 24-month follow- ment (experimental group). Once the offenders arrived at the treat-
up period (Fig. 1). Study participants were processed by six judges ment centre (253 in total) and were assessed for eligibility, they were
from the Salt Lake City Justice Court and convicted of DV crimes; randomly assigned to the study conditions (222 in total). Unlike
NAtuRe HuMAN BeHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NATURe HUmAN BeHAVIoUR
variable calculated based on Utah Adult Sentencing Guidelines
Table 2 | two-year pre- and post-random assignment means:
between the two treatment groups (see explanation of the weighting
arresta frequencies and CSS
of the crime categories in Statistical procedures, below).
Stage outcome BiP-onlyb BiP-plus-CPb Table 3 presents the parameter estimates for the regression
models. It includes the constant, the treatment effect of BIP-plus-CP
n 96 126
and the dependent variable at baseline as a covariate. The table
Pre-treatmentc Frequency 1.000 (1.759) 1.437 (2.398)
shows the unstandardized estimates and their respective standard
CSS 3.010 (5.741) 4.040 (6.495) errors of the mean, the estimated odds ratio (Exp(B)) and their
Post-treatment Frequency 0.604 (1.827) 0.373 (1.270) corresponding 95% Wald confidence intervals (CI). Our test pro-
duced a statistically significant reduction in the count-based model
CSS 1.969 (5.596) 1.151 (3.897)
reoffending, measured as any new arrest within 24 months in the
aAll crimes (including DV); bnumbers in parentheses indicate s.d.; cexcludes the case used for BIP-plus-CP group compared to the BIP-only group, in the mag-
random assignment.
nitude of approximately 53% Exp(B) = 0.470, 95% CI 0.312, 0.707,
P < 0.001). Once we take into account the baseline values of the
dependent variable, the estimated marginal means also show a
previous studies of DV interventions, we also measured severity of statistically significant treatment effect (Fig. 2; P < 0.001), with
subsequent crimes rather than simply posttreatment reoffending. 0.276 re-arrests (95% Wald CI 0.199, 0.383; s.e.m. = 0.0462) in the
Table 1 shows the key characteristics of the 222 participants, bro- BIP-plus-CP group compared to 0.587 re-arrests (95% CI 0.454,
ken down into the two study conditions. The sample was comprised 0.761; s.e.m. = 0.0774) in the BIP-only group.
of predominantly Caucasian offenders around the age of 33–35 When considering the harm-reduction potential of the hybrid
years who were employed during the time of intake assessment treatment—or CSS—the results show findings similar to those of
and who had a relatively short criminal record in the 24 months the count-based model. Severity was reduced for all crimes, includ-
before the random assignment. The majority of the participants ing DV, by approximately 52% Exp(B) = 0.480, 95% CI 0.385, 0.600;
were male although, as previously noted, Utah DV laws are gender P < 0.001; see Table 3). In other words, the harm caused to victims of
neutral; also included were both IPV and family violence/roommate crimes by offenders in the BIP-plus-CP treatment was halved in the
crimes50. A small percentage of the cases were dual arrests, meaning hybrid treatment compared to the standard treatment. Fig. 2 shows
that both parties were arrested for a DV crime. A similar propor- the estimated marginal means when taking into consideration the
tion of participants in the two study groups reported having suicidal baseline covariate: 1.776 (95% CI 1.534, 2.055; s.e.m. = 0.0793) and
tendencies—a key predictor of domestic homicide51. None of the 0.853 (95% CI 0.711, 1.023; s.e.m. = 0.1323), for the BIP-only and
baseline comparisons yielded a statistically significant difference at BIP-plus-CP group, respectively (P < 0.001).
the 0.05 threshold—although running statistical significance testing
for measurement of baseline differences in RCTs is not a recom- Discussion
mended practice52–55. Scholars and practitioners have long been searching for alternative
Our study comprised 96 BIP-only and 126 BIP-plus-CP, for a treatments for DV, particularly those that complement and enhance
total of 222 participants who met the inclusion/exclusion criteria. At BIP, given their prominent use by US criminal courts and related
baseline (see Table 2), the mean (M) number of crimes committed regulations19. RP provide a particularly promising addition to treat-
by the BIP-only group prior to random assignment ranged between ment options for DV offenders because, as this and other RJ-related
one and nine, with a mean number of crimes of 1.000 (s.d. = 1.759), studies have suggested, it has the potential not only to reduce recidi-
whereas the BIP-plus-CP group ranged between one and 20, with a vism given certain conditions, but also to increase satisfaction,
mean of 1.437 (s.d. = 2.398). While the BIP-plus-CP group appears address particular offender crimes and characteristics, incorporate
more criminogenic at baseline (M = 4.040, s.d. = 6.495) than the an offender’s readiness for change and remorse and engage victims
BIP-only group (M = 3.010, s.d. = 5.741) (thus making it more dif- of all types in ways that other programmes have not yet done22,56.
ficult to show an improvement over the standard group), these Additionally, RP can accommodate the broad conceptualization of
differences are not statistically significant at the 0.05 level. At post- DV, including family violence, as it has come to be defined by dif-
random assignment, the mean number of crimes committed by the ferent jurisdictions1.
BIP-only group (including DV crimes) ranged between one and 14 Circles of peace, of the type used in this study, draw on RJ prin-
(M = 0.604, s.d. = 1.827), whereas the BIP-plus-CP group ranged ciples and practices built into this evolving approach22,40. While CP
between one and eight (M = 0.373, s.d. = 1.270). have received less attention than the face-to-face RJCs promulgated
Table 2 also presents our findings on differences in severity of in the Campbell Collaboration and other reviews42,43, they neverthe-
crime committed—or crime severity scores (CSS)—a harm-reduction less incorporate the assumption that a person can make good after
Table 3 | Parameter estimates and exponential parameter estimates (n = 222)
95% Ci for exp(B)
B s.e.m. P value exp(B) Lower upper
Crime Treatmenta −0.755 0.2083 0.0003 0.470 0.312 0.707
counts
Baseline 0.192 0.0179 <0.0001 1.211 1.169 1.254
(new
arrests)
Intercept −0.771 0.1357 <0.0001 0.463 0.354 0.603
CSS Treatmenta −0.733 0.1133 <0.0001 0.480 0.385 0.600
(severity
Baseline 0.073 0.0036 <0.0001 1.076 1.069 1.084
of new
arrests)
Intercept 0.310 0.0783 <0.0001 1.364 1.170 1.590
aBIP-plus-CP.
NAtuRe HuMAN BeHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NATURe HUmAN BeHAVIoUR Articles
0.800
0.761
0.600 0.587
0.454
0.400 0.383
0.276
0.200 0.199
0
a crime even if the treatment is mandatory and the victim does not suggests that not only can BIP-plus-CP reduce the incidence of new
participate, as may be the case in the DV context. CP facilitates this crimes, but it also reduces harm when new crimes do occur, in that
personal growth through an “intensity of interaction”42 and an orga- the crimes committed are less severe. These findings surpass the
nized process of dialogue, both with people known to the offender more modest outcomes of other RJ studies, not related to DV42–44.
(family members, support people and a victim who willingly partic- At this point, we would not expect any intervention programme
ipates) as well as through others the offender comes to trust (a circle to eradicate DV altogether, given the intergenerational transmission
keeper, as well as a volunteer community member who attends CP of violence and the longstanding social, psychological, cultural and
over several weeks of treatment)56,57. In addition, through the use even biological dimensions of this enduring problem59–62. However,
of a social compact, there is an element of focused accountability an intervention that both reduces recidivism by half in all crimes
each week in the CP session where all parties witness change by (including DV), as well as reduces harm at similar levels, is indeed
the offender that is both recognized and performed22. It has now a very promising and hopeful development, particularly given the
been well documented that RJ agreements have a higher compliance changing demographics of DV offenders who would benefit from
rate than orders/agreements in control groups58. In addition, while more tailored treatments. Future research should include a cost–
in this study offenders were required to attend treatment and not benefit analysis of the hybrid BIP-plus-CP approach, although exist-
all victims participated, we did not witness negative consequences ing studies of the cost of typical RJ programmes may be instructive
stemming from either of these conditions. Indeed, our results sug- as well42,43.
gest that RP combined with BIP is much more effective than a BIP- Studying a combined programme of BIP-plus-CP parallels other
only approach. innovations in the field (see ref. 30 for one example), providing a
Although some of the elements in CP did not align with typi- unique opportunity to develop the next generation of treatment
cal RJ programmes and practices, as has been noted, many others programmes for DV crimes in a manner that incorporates both
did. Using RJCs, as an example, CP include: (1) a discussion with the standard treatment but also includes an additional component
both offenders and victims about how the CP works; (2) schedul- that has the overall effect of reducing recidivism. While our study
ing a conference at the victim’s convenience (when victims partici- cannot conclude that an approach that is restorative-only is ‘better’
pated in the CP); (3) seating participants in a circle with privacy; than BIP-only, it does provide evidence that the hybrid of BIP and
(4) providing an introduction to the participants in terms of how RPs can in fact improve outcomes of a BIP-only treatment. Future
everyone is connected to the crime; (5) opening the first circle with research should also examine the effectiveness of BIP-plus-CP for
the offender’s discussion of the crime and its harm; (6) inviting par- a population of IPV-only cases, to align more closely with other
ticipants to comment both on the crime itself and how the conse- studies in the field of DV treatment. Additionally, future interven-
quences might be repaired; and (7) developing a social compact that tions should explore further how victim perspectives can be bet-
is monitored43. In the case of CP, circle keepers as well as the CP par- ter integrated, particularly in terms of their ongoing engagement
ticipants oversee adherence to the social compact during the period in mandated treatment for DV crimes where victim participation is
of treatment (other RJ models typically require that the agreement often limited by legal mandates. Finally, it is strongly advised that RJ
be filed with a more formal institutional body)43. Because CP were practice be given the opportunity to incorporate new nomenclature,
intentionally designed based on RJ principles and practices22, it is including references to ‘offenders’ as ‘program participants’ or more
no surprise that many programme elements align closely with RJCs specifically ‘applicants’ (the term used in CP). This will require a
and other restorative approaches, as well as with the theory that larger cultural shift.
underpins the effectiveness of RJ more generally. There are four noteworthy limitations to this study that future
In this study, we detected statistically significant and meaningful research should address. First, we used official records of criminal
reductions of recidivism of all crimes, including DV, of >50% in activity and severity, which represent a consistent outcome measure
posttreatment follow-up of up to 2 years. Compared to the standard across treatment groups. However, not all incidents of DV are offi-
BIP-only treatment, BIP-plus-CP appears to reduce the likelihood cially documented and the granularity of data that can be achieved
of reoffending. Moreover, we found that this hybrid approach also from these official sources is limited. Therefore, the categories of
reduces harm as measured by new arrests—again, by >50%. This postrandomization arrest are not precisely defined as DV versus
stserra
weN
2.500
2.055
2.000
1.776
1.500 1.534
1.000 1.023
0.853
0.711
0.500
0
erocs
ytireveS
BIP-only (n = 96) BIP-plus-CP (n = 126) BIP-only (n = 96) BIP-plus-CP (n =126)
Fig. 2 | estimated marginal means and 95% Wald Ci for difference in new arrests and severity. The estimated marginal means for new arrests show a
statistically significant treatment effect (P < 0.001), with 0.276 re-arrests (95% Wald CI 0.199, 0.383; s.e.m. = 0.0462) in the BIP-plus-CP group compared
to 0.587 re-arrests (95% CI 0.454, 0.761; s.e.m. = 0.0774) in the BIP-only group. The estimated marginal means for severity are shown when taking into
consideration the baseline covariate: 1.776 (95% CI 1.534, 2.055; s.e.m. = 0.0793) and 0.853 (95% CI 0.711, 1.023; s.e.m. = 0.1323) for the BIP-only and
BIP-plus-CP group, respectively (P < 0.001).
NAtuRe HuMAN BeHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NATURe HUmAN BeHAVIoUR
non-DV. Future studies should address this shortcoming by con- (Fig. 1). The offender subsequently started treatment and was mandated to
ducting research in jurisdictions with the capacity to measure more complete all treatment sessions. Failure to comply with treatment requirements
results in contempt of court orders and further sentencing. As the Consolidated
precise definitions.
Standards of Reporting Trials (CONSORT) flowchart (Fig. 1) indicates, there were
Second, we captured recidivism data only 24 months postran- several reasons after random assignment that offenders either did not start or did
dom assignment. There is a need to understand what happens lon- not complete treatment. Case attrition in both clinical and research settings is well
gitudinally. There is the possibility of decay over time63, but it can recognized in DV settings65.
equally be the case that the treatment effect increases rather than Our sample consisted of all eligible DV offenders who were sentenced to
treatment for a misdemeanour DV crime by the Salt Lake City Justice Court
diminishes over an extended period, as was suggested in a study of
between 8 February 2012 and 31 December 2013, and who appeared for the
four BIP sites64. treatment assessment, were assessed by the treatment provider and deemed
Third, future studies should incorporate a specific focus on several appropriate for either treatment option. Random assignment of cases to treatment
aspects of RJ programming that will help tease out what may be most began on 6 March 2012, and the last case was randomly assigned on 10March 2014.
Cases qualifying for the study followed the mandate of Utah DV law at the time of
relevant to the effectiveness of this practice in the DV context. For
this study, which included intimate partners, family members and roommates who
example, it would be helpful to understand whether DV programmes
violated the relevant criminal codes50. Those offenders over the age of 18 years who
that rely on offenders and victims who willingly agree to participate lived locally were included in the sample. To reflect typical court practices, gender
improve the overall impact on outcomes. To advance this type of and criminal history or delinquent background were not used as exclusion criteria.
research, current legal mandates in the DV criminal context would
Random assignment. All six judges from the Salt Lake City Justice Court agreed to
have to be overcome. Perhaps this research should focus on child wel-
refer eligible DV cases to the relevant treatment provider during the experimental
fare, where we have seen more robust experimentation even when DV
period. We have no reason to believe that this cohort of DV cases is any different
is present2,3. Additionally, future studies should also focus on measur- from those of previous years in this jurisdiction. At sentencing, the judge handed
ing victim and offender satisfaction, other key elements of RJ research. the offender a referral sheet with the information about the treatment provider,
Fourth, we tested the effect of the treatment provided to a het- as is standard practice in DV cases. Offenders would then contact the treatment
provider to schedule an assessment. If an offender was deemed fit for either
erogeneous cohort of DV offenders. There are a number of impor-
treatment option, the case was randomly assigned to one of two treatments. We
tant factors that might influence the DV treatment outcome.
used a simple random assignment sequence through the RAND function in Excel,
Employment, age, history of criminality and substance abuse, which resulted in a baseline imbalance in terms of group sizes (96 versus 126).
among others, are all factors that can predict the likelihood of an Assignment of cases was conducted remotely to minimize contamination biases.
individual both dropping out of treatment and reoffending65. The In all, 222 eligible cases were randomly assigned to two experimental conditions,
as depicted in the CONSORT flowchart from the point of random assignment
breakdown based on these covariates would further inform both
until completion of treatment (Fig. 1). Offenders were ‘blinded’ in terms of their
research and policy. However, given our relatively small sample size, participation in the RCT. Data collection and analysis were not performed blind to
subgroup statistical analyses are not advised. Instead, we focused the conditions of the experiment.
our study on the overall treatment effect and the severity of reoff-
ending, which provides clarity on this pressing question. Still, as the Treatments. Based on the Arizona RCT that compares RJ and BIP treatment
conditions22, it was hypothesized that DV offenders assigned to the hybrid
evidence on the effect of RP on DV develops, these variables should
treatment (BIP-plus-CP) would recidivate less, in terms of all crimes, including
be incorporated using meta-analytical tools. DV, compared to offenders assigned to BIP-only, as measured by re-arrest counts.
A second hypothesis posited that BIP-plus-CP would lead to a reduction in
Methods the severity of the crime committed, compared to the standard treatment for
Population and sampling. The study protocol was approved by New York similar offenders (see explanation of the weighting of the crime categories in
University’s Institutional Review Board, the University Committee on Activities Statistical procedures, below). To test these hypotheses, we collaborated with the
Involving Human Subjects and the University of Utah’s Institutional Review Salt Lake City judicial system and a local treatment provider. In Utah, first-time
Board (IRB). The protocol was designed to protect the human subjects court- DV offenders are mandated to a minimum of 16 weeks for treatment. The local
mandated to DV treatment while at the same time being able to address the treatment provider required 18 weeks of DV treatment68. Additionally, Utah state
important policy questions. There was no contact between the researchers and standards allows for male and female offenders to be in DV treatment together68.
the study participants. Data collection for this study was limited to pre-existing/
secondary data that are routinely collected by treatment providers and criminal BIP-only. Utah law requires offenders to receive treatment following conviction
justice agencies. The IRB approved a waiver of informed consent under No. 45 of a misdemeanour DV crime. The standard treatment was BIP-only, an offender-
CFR 46.116(d), as the following criteria were met: (1) the research involved no only group treatment approach typical of the Duluth-style intervention. Groups
more than minimal risk to the participants; (2) the waiver or alteration did not were facilitated by one group leader and included a wide range of DV offenders,
adversely affect the rights and welfare of the participants; (3) the research could including male and female offenders and IPV and family violence/roommate cases,
not practicably be carried out without the waiver; and (4) providing participants as defined by Utah law50. The group is open, with offenders joining at different
with additional pertinent information after participation was not appropriate. points in time and leaving as they satisfy their legal mandates for treatment.
Furthermore, a Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act Waiver of Offenders were assigned to an 18-week programme of BIP, with each weekly
Authorization was approved by the IRB to gather data from the treatment provider session lasting 90 min.
on the offenders who were randomly assigned to treatment for the study. This
waiver allowed us to collect records from the treatment provider’s clinical case BIP-plus-CP. The alternative approach to the standard treatment offered through
file. Additionally, we obtained a Certificate of Confidentiality from the National this study was a hybrid of BIP-plus-CP, which included a 12-week offender-only
Institutes of Health protecting the research subjects in the study. This certificate BIP treatment followed by 6 weeks of CP sessions (both the BIP and CP sessions
protects the privacy of the research subjects by withholding their identities from all were 90 min). The 12 weeks of BIP was required by Utah’s state law: offenders
persons not connected with the research project. must complete 12 weeks of offender-only treatment before they can participate in
According to the US Census Bureau, Salt Lake City has approximately 200,000 conjoint treatment with their victim68.
residents and is the capital city of Utah. Utah’s population is 73.7% Caucasian Ideally, CP sessions always include a circle keeper, the offender, a trained
while 21.3% are of Hispanic or Latino origin66. Eighty-five per cent graduated from and volunteer community member, volunteer support people to both victim and
high school. The median household income is US$54,009, with 17.8% in Salt Lake offender and an invitation to the victim to participate. The focus of the CP was on
County (including Salt Lake City) living below the poverty level; 29% are not in the repairing the harm which included, as noted, an intense interaction, an organized
labour force. Just under half of the population (49%) in Salt Lake County belongs process of dialogue and the creation of a social compact that was monitored
to the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints67. weekly39,42,43. Circles varied in terms of willing participants. Not all victims chose
The primary treatment available to DV offenders in Utah is BIP. To test an to participate, either because the relationship had terminated (in cases of IPV or
alternative to BIP, we collaborated with the judiciary in Salt Lake City and a local roommates) or because the victim made a conscious decision not to participate in
treatment provider to randomly assign eligible cases to two conditions: BIP-only treatment. In those cases that were randomly assigned to BIP-plus-CP and started
and BIP-plus-CP. After having been to court, sentenced offenders had to contact CP sessions, 42% of victims chose to participate in at least one session during the
the DV treatment provider to schedule an appointment for an initial assessment. CP component of treatment.
The assessment by the treatment provider was used to determine whether the
offender was fit for treatment. If deemed fit for either treatment option, cases Data and variables. Multiple sources of data were used in this experiment. First,
were then randomly assigned to BIP-only or BIP-plus-CP following the assessment data were gathered from the clinical assessments conducted by the treatment
NAtuRe HuMAN BeHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NATURe HUmAN BeHAVIoUR Articles
provider prior to the beginning of treatment, which also included the police report References
from the DV incident that led to the offender being mandated to treatment. These 1. Barocas, B., Emery, D. & Mills, L. G. Changing the domestic violence
clinical assessments also included access to socio-demographic and family histories narrative: aligning definitions and standards. J. Fam. Violence 31,
of violence and related factors, including suicidal tendencies. (A Health Insurance 941–947 (2016).
Portability and Accountability Act Waiver was obtained to gain access to the 2. Pennell, J. & Burford, G. Family group decision making: protecting children
case records of those offenders who were randomly assigned to either treatment and women. Child Welf. 79, 131–158 (2000).
condition.) These variables were used to measure baseline balance between the 3. Pennell, J. Restorative practices and child welfare: toward an inclusive civil
treatment groups (Table 1). Across all comparisons, no statistically significant society. J. Soc. Issues 62, 257–277 (2006).
differences emerged at the 0.05 level (Table 1). Based on these records, we 4. Truman, J. L. & Morgan, R. E. Nonfatal Domestic Violence 2003–2014
conducted the random assignment of cases into the two treatment conditions. (US Bureau of Justice Statistics, 2014).
Next, we gained access to pre- and posttest arrest data on all crimes including 5. Petrosky, E. et al. Racial and ethnic differences in homicides of adult
DV violations on each offender from the Utah Bureau of Criminal Identification and women and the role of intimate partner violence—United States,
the Utah court docket records. We used these records as dependent variables, with 2003–2014. MMWR Morb. Mortal. Wkly. Rep. 66, 741–746 (2017).
a 24-month follow-up period from the moment of random assignment. As noted, 6. No More Secrets: Utah Domestic and Sexual Violence Report (Utah Governor’s
we used two sets of outcome data: new arrests, including DV, as well as severity of Office on Domestic and Sexual Violence, 2014).
new arrests. Both data points are important insofar as reduction in crime counts 7. Domestic Violence Fatalities in Utah (Utah Department of Health, Violence,
(new arrests) is a key indicator of treatment outcomes as measured in most RJ and Injury Prevention Program, 2010).
experiments, but reduction in severity is also an important public health policy goal. 8. Aaron, S. M. & Beaulaurier, R. L. The need for new emphasis on Batterers
The rationale for measuring severity requires clarification69–73. Most Intervention Programs. Trauma Violence Abuse 18, 425–432 (2017).
criminologists continue to count crimes (new arrests) in their studies without the 9. Gondolf, E. W. Theoretical and research support for the Duluth Model: a
necessary attention to severity or harm. For instance, a robust overall 15% reduction reply to Dutton and Corvo. Aggress. Violent Behav. 12, 644–657 (2007).
in crime counts may sound impressive but a more precise approach should 10. What is the Duluth Model? (Domestic Abuse Intervention Programs, 2019).
distinguish between serious harm and less severe events74. As previously argued, a 11. Barner, J. R. & Carney, M. M. Interventions for intimate partner violence: a
‘one-size-fits-all’ crime measurement methodology lacks the necessary degree of historical review. J. Fam. Violence 26, 235–244 (2011).
maturity by which results should be measured, especially when conducting cost– 12. Price, B. J. & Rosenbaum, A. Batterer Intervention Programs: a report from
benefit analyses74. For these reasons, weighting of crime categories is required75–77. the field. Violence Vict. 24, 757–770 (2009).
13. Dalton, B. What’s going on out there? A survey of Batterer Intervention
Statistical procedures. For both outcome measures, we applied an intention-to- Programs. J. Aggress. Maltreat. Trauma 15, 59–74 (2007).
treat method. Thus, the analyses are based on treatment assignment, not treatment 14. Boal, A. L. & Mankowski, E. S. The impact of legislative standards on Batterer
received, which is customary in health studies when comparing the efficacy of two Intervention Program practices and characteristics. Am. J. Community
interventions with high expected attrition rates. We then employed two approaches Psychol. 53, 218–230 (2014).
to analyse the outcomes. First, we used a Poisson-based model to assess differences 15. Cannon, C., Hamel, J., Buttell, F. & Ferreira, R. J. A survey of domestic
between two experimental groups in terms of crime counts. Given the risk of over- violence perpetrator programs in the US and Canada: findings and
dispersion, we used a Pearson chi-square parameter estimation because this obtains implications for policy and intervention. Partner Abuse 7,
more conservative variance estimates and significance levels78. The dependent 226–276 (2016).
variable was the postrandom assignment crime counts (new arrests including DV 16. Rosenbaum, A. & Leisring, P. A. Group intervention programs for batterers.
crimes) during the 24-month follow-up period. Group assignment (experimental J. Aggress. Maltreat. Trauma 5, 57–71 (2001).
(0)/control(1)) was used as the factor, and the prerandom assignment data were our 17. Corvo, K., Dutton, D. & Chen, W. Y. Toward evidence-based practice
control variables. Given our randomized design, we measured the effect globally with domestic violence perpetrators. J. Aggress. Maltreat. Trauma 16,
(across all offenders over time). From this model, we then extracted the exponential 111–130 (2008).
parameter estimates and the 95% CIs associated with the estimate, because the 18. Herman, K., Rotunda, R., Williamson, G. & Vodanovich, S. Outcomes from
exponential parameter estimate is a measure of the factor change in the odds of a Duluth model Batterer Intervention Program at completion and long-term
the outcome produced by a one-unit increase in the value of the independent follow-up. J. Offender Rehabil. 53, 1–18 (2014).
variable—an improvement over using variations in the raw coefficients that are not 19. Maiuro, R. D. & Eberle, J. A. State standards for domestic violence
intuitively interpretable79,80. We also computed the estimated marginal means81 to perpetrator treatment: current status, trends, and recommendations.
report the mean interaction responses, and adjusted for the baseline covariate (that Violence Vict. 23, 133–155 (2008).
is, the dependent variable at pretest value) in each model. We used an alpha level of 20. Tomsich, E. A., Tunstall, A. M. & Gover, A. R. in The Encyclopedia of Crime
0.05 for all statistical tests, and all tests were two-tailed. and Punishment 1–8 (Wiley, 2016).
Second, we repeated this approach for crime severity figures based on Utah
21. McCollum, E. E. & Stith, S. M. Couples treatment for interpersonal violence:
Adult Sentencing Guidelines82. We used the official grading system (that is, first- to
a review of outcome research literature and current clinical practices. Violence
third-degree felonies, Class A–C misdemeanours), which breaks down all crime
Vict. 23, 187–201 (2008).
categories in Utah into severity categories. Within each of these six categories,
22. Mills, L. G., Barocas, B. & Ariel, B. The next generation of court-mandated
a further nuanced breakdown of the offence grading was completed, with a
domestic violence treatment: a comparison study of Batterer Intervention and
numerical score assigned for each crime type. For example, a third-degree felony
Restorative Justice Programs. J. Exp. Criminol. 9, 65–90 (2013).
aggravated assault received a score of five, while a Class A misdemeanour assault
23. Stith, S. M., Rosen, K. H., McCollum, E. E. & Thomsen, C. J. Treating
received a score of four. We then multiplied each value by the number of crime
intimate partner violence within intact couple relationships: outcomes of
incidents that occurred per category (see Supplementary Table 1). This allowed us
multi-couple versus individual couple therapy. J. Marital Fam. Ther. 30,
to measure variations of severity of crimes between the two treatment conditions
305–318 (2004).
of the study. We used these scores as the outcome variable, the pretreatment values
24. Babcock, J. C., Green, C. E. & Robie, C. Does batterers’ treatment work? A
as a baseline controlling variable and the group assignment as an exploratory
meta-analytic review of domestic violence treatment. Clin. Psychol. Rev. 23,
variable.
1023–1053 (2004).
25. Eckhardt, C. I. et al. The effectiveness of intervention programs for
Statistical power. Statistical power has been defined as the probability of detecting
perpetrators and victims of intimate partner violence. Partner Abuse 4,
a statistically significant effect, given the true difference between the treatment
196–231 (2013).
group and the control group83. By using Optimal Design84 and focusing on the
26. Arias, E., Arce, R. & Vilariño, M. Batterer Intervention Programmes:
minimum detectable effect size, we estimate that our sample size (n = 222) was
a meta-analytic review of effectiveness. Psychosoc. Interv. 22,
sufficiently large to detect small to medium effects of d = 0.34, in which the alpha
153–160 (2013).
significance level is 0.05, using the hypotheses as assumed to be a two-tailed test,
27. Haggård, U., Freij, I., Danielsson, M., Wenander, D. & Långström, N.
with the count-based outcome as a covariate and with the estimated power of 0.80.
Effectiveness of the IDAP treatment program for male perpetrators of
intimate partner violence: a controlled study of criminal recidivism.
Reporting Summary. Further information on research design is available in the
J. Interpers. Violence 32, 1027–1043 (2017).
Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.
28. Jackson, S. et al. Batterer Intervention Programs: Where Do We Go from Here?
NCJ No. 195079 (National Institute of Justice, 2003).
Data availability
29. Gondolf, E. W. Evaluating batterer counseling programs: a difficult
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the task showing some effects and implications. Aggress. Violent Behav. 9,
corresponding authors upon request. 605–631 (2004).
30. Lila, M., Gracia, E. & Catalá-Miñana, A. Individualized motivational plans in
Received: 5 September 2018; Accepted: 9 August 2019; Batterer Intervention Programs: a randomized clinical trial. J. Consult. Clin.
Published: xx xx xxxx Psychol. 86, 309–320 (2018).
NAtuRe HuMAN BeHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NATURe HUmAN BeHAVIoUR
31. Alexander, P. C., Morris, E., Tracy, A. & Frye, A. Stages of change and the 59. Figueredo, A. J. & McCloskey, L. A. Sex, money, and paternity: the evolutionary
group treatment of batterers: a randomized clinical trial. Violence Vict. 25, psychology of domestic violence. Ethol. Sociobiol. 14, 353–379 (1993).
571–587 (2010). 60. McKenry, P. C., Julian, T. W. & Gavazzi, S. M. Toward a biopsychosocial
32. Babcock, J. C. et al. Domestic violence perpetrator programs: a proposal model of domestic violence. J. Marriage Fam. 57, 307–320 (1995).
for evidence-based standards in the United States. Partner Abuse 7, 61. Perilla, J. L., Bakeman, R. & Norris, F. H. Culture and domestic violence: the
355–460 (2016). ecology of abused Latinas. Violence Vict. 9, 325–339 (1994).
33. Romero-Martínez, Á., Lila, M., Gracia, E. & Moya-Albiol, L. Improving 62. Riggs, D. S., Caulfield, M. B. & Street, A. E. Risk for domestic violence:
empathy with motivational strategies in Batterer Intervention factors associated with perpetration and victimization. J. Clin. Psychol. 56,
Programmes: results of a randomized controlled trial. Br. J. Clin. Psychol. 58, 1289–1316 (2000).
125–139 (2019). 63. Sutherland, A., Ariel, B., Farrar, W. & De Anda, R. Post-experimental
34. Zarling, A., Lawrence, E. & Marchman, J. A randomized controlled trial of follow-ups—fade-out versus persistence effects: the Rialto police body-worn
acceptance and commitment therapy for aggressive behavior. J. Consult. Clin. camera experiment four years on. J. Crim. Justice 53, 110–116 (2017).
Psychol. 83, 199–212 (2015). 64. Gondolf, E. W. A 30-month follow-up of court-referred batterers in four
35. Easton, C. J., Crane, C. A. & Mandel, D. A randomized controlled trial cities. Int. J. Offender Ther. Comp. Criminol. 44, 111–128 (2000).
assessing the efficacy of cognitive behavioral therapy for substance-dependent 65. Jewell, L. M. & Wormith, J. S. Variables associated with attrition from
domestic violence offenders: an integrated substance abuse-domestic violence domestic violence treatment programs targeting male batterers: a meta-
treatment approach (SADV). J. Marital Fam. Ther. 44, 483–498 (2018). analysis. Crim. Justice Behav. 37, 1086–1113 (2010).
36. Murphy, C. M., Eckhardt, C. I., Clifford, J. M., Lamotte, A. D. & Meis, L. A. 66. Quickfacts: Salt Lake City Utah. US Census Bureau https://www.census.gov/
Individual versus group cognitive-behavioral therapy for partner-violent men: quickfacts/fact/table/saltlakecitycityutah/PST045217 (2017).
a preliminary randomized trial. J. Interpers. Violence https://doi. 67. Associated Press. New Figures Show LDS Members a Minority in Salt Lake
org/10.1177/0886260517705666 (2017). County https://kutv.com/news/local/new-figures-show-lds-members-a-
37. Strang, H. et al. Reducing the harm of intimate partner violence: minority-in-salt-lake-county (2018).
randomized controlled trial of the Hampshire Constabulary CARA 68. Utah Administrative Code, Rule R501-21-7 https://rules.utah.gov/publicat/
experiment. Camb. J. Evid. Based Policing 1, 160–173 (2017). code/r501/r501-21.htm (2019).
38. Taft, C. T. et al. Strength at Home Couples Program to prevent military 69. Block, C. R. & Block, R. L. Crime definition, crime measurement, and victim
partner violence: a randomized controlled trial. J. Consult. Clin. Psychol. 84, surveys. J. Soc. Issues 40, 137–160 (1984).
935–945 (2016). 70. Brady, T. V. Measuring What Matters, Part One: Measures of Crime, Fear and
39. Braithwaite, J. in Public Accountability: Designs, Dilemmas and Experiences Disorder (National Institute of Justice, 1996).
(ed. Dowdle, M.) 33–51 (Cambridge Univ. Press, 2006). 71. Brennan, S. & Dauvergne, M. Police-reported Crime Statistics in Canada, 2010
40. Ptacek, J. in Preventing Intimate Partner Violence: Interdisciplinary Perspectives (Statistics Canada, 2011).
(eds Renzetti, C. et al.) 159–184 (Policy Press, 2017). 72. Hindelang, M. J., Hirschi, T. & Weis, J. G. Measuring Delinquency (Sage
41. Cheon, A. & Regehr, C. Restorative justice models in cases of intimate Publications, 1981).
partner violence: reviewing the evidence. Vict. Offenders 1, 369–394 (2006). 73. Gove, W. R., Hughes, M. & Geerken, M. Are uniform crime reports a valid
42. Sherman, L. W., Strang, H., Mayo-Wilson, E., Woods, D. J. & Ariel, B. Are indicator of the index crimes? An affirmative answer with minor
restorative justice conferences effective in reducing repeat offending? Findings qualifications. Criminology 23, 451–501 (1985).
from a Campbell systematic review. J. Quant. Criminol. 31, 1–24 (2015). 74. Sherman, L., Neyroud, P. W. & Neyroud, E. (2016). The Cambridge Crime
43. Strang, H., Sherman, L. W., Mayo-Wilson, E., Woods, D. & Ariel, B. Harm Index: measuring total harm from crime based on sentencing
Restorative Justice Conferencing (RJC) using face-to-face meetings of guidelines. Policing 10, 171–183 (2016).
offenders and victims: effects on offender recidivism and victim satisfaction. 75. Burton, S. E. et al. Applying a crime seriousness scale to measure changes in
A systematic review. Campbell Syst. Rev. 12, 1–59 (2013). the severity of offenses by individuals arrested in Florida. Justice Res. Policy 6,
44. Wilson, D. B., Olaghere, A. & Kimbrell, C. S. Effectiveness of Restorative 1–18 (2004).
Justice Principles in Juvenile Justice: A Meta-Analysis. Final Technical Report to 76. Francis, B., Soothill, K. & Dittrich, R. A new approach for ranking ‘serious’
the Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention (Office of Justice offences. The use of paired-comparisons methodology. Br. J. Criminol. 41,
Programs, 2017). 726–737 (2001).
45. Stubbs, J. in Restorative Justice and Violence Against Women (ed. Ptacek, J.) 77. Ramchand, R., MacDonald, J. M., Haviland, A. & Morral, A. R. A
103–122 (Oxford Univ. Press, 2009). developmental approach for measuring the severity of crimes. J. Quant.
46. Smith, A. in Restorative Justice and Violence Against Women (ed. Ptacek, J.) Criminol. 25, 129–153 (2009).
255–278 (Oxford Univ. Press, 2009). 78. McCullagh, P. & Nelder, J. A. Generalized Linear Models (Chapman & Hall/
47. Van Ness, D. W. in Restorative Justice: Theoretical Foundations CRC Press, 1989).
(eds Weitekamp, E. G. M. & Kerner, H.-J.) 23–42 (Willan Publishing, 2002). 79. Long, J. S. Regression Models for Categorical and Limited Dependent Variables:
48. Dissel, A. & Ngubeni, K. Giving women their voice: domestic violence and Advanced Quantitative Techniques in the Social Sciences (Sage Publications,
restorative justice in South Africa. In XIth International Symposium on 1997).
Victimology http://www.csvr.org.za/docs/gender/givingwomenvoice.pdf (2003). 80. Henstock, D. & Ariel, B. Testing the effects of police body-worn cameras on
49. Coker, D. K. & Macquoid, A. Why opposing hyper-incarceration should be use of force during arrests: a randomised controlled trial in a large British
central to the work of the anti-domestic violence movement. Univ. Miami police force. Eur. J. Criminol. 14, 720–750 (2017).
Race Soc. Justice Law Rev. 5, 585–618 (2015). 81. McCulloch, C. E., Searle, S. R. & Neuhaus, J. M. Generalized, Linear, and
50. Utah Code Section 77-36-1 https://le.utah.gov/xcode/Title77/Chapter36/77- Mixed Models 2nd edn (Wiley Press, 2008).
36-S1.html (2019). 82. Utah Sentencing Commission. 2016 Adult Sentencing and Release Guidelines
51. Button, I. M. D., Angel, C. & Sherman, L. W. Predicting domestic homicide https://justice.utah.gov/Sentencing/Guidelines/Adult/2016%20Adult%20
and serious violence in Leicestershire with intelligence records of suicidal Sentencing%20Guidelines.pdf (2016).
ideation or self-harm warnings: a retrospective analysis. Camb. J. Evid. Based 83. Cohen, J. Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences 2nd edn
Policing. 1, 105–115 (2017). (Erlbaum Associates, 1988).
52. de Boer, M. R., Waterlander, W. E., Kuijper, L. D., Steenhuis, I. H. & Twisk, J. 84. Raudenbush, S. W. et al. Optimal Design Plus Empirical Evidence v.3.0 (2011).
W. Testing for baseline differences in randomized controlled trials: an
unhealthy research behavior that is hard to eradicate. Int. J. Behav. Nutr. Phys. Acknowledgements
Act. 12, 4–12 (2015). This research was funded by the National Science Foundation (award no. 0964821). The
53. Harvey, L. A. Statistical testing for baseline differences between randomized funders had no role in the study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish
groups is not meaningful. Spinal Cord 56, 919 (2018). or preparation of the manuscript. We would like to express our gratitude to the study
54. Moher, D. et al. CONSORT 2010 explanation and elaboration: updated participants for allowing us to gain greater insight into DV treatment programmes. This
guidelines for reporting parallel group randomized trials. Int. J. Surg. 10, study involved several invaluable partnerships with key constituent groups, including
28–55 (2012). the judiciary, a community-based agency and universities. More specifically, we would
55. Senn, S. J. Base logic: tests of baseline balance in randomized clinical trials. like to thank the Salt Lake City Justice Court, including J. Baxter, L. G. Cutler, J. Robison,
Clin. Res. Regul. Aff. 12, 171–182 (1995). S. Magid, C. Roberts, V. Ward and C. Preece. Additionally, we would like to thank the
56. Tyler, T. R. Restorative justice and procedural justice: dealing with rule local treatment provider (and all the clinicians) that partnered with us for this study.
breaking. J. Soc. Issues 62, 307–326 (2006). We are grateful to all the members of the research team who worked on this project
57. Mills, L. G. Violent Partners: A Breakthrough Plan for Ending the Cycle of from New York University, including L. Al Neyadi, J. Borgeson, J. Cipollina, D. Emery,
Abuse (Basic Books, 2009). M. Takele Kassa, Y. Lee, M. Mangafas, R. Mehta, F. Mohmad, M. Radler, R. Shimizu,
58. Latimer, J., Dowden, C. & Muise, D. The effectiveness of restorative justice Y. Shy, Y. Shyrokonis and T. Taylor, and from the University of Utah, including A. Earp,
practices: a meta-analysis. Prison J. 85, 127–144 (2005). E. Grundvig, A. O’Neill, K. Prince, K. Riley, L. Taholo and E. Becker Worwood.
NAtuRe HuMAN BeHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NATURe HUmAN BeHAVIoUR Articles
Author contributions Additional information
L.G.M. and B.B. conceived the study. L.G.M., B.B., R.P.B. and B.A. designed the study. Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/
B.B. and R.P.B. managed the data collection. B.B. developed the codebook and coding s41562-019-0724-1.
procedures and oversaw the coding of the data. B.A. analysed the data with input from Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to L.G.M. or B.B.
L.G.M., B.B. and R.P.B. B.B. led the drafting of the manuscript. L.G.M. and B.B. led
Peer review information Primary handling editor: Aisha Bradshaw
the revising of the manuscript with contributions from the other authors. All authors
contributed to the interpretation of the findings and writing the final manuscript. Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
Competing interests published maps and institutional affiliations.
The authors declare no competing interests. © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2019
NAtuRe HuMAN BeHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
1
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Corresponding author(s): Linda G. Mills & Briana Barocas
Last updated by author(s): Jun 26, 2019
Reporting Summary
Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency
in reporting. For further information on Nature Research policies, see Authors & Referees and the Editorial Policy Checklist.
Statistics
For all statistical analyses, confirm that the following items are present in the figure legend, table legend, main text, or Methods section.
n/a Confirmed
The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
A statement on whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided
Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.
A description of all covariates tested
A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
A full description of the statistical parameters including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient)
AND variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)
For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted
Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.
For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated
Our web collection on statistics for biologists contains articles on many of the points above.
Software and code
Policy information about availability of computer code
Data collection SPSS
Data analysis SPSS
For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors/reviewers.
We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Research guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.
Data
Policy information about availability of data
All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable:
- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets
- A list of figures that have associated raw data
- A description of any restrictions on data availability
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.
Field-specific reporting
Please select the one below that is the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.
Life sciences Behavioural & social sciences Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences
For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/documents/nr-reporting-summary-flat.pdf
2
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Behavioural & social sciences study design
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
Study description This study used a randomized controlled design to compare the traditional criminal justice response to domestic violence (DV) cases with
a hybrid alternative approach in Salt Lake City, Utah. Both recidivism and harm reduction (for all crimes, including DV) were assessed over
a 24-month period for DV offenders, comparing a standard Batterer Intervention Program (BIP) and a hybrid BIP that included
restorative-informed practices referred to as BIP-plus-Circles of Peace (CP).
Research sample The sample consisted of all eligible DV offenders who were sentenced to treatment for a misdemeanor DV crime from the Salt Lake City
Justice Court, between February 8, 2012 to December 31, 2013, and who appeared for the treatment assessment, were assessed by the
treatment provider and deemed appropriate for either treatment option. Cases qualifying for the study followed the mandate of Utah DV
law, which included both intimate partners and family members who violated the relevant criminal code. Those offenders over the age of
18 who lived locally were included in the sample. To reflect typical court practices, gender and criminal history or delinquent background
were not used as exclusion criteria.
The sample was comprised of predominantly Caucasian offenders around the age of 33-35 who were employed during the time of intake
assessment and who had a relatively short criminal record in the 24 months prior to the random assignment. The majority of the
participants were male (although, Utah domestic violence laws are gender neutral; they also include both intimate partner violence and
family violence crimes). A small percentage of the cases were “dual arrests,” meaning that both parties were arrested for a DV crime. A
similar proportion of participants in the two study groups reported having suicidal tendencies—a key predictor of domestic homicide.
None of the baseline comparisons yielded a statistically significant difference at the .05 threshold—although running statistical
significance testing for measuring baseline differences in RCTs is not a recommended practice.
Sampling strategy By using Optimal Design and focusing on the minimum detectable effect size, we estimate that our sample size (n=222) was large enough
to detect small to medium effects of d = 0.34, in which the alpha significance level is .05, using the hypotheses as assumed to be a two-
tailed test, with the count-based outcome as a covariate, and with the estimated power of 0.80.
Data collection Multiple sources of data were used in this experiment. First, data were gathered from the clinical assessments conducted by the
treatment provider prior to the beginning of treatment, which also included the police report from the DV incident that led the offender
to be mandated to treatment. These clinical assessments also included access to socio-demographic and family histories of violence and
related factors. (A Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) waiver was obtained to gain access to the case records of
those offenders who were randomly assigned to treatment for the study.) These variables were used to measure baseline balance
between the treatment groups. Based on these records, we conducted the random assignment of cases into the two experimental arms.
Next, we gained access to pretest and posttest arrest data on DV violations on each offender from the Utah Bureau of Criminal
Identification (BCI) and the Utah court docket records. We used these records as dependent variables, with a 24-month follow-up period
from the moment of random assignment. We used two sets of outcome data: new arrests and severity of new arrests (for all crimes,
including DV). Both data points are important; while reduction in crime counts (new arrests) is a key indicator of treatment outcomes—as
measured in most RJ experiments—reduction in severity is an important public health policy goal.
Timing The sample consisted of all eligible DV offenders who were sentenced to treatment for a misdemeanor DV crime from the Salt Lake City
Justice Court, between February 8, 2012 to December 31, 2013, and who appeared for the treatment assessment, were assessed by the
treatment provider and deemed appropriate for either treatment option. Random assignment of cases to treatment began on March 6,
2012, and the last case was randomly assigned on March 10, 2014.
Data exclusions No data were excluded from the analyses.
Non-participation All cases randomly assigned to treatment were included in the study.
Randomization All six judges from the Salt Lake City Justice Court agreed to refer eligible DV cases to the treatment provider we were partnered with for
this study. At sentencing, the judge handed the offender a referral sheet with the information about the treatment provider. Offenders
would then contact the treatment provider to schedule an assessment. Following the assessment, if an offender was deemed fit for
either treatment option, the case was randomly assigned to one of two treatments: BIP-only (standard treatment) or BIP-plus-CP (hybrid
treatment). We used a simple random assignment sequence through RAND function in Excel. Assignment of cases was conducted
remotely to avoid any contamination biases. In all, 222 eligible cases were randomly assigned to two experimental arms of the study.
Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods
We require information from authors about some types of materials, experimental systems and methods used in many studies. Here, indicate whether each material,
system or method listed is relevant to your study. If you are not sure if a list item applies to your research, read the appropriate section before selecting a response.
3
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Materials & experimental systems Methods
n/a Involved in the study n/a Involved in the study
Antibodies ChIP-seq
Eukaryotic cell lines Flow cytometry
Palaeontology MRI-based neuroimaging
Animals and other organisms
Human research participants
Clinical data
Human research participants
Policy information about studies involving human research participants
Population characteristics See above
Recruitment This study simply follows an offender who has agreed to treatment and observes what happens when they go through one of
two options. Since the study is built on the theory that it is not yet known by the research team or the treatment provider or the
court which treatment is better and for whom, the ethical way to determine which treatment option an offender gets is random.
Thus, an IRB Waiver of Informed Consent was obtained and approved by two university IRBs for this study and the sample
included all eligible DV offenders who were sentenced to treatment for a misdemeanor DV crime from the Salt Lake City Justice
Court, between February 8, 2012 to December 31, 2013, and who appeared for the treatment assessment, were assessed by the
treatment provider and deemed appropriate for either treatment option.
Ethics oversight New York University's Institutional Review Board, the University Committee on Activities Involving Human Subjects, and the
University of Utah Institutional Review Board approved the study protocol.
Note that full information on the approval of the study protocol must also be provided in the manuscript.