Articles
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-020-00988-4
Framing economic inequality and policy as group
disadvantages (versus group advantages) spurs
support for action
Pia Dietze 1 ✉ and Maureen A. Craig 2
Given the near-historic levels of economic inequality in the United States, it is vital to understand when and why people are
motivated to reduce it. We examine whether the manner in which economic inequality and policy are framed—in terms of either
upper-socio-economic-class advantages or lower-socio-economic-class disadvantages—influences individuals’ reactions to
inequality. Across five studies, framing redistributive policy (Study 1) as disadvantage-reducing (versus advantage-reducing)
and economic inequality (Studies 2–5) as lower-class disadvantages (versus upper-class advantages or a control frame)
enhances support for action to reduce inequality. Moreover, increased support is partly driven by perceptions that inequality is
more unjust if framed as lower-class disadvantages. Using diverse methodologies (for example, social media engagement on
Facebook) and nationally representative samples of self-reported upper-class and lower-class individuals, this work suggests
that the ways in which economic inequality is communicated (for example, by the media) may reliably influence people’s reac-
tions to and concern for the issue.
I
n recent years, wealth and income disparities within and across How information is framed powerfully impacts how people per-
countries have been the topic of bestselling books1,2, politi- ceive and react to it15–17. Examining racial inequality (that is, dispari-
cal campaigns3 and shocking headlines. Despite this attention, ties) and racial inequity (that is, explicitly undeserved disparities),
economic inequality is persistently rising or remaining extremely research has shown that societally advantaged group members
high in most countries4. In 2019, 26 individuals possessed as much (white people) react to framing in a variety of ways18–22. Robust
wealth as 50% of the world’s population5 and the United States in work suggests that white advantage frames can reduce white peo-
particular reached the highest level of income inequality on record6. ple’s group-based esteem21, elevate feelings of guilt18–20 and enhance
The social and health consequences of such extreme economic claims of personal life hardships or denial of privilege22. However,
inequality affect individuals across income levels. Higher income the effects of these frames for support for actions and policies to
inequality in a country predicts lower financial satisfaction7, worse reduce racial inequities are less straightforward. For example, some
mental health8 and lower levels of happiness and trust9. research has found that racial disparities framed as white advantages
Despite the deleterious consequences of economic inequality, (compared with Black disadvantages) can lead white people to sup-
Americans generally report little support for redistributive policies port policies meant to alleviate inequities21, whereas other research
that are intended to reduce such inequality10–12. Some research sug- suggests that a white advantage frame (compared with no frame)
gests that simply providing people with straightforward informa- can lead white people to voice less support for reparative action22.
tion about economic disparities reduces beliefs in fair opportunity Interestingly, some studies suggest that congruency between
and, in turn, elicits more support for inequality-reducing policies13. the inequity frame and the policy frame might be important to
However, there are many ways in which inequality information increase support for reparative action21,23. For example, a white
could be communicated and the effects of how economic inequal- advantage frame may increase support for a policy aimed at reduc-
ity is framed are less well understood. Because inequality is an ing white advantages but not for a policy aimed at reducing Black
inherently comparative phenomenon (some have more or less than disadvantages21. In general, differences between studies, particularly
others), the same information about economic inequality can be in the content of framing manipulations (for example, whether con-
accurately framed either in terms of one group’s advantages (hav- trol conditions are present and, if so, whether inequality is salient
ing more) or in terms of another’s disadvantages (having less). For in them, or whether inequality is explicitly stated as unjust in the
example, the statistics on global wealth inequality presented at the framing conditions) and dependent measures (for example, differ-
outset of this article used an advantage frame (focusing on what ent policies and emotional reactions), suggest that more work is
rich people have, relative to others)—a common way of describing needed to clarify these nuanced reactions. Altogether, framing has
economic inequality14. How might an alternative frame that high- been shown to have a substantial psychological impact on how indi-
lights the plight of people living in poverty (that is, a disadvantage viduals perceive and react to information about racial inequality.
frame) fare in marshalling support for reparative action? The pres- More central to the present research, a substantially smaller lit-
ent research investigates how and why the manner in which eco- erature has examined reactions to the framing of economic inequal-
nomic inequality is framed—in terms of either wealthy advantages ity and inequity24–26. This work typically focuses on upper-class
or poor disadvantages—influences individuals’ support for taking individuals’ responses (rather than the responses of members of
action to reduce it. the lower-class group). We use ‘lower class’ to indicate people who
1Department of Psychological Science & Blum Center for Poverty Alleviation, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA, USA. 2Department of Psychology,
New York University, New York, NY, USA. ✉e-mail: pdietze@uci.edu
NAture HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NATUre HUMAN BeHAvioUr
report belonging to social classes with fewer resources than those in
the middle class (for example, people who identify as working class) Table 1 | Means (and standard errors in parentheses) for
and ‘upper class’ to signify people who report belonging to social advantage and disadvantage conditions across studies
classes with more resources than the middle class (for example, peo-
Advantage Disadvantage
ple who identify as upper-middle class). Most of the extant studies
condition condition
examining the effects of economic inequality and inequity framing
have examined how framing can impact upper-class individuals’ Study 1 N = 706 N = 678
views of themselves, rather than their support for actions to miti- Preference for government 3.001 (0.045) 3.310 (0.038)
gate inequality (for example, policy outcomes and collective action). action
However, as in the literature on racial inequality framing, major Efficacy judgement of 2.966 (0.041) 3.151 (0.034)
differences in the control conditions and stimuli have produced a government
complicated picture. As with racial inequality framing, upper-class
Study 2a N = 133 N = 139
individuals react to information about class advantages with denial
and distancing25, while information on lower-class disadvantages Support for collective action 3.365 (0.145) 3.773 (0.142)
can morally threaten upper-class individuals and lead to highlight- Study 2b N = 36 N = 39
ing discrimination experiences in other domains of identity (for Support for collective action 3.274 (0.266) 4.260 (0.255)
example, gender and race26). The sole study (to our knowledge) that
Study 3 N = 888 N = 892
has specifically examined the effect of economic inequality fram-
ing on support for action to reduce it found that income inequality Support for collective action 2.748 (0.089) 3.046 (0.084)
framed as rich people making more than poor people (that is, an Injustice perceptions 5.027 (0.081) 5.345 (0.059)
advantage frame) garnered more support for redistributive poli- Study 5 N = 524 N = 523
cies than a disadvantage frame; however, this effect emerged only
Support for collective action 3.363 (0.072) 3.611 (0.072)
among conservatives24. While these results are intriguing, the small
sample size (N = 79) suggests a cautious interpretation. Injustice perceptions 5.620 (0.053) 5.784 (0.053)
It thus remains unanswered which economic inequality frame Descriptive statistics (survey weights adjusted in Study 1 and Study 3) for the dependent variables
facilitates greater support for reparative action and whether one’s by experimental condition and study, controlling for covariates. The value of N for each framing
own social class affects this process. The current research seeks to condition for each study is presented above the means and standard errors.
address these gaps in the literature in a comprehensive investigation.
In five studies, we examine the effects of framing redistributive pol-
icy (Study 1) and economic inequality (Studies 2–5) on support for The respondents were more likely to indicate that the government
collective action, using nationally representative samples, samples should reduce poverty (that is, the disadvantage frame) than reduce
with targeted recruitment of upper-class and lower-class people, the gap between the rich and everyone else (that is, the advantage
diverse methodologies (for example, social media engagement), and frame) (B = −0.309; t = −5.279; P < 0.001; 95% confidence interval
control conditions to provide baseline comparisons. Furthermore, (CI), (−0.424, −0.194); Cohen’s f2 = 0.023; Fig. 1). We also tested
we investigate how belonging to the advantaged or disadvantaged whether the respondents’ social class (using two dummy variables
social class groups and perceptions of injustice (reliable predictors indicating advantaged upper classes (upper-middle class or upper
of collective action21,27) may influence these reactions. class) or disadvantaged lower classes (lower-middle or lower class),
with the middle class as the reference group) or political ideology
results moderated the observed effect. Neither advantaged class member-
Study 1. In Study 1, we analysed publicly available data from a ship (P = 0.502) nor disadvantaged class membership (P = 0.076)
nationally representative survey about economic inequality that nor ideology (P = 0.148) significantly moderated the effect.
fortuitously included an experimental manipulation of redistribu- We then examined how policy framing influenced the respon-
tive policy framing (N = 1,504)28. The respondents were randomly dents’ views of government efficacy to reduce inequality, controlling
assigned to answer two questions about economic inequality again for demographics. In a similar pattern to that of preferences
policy framed in one of two ways (advantage-reducing policy or for government action, the respondents expressed that government
disadvantage-reducing policy). The respondents reported their policies and programmes can do more to reduce poverty than to
degree of support for governmental intervention to reduce economic reduce the gap between the rich and everyone else (B = −0.185;
inequality. Specifically, the respondents were asked how much t = −3.490; P < 0.001; 95% CI, (−0.290, −0.081); f2 = 0.009; Fig. 2).
(1 = nothing at all, 4 = a lot) the government should do to either Again, we tested whether social class (with dummy variables
(a) reduce the gap between the rich and everyone else (advantage indicating belonging to the advantaged or disadvantaged economic
frame) or (b) reduce poverty (disadvantage frame). Afterwards, the groups) or political ideology moderated the observed effects. While
respondents were asked about their views on government efficacy to ideology and disadvantaged class membership did not moderate the
enact policies to reduce inequality—that is, how much the govern- effect (P = 0.289 and P = 0.375, respectively), advantaged class mem-
ment can either (a) reduce the gap between the rich and everyone bership was a significant moderator. The effect of framing was exac-
else or (b) reduce poverty—with the same response options. erbated among upper-class individuals, who reported less optimism
Table 1 presents descriptive statistics for all studies. In addition, for the notion that the government can reduce the gap between the
we use two-tailed statistical tests (that is, multivariate regression rich and everyone else, compared with their middle-class counter-
analysis) and report the unstandardized regression coefficients parts (B = −0.408; t = −2.721; P = 0.007; 95% CI, (−0.702, −0.114))
(B) in all analyses except for Study 4, where we do not have access or their lower-class counterparts (B = −0.305; t = −1.979; P = 0.048;
to the raw data and thus do not use inferential statistics. We con- 95% CI, (−0.607, −0.003)).
ducted weighted linear regression analyses to examine the effects Taken together, these data suggest that individuals view govern-
of policy framing (0 = disadvantage frame, 1 = advantage frame) on ment action to reduce economic inequality more favourably if the
the respondents’ preferences for reducing inequality, controlling for action is framed as reducing disadvantages (that is, poverty), com-
respondent demographics (that is, age, gender, ethnicity, political pared with reducing advantages (that is, the gap between the rich
ideology and social class categorization). See the Supplementary and everyone else). This preference holds for individuals regardless
Information for comprehensive regression and correlation tables. of their ideology and their own social class standing. The framing
NAture HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NATUre HUMAN BeHAvioUr Articles
“How much, if anything, should the “How much do you think government policies
government do to reduce... and programs can do to reduce...
...the gap between the rich
and everyone else?”
...the gap between the rich
and everyone else?”
...poverty?”
...poverty?”
Nothing at all A lot
Nothing at all A lot Fig. 2 | raincloud plots with jittered data for respondents’ views on
government efficacy to reduce poverty (that is, reduce disadvantages)
Fig. 1 | raincloud plots with jittered data for respondents’ preferences for or to reduce the gap between the rich and everyone else (that is, reduce
the government to reduce poverty or to reduce the gap between the rich advantages). The respondents were randomly assigned to answer one
and everyone else. The respondents were randomly assigned to answer of the two questions, which provided the manipulation of policy framing.
one of the two questions, which provided the manipulation of policy Respondents who were asked about how much government policies and
framing. Respondents who were asked about how much the government programmes can do to reduce poverty (bottom) expressed more support
should do to reduce poverty (bottom) expressed more support than than respondents asked about reducing the gap between the rich and
respondents asked about reducing the gap between the rich and everyone everyone else (top) (N = 1384; B = −0.19; t = −3.49; P < 0.001; 95% CI,
else (top) (N = 1,384; B = −0.31; t = −5.28; P < 0.001; 95% CI, (−0.42, (−0.29, −0.08)). The dotted areas indicate the raw data, and the solid
−0.19)). The dotted areas indicate the raw data, and the solid areas areas indicate the data distributions. The black diamonds signify the means
indicate the data distributions. The black diamonds signify the means for for each question; the black lines signify the 95% CIs around the means.
each question; the black lines signify the 95% CIs around the means.
antecedent process and examine how the framing of economic
inequality may influence support for action to reduce inequality.
effect in ratings of government efficacy to reduce inequality was To provide a tightly controlled test of how economic inequality
exacerbated among upper-class individuals, who deemed the framing influences support for action, in Study 2 we randomly dis-
government less capable of reducing advantages, compared with tributed infographics with information about economic inequality
middle-class or lower-class respondents. The relative pessimism (Fig. 3) framed as either lower-class disadvantages or upper-class
expressed by upper-class individuals about the government’s efficacy advantages and measured individuals’ reported willingness to take
to reduce advantages could stem from multiple factors. Upper-class collective action. Across conditions, the two infographics provided
individuals may be motivated to downplay politicians’ capabilities identical information about US economic inequality, except that
to reduce rich advantages because it would affect them directly. one infographic framed inequality as upper-class advantages (the
Alternatively, they might base these judgements on real experiences, advantage frame) and one as lower-class disadvantages (the dis-
such as decades of stable effective tax rates for the rich and greater advantage frame). The participants then filled out a questionnaire
experience with how wealth impacts access to politicians29. and reported their willingness to take collective action. Given the
class-based variability in judgements of government efficacy in
Study 2. While the national survey data from Study 1 provide Study 1 and Americans’ complex views on government involve-
confidence in generalizability and suggest broad relevance of the ment (for example, redistribution policies) to address economic
documented policy-framing effect, a limitation is that researchers inequality30, we chose two actions that do not rely on government
conducting secondary analyses (as we did) did not create the sur- involvement but instead relate to increasing awareness and activ-
vey questions. In this case, the questions probably were developed ism in one’s community. The participants reported their likelihood
for purposes other than providing a clean experimental test of the (1 = extremely unlikely, 7 = extremely likely) of (a) sharing the info-
framing of economic inequality policy, and as such, the two condi- graphic on social media and (b) attending a protest about reducing
tions differed in several aspects other than their focus on advantages income inequality in the United States. Consistent with the results
or disadvantages. For example, the advantage frame explicitly com- of Study 1, we hypothesized that the disadvantage frame would gar-
pared the rich with everyone else, whereas the disadvantage frame ner more support for collective action to reduce economic inequal-
only referenced poverty. In addition to methodological concerns, ity than the advantage frame.
past research has shown that individuals’ support for policies aimed We conducted this study in two samples. Study 2a (N = 315)
at reducing advantages versus reducing disadvantages is influenced was conducted online on Amazon’s Mechanical Turk (MTurk)
by the framing of economic inequality itself. Thus, for the remain- crowdsourcing platform to access a more diverse sample than
der of this manuscript, we focus our investigation on this more most college student pools31. However, upper-middle-class and
NAture HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NATUre HUMAN BeHAvioUr
Fig. 3 | infographic about economic inequality with either a disadvantage frame or an advantage frame. MTurk workers (Study 2a, N = 272), park-goers in
New York City (Study 2b, N = 75) and a nationally representative sample of Americans (Study 3, N = 1,780) were randomly assigned to read an infographic
about economic inequality with either a disadvantage frame (left) or an advantage frame (right). The infographic referred to low-income and high-income
instead of lower-class and upper-class in Study 2a. Note that the information describing different forms of economic inequality displayed in the infographic
was chosen for simplicity and ease of communication (from news articles and other online sources) but the information has not been fact-checked.
upper-class individuals are underrepresented on MTurk, com- We again conducted linear regression adjusting for the par-
pared with the general population. To provide a sample of rela- ticipants’ demographics. As predicted, in both samples, individu-
tively higher-socio-economic-status individuals, Study 2b (N = 100) als exposed to an infographic explaining economic inequality as
sought to replicate the results by sampling from visitors to lower-class disadvantages (as opposed to upper-class advantages)
Washington Square Park, a wealthy area in New York City (median reported a greater likelihood of engaging in collective action against
ZIP-code income, US$104,561; ref. 32); indeed, this successfully economic inequality (Study 2a: B = −0.408; t = −2.004; P = 0.046;
boosted the proportion of self-reported upper-middle-class and 95% CI, (−0.809, −0.007); f2 = 0.013; Study 2b: B = −0.986;
upper-class individuals to 38.96% in Study 2b (from 10.66% in t = −2.608; P = 0.011; 95% CI, (−1.742, −0.231); f2 = 0.080). We
Study 2a). The procedure and materials paralleled those of Study tested whether ideology moderated the framing effect of Study 2a
2a except that Study 2b was conducted in-person instead of online. (the participants’ ideology was not measured in Study 2b), but no
NAture HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NATUre HUMAN BeHAvioUr Articles
significant interaction emerged (P = 0.480). No significant social
class interactions emerged in either study; however, these results Perceived
injustice
should be treated tentatively given the small social class subsamples –0.32** 0.30***
(see the Supplementary Information for the details). a b
Study 3. Studies 2a and 2b provide consistent evidence that fram-
ing information about economic inequality as lower-class disadvan- Advantage frame versus c (c′) Support for
disadvantage frame collective action
tages motivates individuals to support collective action more than –0.30* (–0.21)
framing economic inequality as wealthy people’s advantages, an
effect that appears in a predominantly lower-class sample as well Fig. 4 | relationship between economic inequality framing and support
as in a wealthier sample. But why may this be the case? Decades for collective action, mediated by perceived injustice. The relationship
of research in collective action reveals that one of the most potent between economic inequality framing and support for collective action,
precursors to support for collective action is perceptions that the mediated by perceived injustice in Study 3 (N = 1,780; a path, which
situation is injust27,33. Thus, in Study 3 (and Study 5) we investigate represents the association between injustice perceptions as the criterion
the potential mediating role of injustice appraisals. On the basis variable and framing condition as a predictor: B = −0.32; t = −3.20;
of this prior work, we test whether economic inequality framed P = 0.001; 95% CI, (−0.51, −0.12); b path, which represents the association
as lower-class disadvantages is perceived as more unjust than an between support for collective action as the criterion variable and condition
upper-class advantage frame, and whether this potentially explains and injustices perceptions as predictors: B = 0.30; t = 7.58; P < 0.001; 95%
why the disadvantage frame motivates greater support for action to CI, (0.22, 0.38); c path, which represents the association between support
reduce inequality. for collective action as the criterion variable and framing condition as a
While an individual’s own social class did not impact the observed predictor: B = −0.30; t = −2.46; P = 0.014; 95% CI, (−0.54, −0.06); c′ path,
effects of Studies 1–2 (except government efficacy judgements in which represents the effect of framing condition on support for collective
Study 1), a substantial body of intergroup relations research under- action controlling for injustice perceptions: B = −0.21; t = −1.77; P = 0.076;
scores the importance of one’s group membership in reactions to 95% CI, (−0.44, 0.02)). The point estimates are calculated adjusting for
group-based advantages/disadvantages19. As such, Study 3 aimed to covariates (that is, social class, age, gender, ethnicity and ideology), and
provide a stringent test of whether social class moderates the effect the analyses were weighted according to the guidelines provided by the
of inequality framing on support for collective action by recruiting study administrator (NORC’s AmeriSpeak). The value in parentheses (in
equal numbers of lower-class and upper-class participants within the the figure) represents the direct effect after the inclusion of the mediator.
same nationally representative online sample (N = 1,861; NORC’s *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001.
AmeriSpeak Panel). The methods were similar to those of Study 2:
the participants were randomly assigned to read one of the two info-
graphics varying in the framing of economic inequality (Fig. 3) and inequality framed as lower-class disadvantages is more likely to
then reported their perceptions that social class inequality in the marshal support for collective action than inequality framed as
United States is unjust and, as in Study 2, their support for collective upper-class advantages. This effect occurs independently of the
action to reduce economic inequality. participants’ social class or political ideology. In addition, media-
First, we used weighted linear regression to test for a framing tion analyses reveal that the effect of economic inequality fram-
effect on support for collective action to reduce economic inequal- ing on support for collective action is partly driven by heightened
ity, adjusting for the participants’ demographics. Consistent with perceptions of injustice in response to the lower-class disadvan-
the results of Study 2, the results revealed that individuals exposed tage frame.
to the disadvantage frame expressed more support for collective
action than individuals exposed to the advantage frame (B = −0.298; Study 4. Across a variety of study populations, from nationally rep-
t = −2.459; P = 0.014; 95% CI, (−0.537, −0.060); f2 = 0.007). We resentative samples to pedestrians in a city park, Studies 1–3 reveal
tested whether social class or political ideology moderated the that individuals express more support for disadvantage-reducing
observed effects, but we again found no significant moderation by (versus advantage-reducing) policy and for reducing economic
either variable (P = 0.699 and P = 0.107, respectively). inequality framed as lower-class disadvantages (versus upper-class
Next, we tested the hypothesis that individuals support more advantages). However, it is not yet clear whether the disadvan-
collective action in response to the lower-class disadvantage frame tage frame increased support relative to the baseline or whether
because this framing leads economic inequality to be perceived as the advantage frame decreased support relative to the baseline (or
more unjust. We conducted a weighted mediational analysis with whether both effects occurred). Study 4 thus includes a control
structural equation modelling34,35. The results of this analysis are pre- frame to ascertain baseline levels of engagement with inequality
sented in Fig. 4. Individuals indeed perceived social class inequality information.
as more unjust if the infographic framed inequality as lower-class Study 4 moves beyond ‘the lab’ to investigate whether a news-
disadvantages, compared with upper-class advantages (B = −0.318; paper headline framing inequality as lower-class disadvantages
t = −3.204; P = 0.001; 95% CI, (−0.513, −0.123); f2 = 0.011). We (versus upper-class advantages or a neutral control frame) gets dis-
also found a significant positive association between perceptions tributed more widely online on the most popular social networking
of injustice and support for collective action (B = 0.301; t = 7.581; website, Facebook36. We created different versions of a sponsored
P < 0.001; 95% CI, (0.223 0.379), f2 = 0.057). As shown in Fig. 3, the post presenting a headline about economic inequality and tested
direct effect of inequality framing on collective action is no longer them against each other to assess which version reached the most
significant if the influence of injustice perceptions is accounted users. There are some limitations to this approach: Facebook evalu-
for in the model (B = −0.209; t = −1.774; P = 0.076; 95% CI, (−0.441, ates the statistical significance of the event (that is, Facebook’s pro-
0.022)). Indeed, perceptions of injustice served as a statistical prietary algorithm determines which headline ‘wins’) but does not
mediator of the effect of inequality framing on collective action allow us to directly evaluate the statistical significance of the differ-
support (indirect effect: B = −0.094; t = −2.919; P = 0.004; 95% CI, ence between each pair of ads. However, this approach is ecologi-
(−0.156, −0.031)). cally valid, as the results are equivalent to what other ad buyers (for
Overall, these results demonstrate that across a nationally example, organizers, leaders and politicians) would use to optimize
representative sample of lower-class and upper-class Americans, online communications on this topic.
NAture HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NATUre HUMAN BeHAvioUr
Advantage ad Disadvantage ad
Control ad
Fig. 5 | the Facebook ads used in Study 4a (N = 72,324) and Study 4b (N = 67,491). The advantage (top left) and disadvantage (top right) ads used in
Study 4a and Study 4b. The control ad used in Study 4b is shown below. In Study 4a, the control ad headline read: “Studies find a 15-year difference in life
expectancy between poor and rich Americans”. Facebook users were randomly assigned to view one of the three ads (advantage ad, disadvantage ad, or
control ad) embedded in their newsfeed marked as sponsored content. Photo by rawpixel/Unsplash.
We created advertisements with different inequality frames that the word order (that is, mentioning “poor” before “rich”) did
(advantage, disadvantage, and control) that were randomly assigned not inadvertently resemble a disadvantage frame.
to appear in users’ newsfeeds (Fig. 5). The headline in the advan- We tested the effectiveness of each ad by creating a ‘split test’ (that
tage frame was taken directly from a major newspaper article: “Rich is, a randomized experiment) on Facebook. A split test shows the dif-
Americans live up to 15 years longer than poor peers, studies find”37. ferent ads to randomly assigned, demographically equivalent audi-
We then created additional headlines: “Poor Americans live up to 15 ences to determine a ‘winning ad’. The exact algorithm that Facebook
years shorter than rich peers, studies find” (disadvantage frame), uses to determine the winning ad is proprietary and unavailable to the
“Studies find a 15-year difference in life expectancy between poor public. In simplified terms, the reach increases (and the cost of run-
and rich Americans” (control frame, Study 4a) and “Studies find ning the ad decreases) if users, particularly users with large friend net-
a 15-year difference in life expectancy based on income” (control works, engage with an ad (for example, spend time viewing, reacting
frame, Study 4b). Study 4b was a preregistered replication of Study to, liking, commenting on, sharing or clicking on the ad). On the basis
4a with a slight modification of the control frame wording to ensure of this feedback, Facebook’s algorithm gives higher priority to ads with
NAture HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NATUre HUMAN BeHAvioUr Articles
If icon is clicked,
this tab opens
Fig. 6 | results from Study 4a (N = 72,324). Facebook determined the ad framing economic inequality in terms of disadvantages (the disadvantage ad) to
be the winner with the lowest cost per 1,000 people reached (top). Further information provided by Facebook about the chance of replication if you click
on the information icon (bottom).
more engagement and distributes them more widely (for example, to audience in the most cost-effective manner (see Supplementary
users’ friend networks), which in turn increases unique views (that is, Figs. 1–3 for more details on the reach metric).
the reach) and decreases the cost.
Study 4b. For the preregistered replication study, we again ran a split
Study 4a. We ran the split test for 24 hours and Facebook deter- test on Facebook for 24 hours. Replicating the previous result and
mined the disadvantage ad to be the winner—it had the lowest cost consistent with the preregistered hypothesis, Facebook determined
per 1,000 people reached (that is, it distributed the information the disadvantage ad the winner—it had the lowest cost per 1,000
most cost-effectively). In addition, Facebook determined that the people reached (Fig. 7). Again, Facebook calculated that the disad-
disadvantage ad has a 95% chance of outperforming the other ads in vantage ad had a greater than 95% chance of outperforming the other
a replication of the test (Fig. 6). In a single day, the disadvantage ad ads if the test was conducted again. In terms of absolute numbers, the
reached 623 (2.66%) more people than the advantage ad (which was disadvantage ad reached 180 (0.08%) more people than the advantage
the least effective ad). The disadvantage ad also outperformed the ad, which again reached the fewest people. The control ad reached 81
control ad, albeit by a much smaller margin (it reached 134 or 0.56% (0.03%) fewer people than the disadvantage ad and 99 (0.04%) more
more people). Thus, the ad that framed economic inequality as dis- people than the advantage ad, again performing second best in terms
advantages faced by lower-class Americans reached the broadest of reach (see Supplementary Figs 1–3 for more details).
NAture HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NATUre HUMAN BeHAvioUr
Fig. 7 | results from Study 4b (N = 67,491). Facebook determined the ad framing economic inequality in terms of disadvantages (the disadvantage ad) to
be the winner with the lowest cost per results.
In sum, Study 4b provides a preregistered replication of the Consistent with previous results and our preregistered hypothe-
framing effect observed in Study 4a: a news headline framing eco- sis, individuals exposed to the lower-class disadvantage infographic
nomic inequality as disadvantages faced by lower-class Americans (compared with the upper-class advantage infographic) expressed
increases the potential virality of the message (it reached the most more support for collective action (B = −0.248; t = −2.424; P = 0.016;
people) compared with a rich advantage frame or control frame. On 95% CI, (−0.449, −0.047); f2 = 0.005), controlling for the par-
the basis of these results, an individual or an organization (for exam- ticipants’ demographic characteristics. Again, neither advantaged
ple, a newspaper, non-profit, or think tank) publishing this content class membership (P = 0.349) nor disadvantaged class membership
would be advised to frame economic inequality as lower-class dis- (P = 0.830) nor ideology (P = 0.331) significantly moderated the
advantages if they sought to reach the maximum number of people effect of inequality framing. We then tested for the same mediation
with their message. This finding dovetails with the results of Studies process model as in Study 3. Replicating the effects of Study 3, the
1–3, while also extending the findings from self-report measures to participants reported that inequality was more unjust if they were
behavioural engagement in a real-world setting. exposed to lower-class disadvantages (versus upper-class advan-
tages) (B = −0.164; t = −2.171; P = 0.030; 95% CI, (−0.313, −0.016);
Study 5. Across Studies 2–4, we provide evidence that economic f2 = 0.003). We also replicated the significant positive association
inequality framed as lower-class disadvantages increases Americans’ between perceptions of injustice and support for collective action
engagement with and concern for the issue. However, thus far, our (B = 0.519; t = 13.385; P < 0.001; 95% CI, (0.443, 0.596); f2 = 0.139).
experimental materials (that is, infographics and Facebook ads) Finally, we replicated the finding that the direct effect of inequal-
have described at least one outcome of economic inequality that ity framing on collective action is not significant if the influence
was related to health. Human life and related factors such as health of perceived injustice is accounted for in the model (B = −0.163;
and medical care are considered by many to be ‘sacred values’—val- t = −1.716; P = 0.086; 95% CI, (−0.348, 0.023)). In sum, perceptions
ues that are absolute and not subject to trade-offs38. If health-related of injustice again served as a mediator of the effect of inequality
inequalities are seen as compromising these sacred values, a viola- framing on collective action support (indirect effect: B = −0.085;
tion of this kind could elicit severe moral outrage (that is, affective t = −2.157; P = 0.031; 95% CI, (−0.163–0.008)).
injustice), which could explain the motivation to act to help the dis-
advantaged39,40. Thus, in Study 5 we sought to disambiguate whether Discussion
the documented effect only occurs due to the perceived injustice Using diverse methodologies, representative national samples and
of health-based inequalities or whether the results replicate without preregistered hypotheses, the present research finds that Americans
the salience of health-related disparities. We hypothesized that the are more supportive of policy framed as reducing disadvantages
effect is not driven by health-related inequality framing in particu- faced by lower-class Americans, more supportive of action to
lar but by economic inequality framing more generally. reduce economic inequality framed as lower-class disadvantages
Study 5 (N = 1,112) was a preregistered experiment conducted and more engaged online with a lower-class disadvantage frame,
online on the Prolific Academic crowdsourcing platform41. The compared with an upper-class advantage frame or a neutral con-
methods were almost identical to those used in Study 3; however, the trol frame. In addition, a representative sample of lower-class
individuals were exposed to a shortened version of the lower-class and upper-class Americans and a large preregistered replication
disadvantage (versus upper-class advantage) infographic that did experiment reveal that the lower-class disadvantage (versus
not include the health-related piece of information, and individuals upper-class advantage) frame is perceived as more unjust and
from all social classes were included in the sample. that this difference in perceived injustice partially explains why the
NAture HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NATUre HUMAN BeHAvioUr Articles
disadvantage frame enhanced collective action support. While social into how perceptions of inequality and inequity may be interrelated
class and ideology are important individual-difference factors that reli- and impact one another.
ably predict reactions to economic inequality (see the Supplementary Overall, this work represents a large-scale investigation of eco-
Information for the full regression tables), we do not find consistent nomic inequality framing and the dissemination of information on
moderation by social class or political ideology. We intentionally the topic with emphasis on precision, generalizability and ecological
focused the outcome measures of Studies 2–5 on actions that are validity. While messages about economic inequality often highlight
independent of government involvement and instead are collec- the exuberant advantages and wealth of the 1%, the present research
tively enacted within one’s local community. The results of this reveals that emphasizing the struggles of the economically disad-
work are thus applicable to organizers, leaders and politicians who vantaged may be more effective in mobilizing support for collective
may be motivated to mobilize average Americans, independent of action to reduce inequality and provides insight into individuals’
their attitudes toward the government, political ideology and social engagement with one of the most challenging issues of our time.
class standing.
The present research is limited in important ways that should Methods
be addressed in future research. We provide an examination of the The Institutional Review Board at New York University approved all study
effects of both framing government policy (Study 1) and framing protocols. The participants in this research gave informed consent in accordance
with the guidelines set forth by the Institutional Review Board at New York
inequality itself (Studies 2–5), but more work is needed to clarify
University. All data collected by the authors and all data analyses were performed
how these effects may interrelate with one another. For example, blind to the conditions of the experiments.
similar to research conducted in the domain of race21,23, economic
inequality framed as upper-class advantages could elicit stronger Study 1. Participants. The data in Study 1 are based on telephone interviews
support for policies perceived to reduce advantages (for example, conducted between 15 and 19 January 2014 among a national sample of adults
living in all 50 US states and the District of Columbia (N = 1,504)28. We excluded
support for government action to reduce the gap between the rich
138 participants from the analysis due to missing data on one or more variables
and everyone else) than a lower-class disadvantage frame or no of interest. Thus, the final sample consisted of 1,384 participants (642 male, 742
frame. The sole other study24 that also investigated the effect of female; aged 18–97, mean = 50.46, s.d. = 17.91). In the final sample, 77.19% of the
economic inequality frames on support for government action pro- participants identified as white/Caucasian, 10.11% as Black/African American,
4.19% as Hispanic/Latino, 2.46% as Asian/Asian American, 1.26% as Native
vides support for this possibility. The authors found that framing
American/American Indian, 2.73% identified multiple ethnicities and 2.06%
economic inequality as rich people’s advantages (versus poor peo-
specified another ethnicity, didn’t know or refused to answer; 1.37% of the
ple’s disadvantages) led to more support for redistributive policies participants identified as lower class, 17.49% as lower-middle class, 48.27% as
among conservatives, and importantly, the redistributive policies in middle class, 23.63% as upper-middle class and 9.25% as upper class.
question were advantage-reducing: new tax brackets for people who
Materials and procedure. All interviews were conducted in English and
earn above US$1 million and US$5 million. While these results are
Spanish (depending on the respondent’s language preference). We conducted
interesting, more research is needed to understand why this would weighted analyses in Stata (version 15.1)43 to correct for selection probability
be the case (and why only for conservatives) and to understand the and non-response rates, which facilitates generalizable inferences. For detailed
relationship between government-based policy frames and eco- information on study weights and the full questionnaire, see the Pew Research
nomic inequality frames more generally. website44. The respondents were randomly assigned to one of two forms. In form 1
(the advantage frame), the respondents answered the following two questions: “How
The results of the present research are consistent across contexts,
much, if anything, should the government do to reduce the gap between the rich and
samples and outcome measures; however, the sizes of the effects of everyone else?” and “How much do you think government policies and programs
inequality framing on support for collective action and engagement can do to reduce the gap between the rich and everyone else in this country?”
are relatively modest (the semipartial correlations between informa- (1 = nothing at all, 2 = not much, 3 = some, 4 = a lot). The respondents randomly
tion framing and collective action support ranged from 0.07 to 0.27, assigned to form 2 (the disadvantage frame) answered the following two questions:
“How much, if anything, should the government do to reduce poverty?” and “How
which are considered small- to medium-sized effects in psychology42;
much do you think government policies and programs can do to reduce poverty in
in comparison, the semipartial correlations between collective action this country?” The participants also answered questions about their demographics
and ideology, our consistently strongest individual-difference pre- including age, gender, ethnicity, conservatism and social class categorization.
dictor, ranged from 0.22 to 0.35). This is perhaps unsurprising, given For consistency, we used the same demographic covariates (except ideology
the subtlety of the experimental manipulation—the information in Study 2b, which we did not collect) and a similar coding scheme for all
demographic covariates across studies. Age and political conservatism were
conveyed through the infographic and Facebook ads was the same,
included as continuous variables. We dummy-coded gender (0 = male, 1 = female),
with only a few words differing across conditions—and given the as well as ethnicity (using white people as the reference group). Two dummy-coded
relatively short study durations (and exposure time to information). variables reflected the respondents’ identification as part of the advantaged
However, even small to medium effect sizes are potentially impact- (upper-middle class and upper class) or disadvantaged (lower-middle class and
ful in the long run42. For example, in Study 4a, after 24 hours of data lower class) social classes, using the middle class as the reference group.
collection, the disadvantage ad had reached 623 more people than
Study 2a. Participants. The participants in Study 2a were 315 workers on the
the advantage ad. This number could increase exponentially with MTurk crowdsourcing platform31. We calculated power to detect a traditionally
each day as the audience reach of the ad continued to grow over small-to-medium effect size (d = 0.35). The power analysis revealed that a
time. Future research should test this possibility empirically, but the sample size of 260 participants was required to achieve 80% power. Anticipating
potential exclusions, we decided to collect a final sample of 300 participants.
potential cumulative impact of information framing over time may
The data were collected between 12 and 13 June 2017. We restricted our sample
be anything but trivial.
to participants from the United States and excluded 11 participants who were
The present work identified one underlying factor that helps not in the United States at the time of the study and 32 participants who were
explain why a disadvantage frame garners more support for taking not raised in the United States. After these exclusions, the final sample consisted
action: the disadvantage frame highlights the inequity of economic of 272 participants (167 female, 104 male, 1 other), aged between 18 and 70
(mean = 36.73, s.d. = 11.23). In the final sample, 73.90% of the participants
inequality. That is, we found that individuals across social classes
identified as white/Caucasian American, 9.56% as Black/African American, 4.41%
responded to economic inequality framed as disadvantages faced
as Latino/a/Hispanic, 5.88% as Asian American, 1.47% as Native American, 4.41%
by people living in poverty with greater reports that the inequality specified multiple ethnicities and 0.37% specified another ethnicity; 6.62% of the
is inequitable or unjust. While past research has typically focused participants identified as poor, 37.13% as working class, 45.59% as middle class,
on the framing of inequality (that is, disparities between groups) or 10.29% as upper-middle class and 0.37% as upper class.
inequity (that is, disparities that are described as unjust) separately,
Materials and procedure. The participants were randomly assigned to read
the present work suggests that inequality framing can impact ineq- an infographic (500 × 1,250 pixels) presenting information about economic
uity judgements. The literature would benefit by delving further inequality framed as either low-income disadvantages or high-income advantages.
NAture HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NATUre HUMAN BeHAvioUr
For example, in the advantage frame, the participants read that budgets of participants comprising equal numbers of people who identify as lower social
public schools in high-income neighbourhoods are three times higher than in class (poor and working class) and higher social class (upper-middle and upper
low-income neighbourhoods. In the disadvantage frame, the participants read that class). The TESS programme administrators allowed us to recruit a total of 1,800
budgets of public schools in low-income neighbourhoods are three times lower participants. The study was fielded between 8 February and 12 March 2018 with a
than in high-income neighbourhoods. In total, the infographic described five final sample of 1,816 adults, living in all 50 US states. Thirty-six participants were
pieces of information about economic inequality that were framed as high-income excluded from the analysis due to missing data on one of the variables of interest.
advantages or low-income disadvantages. After reading the infographic, the Thus, the final sample consisted of 1,780 participants (880 female, 900 male; aged
participants reported how likely they would be to share the infographic on social 18–90, mean = 47.49, s.d. = 16.23). In the final sample, 68.60% of participants
media and the likelihood that they would participate in a protest or demonstration identified as white/Caucasian American, 10.34% as Black/African American,
about reducing social class inequality in the United States (1 = extremely unlikely, 13.76% as Latino/a/Hispanic, 2.70% as Asian American, 3.15% specified multiple
7 = extremely likely). Both items were averaged into a collective action composite ethnicities and 1.46% specified another ethnicity. Because we were interested in
(r = 0.49, P < 0.001). We also assessed the individuals’ ideology and social class. responses from individuals identifying as lower class and upper class, this study
The social class category probe read as follows: “People talk about social classes specifically recruited participants who identified as poor and working class as
such as the poor, the working class, the middle class, the upper-middle class, well as those identifying as upper-middle and upper class (that is, the sample did
and the upper class. Which of these classes would you say you belong to?” This not include those who identified as middle class). In the final sample, 12.02% of
measure has been shown to intuitively and meaningfully capture group-based participants identified as poor, 44.66% as working class, 40.22% as upper-middle
class distinctions in the United States45–47. We include this social class category class and 3.09% as upper class.
measure in all remaining studies. The participants also reported their age, gender
Materials and procedure. The experimental design went through rigorous
and ethnicity. Conservatism was assessed with one item: “I endorse many aspects
prefielding peer review as part of the funding process (for the full dataset and
of conservative political ideology” (1 = strongly disagree, 7 = strongly agree).
proposal, see https://osf.io/nj5dx/). We conducted weighted analyses in Stata
Additional measures were included for exploratory purposes. We used the same
(version 15.1) to correct for selection probability and non-response rates. The
demographic covariates as in Study 1, and the covariates were coded similarly to
materials and procedure were similar to those of Study 2. The participants were
the coding scheme used in Study 1. As such, age and political conservatism were
included as continuous variables. We dummy-coded gender (0 = male, 1 = female), randomly assigned to read an infographic (500 × 1,250 pixels) highlighting
economic inequality in terms of either lower-class disadvantages or upper-class
as well as ethnicity (using white people as the reference group). Since we used a
advantages. The infographics were identical to those used in Study 2b (Fig. 3).
different social class category measure than in Study 1, we created two comparable
After the participants read the infographic, we assessed their support for collective
social class dummy variables (disadvantaged class = working class and poor;
action against economic inequality with the same two items as in Study 2 (that
advantaged class = upper-middle class and upper class), again using the middle
is, the likelihood of sharing the infographic on social media and the likelihood of
class as a reference group.
attending a protest against economic inequality). Both items were averaged into
Study 2b. Participants. One hundred participants were recruited in a public park to a collective action composite (weighted r = 0.62, P < 0.001). Injustice appraisals
were assessed with one item: “The level of social class inequality in the United
participate in Study 2b. We decided a priori to collect 100 participants, considering
the challenges of in-person field data collection and given that prior work States is unjust” (1 = strongly disagree, 7 = strongly agree). Additional measures
used similar sample sizes23. The data were collected between 30 August and 13 were included for exploratory purposes (see the full dataset and proposal). As in
Study 2, we assessed social class with the social class category measure. Again,
September 2017. Seven participants were excluded from the data analysis because
the participants reported their gender, age, ethnicity and political ideology
they conversed with another person while completing the survey, 15 participants
were excluded because they were not US citizens or residents (for example, foreign (1 = extremely liberal, 7 = extremely conservative). Since middle-class individuals
were not included in Study 3, we created a comparable binary social class dummy
tourists) and 3 participants were excluded because they had missing data on one of
the variables of interest. The final sample consisted of 75 participants (45 female, variable (0 = working class and poor, 1 = upper-middle class and upper class). We
used the same demographic covariates as in Study 2, and all covariates were coded
30 male), aged between 18 and 78 (mean = 23.20, s.d. = 9.12). In the final sample,
as in Study 2 (except the binary social class covariate).
38.66% of the participants identified as white/Caucasian American, 10.67% as
Black/African American, 13.33% as Latino/a/Hispanic, 24.00% as Asian American,
Study 4a. Participants. Our audience for Study 4a (that is, individuals who would
2.67% as Native American, 4.00% specified multiple ethnicities and 6.67%
be randomly assigned to the ad manipulation) was composed of adult Facebook
specified another ethnicity; 2.67% of the participants identified as poor, 14.67% as
users (aged 18+), located in the United States, who accessed the newsfeed feature
working class, 44.00% as middle class, 32.00% as upper-middle class and 6.67% as
on desktops to ensure that the ads appeared correctly. An individual user could
upper class.
see only one of the ad versions and, to count as a unique view, each user could see
it only once. A total of 72,324 users were presented with the ads between 4 and 5
Materials and procedure. The materials and procedure were similar to those
March 2019. We set our ad budget to US$150, which allowed for estimated 95%
of Study 2a. The research assistants approached individuals who were sitting
power to detect a frame effect (that is, the likelihood of detecting a difference in the
or walking in Washington Square Park in New York City and asked them to
ad versions, if there is one to detect, as calculated by Facebook).
participate in a short study in exchange for a snack of their choice (candy, water
or a can of soda). The participants were randomly assigned to view a laminated Materials and procedure. We used Facebook’s ad manager to create the three
infographic (10 × 15 inches) presenting information about economic inequality different advertisements to run a split test. In a split test, ads are tested against each
framed in terms of either lower-class disadvantages or upper-class advantages other to determine which ad performs best in terms of the marketing objective. We
(Fig. 1). The infographics were identical to those used in Study 2a, except that we selected reach as our marketing objective because we considered this to be the best
switched the words ‘high-income’ and ‘low-income’ for the words ‘upper social proxy for measuring the potential for collective engagement. This objective tests
class’ and ‘lower social class’ to test for the generalizability of language around which ad reaches the maximum number of unique users. The reach increases if
economic inequality. After the participants finished reading the infographic, they users (particularly those who have large friend networks) engage with the ad. The
were asked to fill out a paper questionnaire that included our dependent variables potential audience is divided into random, non-overlapping samples for accurate
of interest, among other exploratory questions. We assessed the participants’ split test results. At the end of the testing period, Facebook determines the winning
support for collective action against economic inequality with the same two items ad by calculating the cost for each ad to reach 1,000 people (Facebook can also
as in Study 2a (that is, the likelihood of sharing the infographic on social media declare no winner, if the ads perform equally well). In addition, Facebook reports
and the likelihood of attending a protest against economic inequality). Both items the absolute number of people reached by each ad. Precisely how Facebook’s
were averaged into a collective action composite (r = 0.44, P < 0.001). Demographic algorithm weights different engagement variables (for example, viewing, sharing
variables (age, gender and ethnicity) were assessed as in Study 2a, although we did and liking) to determine the winning ad is unknown to the public. For a recent
not assess ideology. As in Study 2a, we used the social class category measure45 to example of the complexity involved in split test optimization and attribution
assess social class. We used the same demographic covariates as in Study 2a (except algorithms, see ref. 48.
ideology, which we did not collect), and all covariates were coded as in Study 2a. As an ad format, we used a single-image advertisement, which included a
headline, descriptive text, an image and a website URL (Supplementary Fig. 4).
Study 3. Participants. The data for Study 3 were collected as part of the Each ad was labelled as sponsored content. We used the same free stock image and
Time-sharing Experiments for the Social Sciences programme (TESS; NSF grant NYU Qualtrics URL for each ad. If users clicked on the ad, they were forwarded to
no. 0818839, J. Freese and J. N. Druckman, principal investigators), which allowed a form, which included the contact information of the researchers.
us to conduct a study using NORC’s AmeriSpeak Panel to recruit a national sample
of upper-class and lower-class participants. Prior studies testing similar effects of Study 4b. Participants. Our audience for Study 4b was adult Facebook users (aged
racial inequality framing and/or moderation of membership in the advantaged/ 18+) located in the United States. As in Study 4a, each user saw one version of
disadvantaged groups reveal small to medium effect sizes (that is, ηp2 ranging the ad, once. On the basis of the results of Study 4a, we set the budget to US$225
from 0.02 to 0.09 and Cohen’s d from 0.29 to 0.49). A power analysis revealed that to aim to reach a sample of 100,000 people within a 24-hour period; at the end
a sample size of 1,302 participants was required for 95% power to detect a small of the 24 hours (from 2 to 3 April 2019), a total sample of 67,491 users had been
effect. To account for potential exclusions, we requested a national sample of 1,500 presented with the ads.
NAture HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NATUre HUMAN BeHAvioUr Articles
Materials and procedure. The materials were identical to those in Study 4a, except 13. McCall, L., Burk, D., Laperrière, M. & Richeson, J. A. Exposure to rising
that in the control frame, we removed any reference to poor or rich people (that inequality shapes Americans’ opportunity beliefs and policy support. Proc.
is, “between poor and rich Americans” was replaced with “between Americans Natl Acad. Sci. USA 114, 9593–9598 (2017).
based on income”; Fig. 5). Before the data collection began, we preregistered our 14. Levitin, M. The triumph of Occupy Wall Street. The Atlantic https://www.
procedure and our hypothesis that Facebook would determine the disadvantage ad theatlantic.com/ politics/archive/2015/06/ the-triumph-of-occupy-wall-
the winner on Open Science Framework (OSF; https://osf.io/ewt8r). street/395408/ (2015).
15. Tversky, A. & Kahneman, D. The framing of decisions and the psychology of
Study 5. Participants. In anticipation that the revised infographic used in Study choice. Science 211, 453–458 (1981).
5 might represent a somewhat weaker manipulation than the prior studies’ 16. Tversky, A. & Kahneman, D. in Choices, Values, and Frames (eds Kahneman,
infographic (it is shorter and includes fewer pieces of information about D. & Tversky, A.) 209–223 (Cambridge Univ. Press, 2000).
inequality), we chose to calculate power on the basis of a traditionally small effect 17. Chong, D. & Druckman, J. N. Framing theory. Annu. Rev. Polit. Sci. 10,
size (Cohen’s f2 = 0.010). A power analysis revealed that a sample size of 1,054 103–126 (2007).
participants was required for 90% power to detect a small effect of inequality 18. Swim, J. K. & Miller, D. L. White guilt: its antecedents and consequences
framing on support for collective action. Consistent with our previous studies, for attitudes toward affirmative action. Pers. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 25,
we planned to exclude participants who were not raised in the United States; we 500–514 (1999).
therefore oversampled and opened the survey to 1,100 participants. The initial 19. Iyer, A., Leach, C. W. & Crosby, F. J. White guilt and racial compensation: the
sample included 1,112 workers on the Prolific Academic crowdsourcing platform, benefits and limits of self-focus. Pers. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 29, 117–129 (2003).
who participated in the study on 19 February 2020. We excluded 65 participants 20. Powell, A. A., Branscombe, N. R. & Schmitt, M. T. Inequality as ingroup
who were not raised in the United States. After these exclusions, the final sample privilege or outgroup disadvantage: the impact of group focus on collective
consisted of 1,047 participants (558 female, 485 male, 4 other), aged between 18 guilt and interracial attitudes. Pers. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 31, 508–521 (2005).
and 82 (mean = 36.16, s.d. = 13.06). In the final sample, 73.93% of the participants 21. Lowery, B. S., Chow, R. M., Knowles, E. D. & Unzueta, M. M. Paying for
identified as white/Caucasian American, 7.45% as African American, 5.16% as positive group esteem: how inequity frames affect whites’ responses to
Latino/a/Hispanic, 5.92% as Asian American, 0.67% as Native American, 6.11% redistributive policies. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 102, 323–336 (2012).
specified multiple ethnicities and 0.76% specified another ethnicity; 8.89% of 22. Phillips, L. T. & Lowery, B. S. The hard-knock life? Whites claim hardships in
participants identified as poor, 37.00% as working class, 40.44% as middle class, response to racial inequity. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 61, 12–18 (2015).
13.00% as upper-middle class and 0.67% as upper class. 23. Lowery, B. S., Chow, R. M. & Crosby, J. R. Taking from those that have more
and giving to those that have less: how inequity frames affect corrections for
Materials and procedure. The materials were identical to those in Study 3, except that inequity. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 45, 375–378 (2009).
we removed one piece of information from the infographics—the item that described 24. Chow, R. M. & Galak, J. The effect of inequality frames on support for
differences in health outcomes (“Medical professionals spend more [less] time and redistributive tax policies. Psychol. Sci. 23, 1467–1469 (2012).
give more [less] accurate diagnoses when treating upper-class [lower-class] patients”). 25. Phillips, L. T. I ain’t no fortunate one: on the motivated denial of class and
Thus, the revised infographic presented four (not five, as was the case in Studies 2 race privilege. Acad. Manage. Proc. 2015, 19158 (2015).
and 3) pieces of information, framed as either upper-class advantages or lower-class 26. Brown, R. M. & Craig, M. A. Intergroup inequality heightens reports of
disadvantages (Supplementary Fig. 5). Before we began the data collection, we discrimination along alternative identity dimensions. Pers. Soc. Psychol. Bull.
preregistered our procedure and our hypothesis that the lower-class disadvantage 46, 869–884 (2020).
infographic (compared with the upper-class advantage infographic) would increase 27. van Zomeren, M., Postmes, T. & Spears, R. Toward an integrative social
support for collective action on OSF on 18 February 2020 (https://osf.io/btz96). identity model of collective action: a quantitative research synthesis of three
socio-psychological perspectives. Psychol. Bull. 134, 504–535 (2008).
Reporting Summary. Further information on research design is available in the 28. January 2014 Political Survey (Pew Research Center, 2014).
Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article. 29. Gilens, M. Affluence and Influence: Economic Inequality and Political Power in
America (Princeton Univ. Press, 2012).
Data availability 30. McCall, L. & Kenworthy, L. Americans’ social policy preferences in the era of
All data and materials have been made publicly available via the Open Science rising inequality. Perspect. Polit. 7, 459–484 (2009).
Framework and can be accessed at https://osf.io/f9sr7/. 31. Buhrmester, M., Kwang, T. & Gosling, S. D. Amazon’s Mechanical Turk: a
new source of inexpensive, yet high-quality, data? Perspect. Psychol. Sci. 6,
Received: 21 November 2019; Accepted: 25 September 2020; 3–5 (2011).
Published: xx xx xxxx 32. 2013–2017 American Community Survey 5-Year Estimates (U.S. Census
Bureau, 2017); https://factfinder.census.gov/ faces/nav/jsf/pages/ community_
facts.xhtml?src=bkmk
references 33. Tausch, N. et al. Explaining radical group behavior: developing emotion and
1. Piketty, T. in Inequality in the 21st Century (eds Grusky, D. & Hill, J.) 43–48 efficacy routes to normative and nonnormative collective action. J. Pers. Soc.
(Avalon, 2017). Psychol. 101, 129–148 (2011).
2. Wilkinson, R. G. & Pickett, K. The Spirit Level: Why Equality Is Better for 34. Brown, R. L. Assessing specific mediational effects in complex theoretical
Everyone (Penguin, 2010). models. Struct. Equ. Modeling 4, 142–156 (1997).
3. Sanders, B. Issues: income and wealth inequality. Bernie Sanders https:// 35. Gunzler, D., Chen, T., Wu, P. & Zhang, H. Introduction to mediation
berniesanders.com/issues/income-and-wealth-inequality/ (2017). analysis with structural equation modeling. Shanghai Arch. Psychiatry 25,
4. Alvaredo, F., Chancel, L., Piketty, T., Saez, E. & Zucman, G. World Inequality 390–394 (2013).
Report: Executive Summary (World Inequality Database, 2018); https:// 36. Perrin, A. & Anderson, M. Share of U.S. Adults Using Social Media, Including
wir2018.wid.world/files/download/wir2018-summary-english.pdf Facebook, Is Mostly Unchanged Since 2018 (Pew Research Center, 2019);
5. Lawson, M., et al. Public Good or Private Wealth. (Oxfam GB, 2019). https://www.pewresearch.org/ fact-tank/2019/04/10/
6. Telford, T. Income inequality in America is the highest it’s been since share-of-u-s-adults-using- social-media-including- facebook-is-mostly-
Census Bureau started tracking it, data shows. The Washington Post unchanged-since-2018/
https://www.washingtonpost.com/ business/2019/09/26/ income-inequality- 37. Glenza, J. Rich Americans live up to 15 years longer than poor peers, studies
america- highest-its-been-since- census-started-tracking- it-data-show/ find. The Guardian https://www.theguardian.com/ us-news/2017/apr/06/
(26 September 2019). us-healthcare-wealth- income-inequality-lifespan (6 April 2017).
7. Hastings, O. P. Who feels it? Income inequality, relative deprivation, and 38. Tetlock, P. E. Thinking the unthinkable: sacred values and taboo cognitions.
financial satisfaction in U.S. states, 1973–2012. Res. Soc. Stratif. Mobil. 60, Trends Cogn. Sci. 7, 320–324 (2003).
1–15 (2019). 39. Montada, L. & Schneider, A. Justice and emotional reactions to the
8. Buttrick, N. R. & Oishi, S. The psychological consequences of income disadvantaged. Soc. Justice Res. 3, 313–344 (1989).
inequality. Soc. Pers. Psychol. Compass 11, e12304 (2017). 40. van Zomeren, M., Postmes, T. & Spears, R. On conviction’s collective
9. Oishi, S., Kesebir, S. & Diener, E. Income inequality and happiness. Psychol. consequences: integrating moral conviction with the social identity model of
Sci. 22, 1095–1100 (2011). collective action. Br. J. Soc. Psychol. 51, 52–71 (2012).
10. Jost, J. T., Banaji, M. R. & Nosek, B. A. A decade of system justification 41. Peer, E., Brandimarte, L., Samat, S. & Acquisti, A. Beyond the Turk:
theory: accumulated evidence of conscious and unconscious bolstering of the alternative platforms for crowdsourcing behavioral research. J. Exp. Soc.
status quo. Polit. Psychol. 25, 881–919 (2004). Psychol. 70, 153–163 (2017).
11. Bartels, L. M. Unequal Democracy: The Political Economy of the New Gilded 42. Funder, D. C. & Ozer, D. J. Evaluating effect size in psychological research:
Age (Princeton Univ. Press, 2010). sense and nonsense. Adv. Methods Pract. Psychol. Sci. 2, 156–168 (2019).
12. Savani, K. & Rattan, A. A choice mind-set increases the acceptance and 43. Graubard, B. I. & Korn, E. L. Modelling the sampling design in the analysis
maintenance of wealth inequality. Psychol. Sci. 23, 796–804 (2012). of health surveys. Stat. Methods Med. Res. 5, 263–281 (1996).
NAture HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NATUre HUMAN BeHAvioUr
44. Most See Inequality Growing, but Partisans Differ over Solutions: About the K. Brennan, C. Hoffman, C. Myers, D. Baltiansky, J. Worrall, P. Ponce and A. Weinberg
Survey (Pew Research Center, 2014); https://www.people-press.org/ for helping with the data collection. We also thank L. T. Phillips for her insightful
2014/01/23/about-the- survey-147/ comments on an earlier version of this manuscript.
45. Dietze, P. & Knowles, E. D. Social class and the motivational relevance of
other human beings: evidence from visual attention. Psychol. Sci. 27, Author contributions
1517–1527 (2016).
P.D. and M.A.C. designed the experiments, collected and analysed the data, and wrote
46. Jackman, M. R. & Jackman, R. W. Class Awareness in the United States (Univ.
the manuscript.
of California Press, 1983).
47. Dietze, P. & Knowles, E. D. Social class predicts emotion perception and Competing interests
perspective-taking performance in adults. Pers. Soc. Psychol. Bull. https://doi.
The authors declare no competing interests.
org/10.1177/0146167220914116 (2020).
48. Lakhotia, K. & Kempe, D. Approximation Algorithms for Coordinating Ad
Campaigns on Social Networks. Proceedings of the 28th ACM International Additional information
Conference on Information and Knowledge Management (eds Zhu, W. et al.) Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/
339–348 (Association for Computing Machinery, 2019). s41562-020-00988-4.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to P.D.
Acknowledgements
Peer review information Primary handling editor: Aisha Bradshaw.
We thank the reviewers of our Time-sharing Experiments for the Social Sciences (TESS)
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
application for their helpful comments as well as the TESS programme itself for support
in Study 3. M.A.C. acknowledges support from the National Science Foundation (grant Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
no. NSF-BCS-1823840). The funder had no role in study design, data collection and published maps and institutional affiliations.
analysis, decision to publish or preparation of the manuscript. We thank M. Lee, © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2020
NAture HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
1
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Corresponding author(s): Pia Dietze
Last updated by author(s): Aug 12, 2020
Reporting Summary
Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency
in reporting. For further information on Nature Research policies, see Authors & Referees and the Editorial Policy Checklist.
Statistics
For all statistical analyses, confirm that the following items are present in the figure legend, table legend, main text, or Methods section.
n/a Confirmed
The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
A statement on whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided
Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.
A description of all covariates tested
A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
A full description of the statistical parameters including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient)
AND variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)
For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted
Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.
For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated
Our web collection on statistics for biologists contains articles on many of the points above.
Software and code
Policy information about availability of computer code
Data collection See main text for details.
Study 1 and Study 3: We do not know the specific software that was used to collect data (the data was collected by a third party).
Study 2a: We used Qualtrics software to collect the data.
Study 2b: Data was collected with paper and pen. After the data collection was finished, research assistants entered the data into
Microsoft Excel.
Study 4: We used Facebook's Ads platform to collect the data.
Study 5: We used Qualtrics software to collect the data.
Data analysis All statistical analyses were conducted using Stata 15.1. All code can be accessed at https://osf.io/f9sr7/ .
For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors/reviewers.
We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Research guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.
Data
Policy information about availability of data
All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable:
- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets
- A list of figures that have associated raw data
- A description of any restrictions on data availability
All data and materials have been made publicly available via the Open Science Framework and can be accessed at https://osf.io/f9sr7/.
2
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Field-specific reporting
Please select the one below that is the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.
Life sciences Behavioural & social sciences Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences
For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/documents/nr-reporting-summary-flat.pdf
Behavioural & social sciences study design
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
Study description We collected quantitative data in all studies.
Research sample See main text for details on research samples.
Study 1 and Study 3: Nationally-representative samples of adults in the United States
Study 2a: Online sample of American adults collected on Amazon’s Mechanical Turk (MTurk) crowdsourcing platform
Study 2b: Adult sample recruited in a public park in New York City
Study 4: Online sample of Facebook users collected via Facebook's Ads platform
Study 5: Online sample of American adults collected on Prolific Academic crowdsourcing platform
Sampling strategy See main text for details on sampling strategy.
Study 1 and Study 3: Representative samples collected through Pew Research and NORC’s AmeriSpeak Panel
Study 2: Convenience sample
Study 4: Convenience sample
Study 5: Convenience sample
Data collection See main text for details on data collection.
Experimenters were blind to hypotheses and conditions.
Computers were used to gather data for all studies except Study 2b, in which we used pen and paper to collect data.
In Study 2b, some of the participants were around other people during data collection because we collected data in a public park
(participants who conversed with another person during the study were excluded from data analysis, see main text).
Timing Study 1: Data collected between January 15-19, 2014
Study 2a: Data collected between June 12-13, 2017
Study 2b: Data collected between August 30 - September 15, 2017
Study 3: Data collected between February 8 - March 12, 2018
Study 4a: Data collected between March 4-5, 2019
Study 4b: Data collected between April 2-3, 2019
Study Study 1: Data collected between January 15-19, 2014
Study 2a: Data collected between June 12-13, 2017
Study 2b: Data collected between August 30 - September 15, 2017
Study 3: Data collected between February 8 - March 12, 2018
Study 4a: Data collected between March 4-5, 2019
Study 4b: Data collected between April 2-3, 2019
Study 5: Data collected on February 19, 2020
Data exclusions All data exclusions are described in detail in the main text .
Non-participation Study 1: Response rates for Pew Research polls typically range from 5% to 15%; the response rate is the percentage of known or
assumed residential households for which a completed interview was obtained
Study 2a and Study 2b: We do not have information on response rates
Study 3: Weighted Recruitment rate: 33.7 %; Weighted Household retention rate: 88.1%; Survey completion rate: 64.9%; Weighted
cumulative response rate: 6.6%
Study 4a and Study 4b: We do not have information on response rates
Study 5: We do not have information on response rates
Randomization Participants were randomly assigned to experimental condition using computer algorithms (e.g., Qualtrics or the Excel random number
generator).
Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods
We require information from authors about some types of materials, experimental systems and methods used in many studies. Here, indicate whether each material,
system or method listed is relevant to your study. If you are not sure if a list item applies to your research, read the appropriate section before selecting a response.
3
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Materials & experimental systems Methods
n/a Involved in the study n/a Involved in the study
Antibodies ChIP-seq
Eukaryotic cell lines Flow cytometry
Palaeontology MRI-based neuroimaging
Animals and other organisms
Human research participants
Clinical data
Human research participants
Policy information about studies involving human research participants
Population characteristics See above
Recruitment Study 1: Recruitment was managed by Pew Research.
Study 2a: We recruited participants on Amazon’s Mechanical Turk (MTurk) crowdsourcing platform
Study 2b: The sample was recruited in a public park in New York City
Study 3: Recruitment managed by NORC’s AmeriSpeak Panel
Study 4: The online sample was recruited on Facebook via Facebook's Ads platform
Study 5: We recruited participants on Prolific Academic crowdsourcing platform
Advantages and disadvantages of the different recruitment strategies are discussed in the main text
Ethics oversight New York University's Institutional Review Board (UCAIHS) approved all studies:
Study 1: Analyzing public-use, de-identified datasets is not considered human-subjects research by UCAIHS and required no
further approval
Study 2: IRB-FY2016-1322
Study 3: IRB-FY2018-1548
Study 4: IRB-FY2018-2070
Study 5: IRB-FY2016-1322
Note that full information on the approval of the study protocol must also be provided in the manuscript.