Articles
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-019-0688-1
Reducing gunshot victimization in high-risk social
networks through direct and spillover effects
George Wood 1,2 and Andrew V. Papachristos 2,3*
More than 60,000 people are victimized by gun violence each year in the United States. A large share of victims cluster in
bounded and identifiable social networks. Despite a growing number of violence reduction programmes that leverage networks
to broaden programmatic effects, there is little evidence that reductions in victimization are achieved through spillover effects
on the peers of participants. This study estimates the direct and spillover effects of a gun violence field intervention in Chicago.
Using a quasi-experimental design, we test whether a desistance-based programme reduced gunshot victimization among
2,349 participants. The study uses co-arrest network data to further test spillover effects on 6,132 non-participants. Direct
effects were associated with a 3.2-percentage point reduction in victimization among seeds over two years, while potential
spillover was associated with a 1.5-percentage point reduction among peers. Findings suggest that peer influence and the struc-
ture of networks might be leveraged to amplify gun violence reduction efforts.
I
n 2016, more than 14,000 people in the United States were shot While mounting evidence suggests that gun violence reduction
and killed by another person, while another 70,000 were wounded programmes focusing on small geographic areas or a small num-
by guns in assaults1,2. Gun violence and its effects are not evenly ber of groups are effective in reducing aggregate levels of gunshot
distributed across the population, however. The trauma and con- violence15,16, we know little about the magnitude of programme
sequences associated with gun violence disproportionately affect effects on treated individuals and even less about whether victim-
young minority men in socially and economically disadvantaged ization can be reduced through network spillover effects. To date,
neighbourhoods1,3–5. Recent research demonstrates that gunshot most evaluations have analysed aggregate levels of gun violence
victimization further concentrates in small, circumscribed social either in geographic regions or among specific groups or gangs in
networks within high-risk populations6–8. For example, 70% of all which a programme has been implemented, comparing the fre-
victims of non-fatal gunshot injuries in Chicago could be located quency of victimization before and after implementation17. Such
in a co-arrest network comprising less than 5% of the city’s popula- aggregated approaches are limited in estimating the magnitude of
tion7. A study of a high-crime Boston community found that nearly the effect on treated individuals because they capture victimization
85% of all victims of fatal and non-fatal gunshot injuries could outcomes among individuals unaffected by the programme while
be located in a network comprising 763 connected individuals8. being affected by shifts in the incidence of gunshot violence caused
Importantly, the structure of such social networks and individuals’ by exogenous, non-programme-related factors18,19. In addition, it
placement within them can severely elevate the risk of victimization has been difficult to test whether programmes reduce victimization
and contribute to the diffusion of violence. Cascades of gun violence among untreated but potentially affected individuals through spill-
within high-risk networks starting with one victim whose associate over effects, largely because it has been infeasible to identify such
is subsequently victimized, and so on, accounted for 63% of victim- individuals and difficult to establish a causal framework for estimat-
izations over an eight-year period in Chicago9. ing spillover20. As such, a central question of precisely how violence
The concentration of gun violence in social networks has reduction programmes reduce the incidence of gunshot victimiza-
implications for gun violence reduction efforts to the extent that tion remains open.
identifying and leveraging such networks might enhance violence The intervention we report attempted to reduce gunshot vic-
prevention and reduction practices. Many violence reduction timization among high-risk participants, as well as among their
efforts already implicitly or explicitly rely on this sort of networked unassigned peers, through spillover effects. The programme is an
logic, by concentrating efforts on high-risk individuals and groups ‘induction intervention’21,22 that attempted to activate peer-to-peer
within small geographic areas. The central premise of such pro- diffusion of a desistance message by encouraging intervention par-
grammes is that gun violence might be reduced by dissuading ticipants to spread a behavioural stimulus.
specific individuals or groups from involvement in violence, by pro- For the intervention, a group comprising law enforcement, com-
viding information, resources, mediation or other services directly munity members and social service agencies carried out an exercise
to those at the highest levels of involvement in gun crime and vio- to map violent conflicts, disputes and episodes of gun violence to
lence10,11. Furthermore, some programmes implicitly seek to engen- identify individuals at high risk of involvement in group-involved
der spillover effects on unassigned individuals by placing outreach gun violence23. These individuals were subsequently invited to
workers and mediators into the networks of individuals involved in attend a one-hour meeting24,25. At these meetings, which were held
violent disputes12,13, or else by encouraging individuals who are part in-person at a public location such as a local park district, school
of interventions to propagate a programme’s message within their or community centre, participants engaged in a four-stage pro-
personal networks14. cess. First, law enforcement officers delivered a message that the
1Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA. 2Institute for Policy Research, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA.
3Department of Sociology, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA. *e-mail: avp@northwestern.edu
NAtuRe HumAN BeHAViouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles Nature HumaN BeHaviour
individual is at acute risk of victimization and that further involve- a b
ment in gun violence would be met with coordinated enforcement Assignment to programme Peer identification
action and criminal justice sanctions. Second, community represen-
Compliant
tatives emphasized that the participant is valued by their community
and extended an invitation for the participant to become involved Peer
in positive community activities to avoid victimization. Third, in
a process akin to perspective-taking26, victims or relatives of vic- Non-compliant
tims of gunshot violence recounted the effects and trauma associ- Seed
ated with gun victimization. Lastly, participants were offered direct
links to local social service provision. Throughout the meeting, par-
ticipants were encouraged to spread the desistance and community
message, perspective-taking and service provision information to
their peers27–29. See Supplementary Notes for further programme
Co-arrest
information. Invited individuals may or may not attend the meet-
ing, and are designated compliant or non-compliant accordingly. c
There are no punitive consequences for non-compliance. Comparison
To estimate the effects of these meetings, we conducted a quasi- Seeds (compliance effect) Peers (spillover effect)
experimental evaluation using participation data and administra-
C = 0
tive data. We first identified those individuals who were invited to, i C = 0
j
and attended, a meeting (n = 1,642) and those who were invited, but C = 1
i
not did not attend, a meeting (n = 707), whom we call compliant
Victimization
and non-compliant seeds, respectively. We then constructed a co- (two years post) C = 1
arrest network30 around each compliant and non-compliant seed, j
where each seed is connected to all non-invited individuals along-
side whom they were arrested in the three years before the meeting. Fig. 1 | Design of the intervention evaluation. a, Individuals at high risk
We define an exposure mapping31,32 in which unassigned individu- of gunshot victimization (seeds) are assigned to the programme and
als are designated as either compliant peers (n = 3,034) if they are classified as either compliant or non-compliant. b, Each seed is identified
connected to a compliant seed—and therefore potentially exposed in the Chicago co-arrest network. We apply our exposure mapping,
to the intervention message—or non-compliant peers (n = 3,098) classifying individuals adjacent to a compliant seed as compliant peers and
if they are connected to a non-compliant seed (see Supplementary those adjacent to a non-compliant seed as non-compliant peers.
Table 1 for a summary of seed and peer units’ covariate profiles). To c, The compliance effect is based on a comparison of victimization
estimate the main effect of the meeting, we compared victimization outcomes in the two years after assignment for seeds in the compliant and
outcomes in the two years following invitation to the programme non-compliant conditions. The spillover effect is based on the equivalent
for the compliant seeds against the non-compliant seeds. To esti- comparison among peers.
mate the spillover effect, we compared victimization outcomes in
the two years after potential exposure to the intervention message
for the compliant peers against the non-compliant peers. Figure 1 To address this problem of confounding, we estimate the effect
shows the identification of peer units and the comparisons for the of compliance on victimization outcomes conditional on observed
main effect and spillover effect. For each peer, potential exposure covariates using Bayesian additive regression trees (BART). BART
to spillover begins on the day that the seed to whom that peer is has been shown to be more accurate than propensity score-based
connected was invited to attend a meeting. Finally, to test the spill- estimators in estimating treatment effects under confounding, par-
over effect under additional exposure to programme participants, ticularly when the parametric relationship between the outcome,
we compared victimization outcomes for peers with connections to treatment and confounders is unknown33. This is in part because
two or more compliant seeds and those connected to two or more BART naturally allows for possible interaction effects and nonlin-
non-compliant seeds. earities in this relationship33–35. We then compare the BART estimate
By linking programme assignment data with administrative data to a simple difference-in-means (DIM). We use this comparison to
on the networks of participants and their associates, we are able to assess the proportion of the observed difference in victimization
map potential pathways of diffusion and thereby determine whether outcomes that is attributed to the compliance and spillover effects
gunshot victimization is reduced among individuals assigned to the after adjusting for confounding due to selection into compliance.
programme, and among individuals indirectly exposed to treat- Finally, as an extension, we use the flexible BART approach to esti-
ment through their network connections. One research design fea- mate the heterogeneity of the compliance effect. In Supplementary
ture warrants further exposition. The programme uses non-random Results, we show further estimates of the compliance and spill-
assignment and selects individuals deemed to be at high risk of vic- over effects using a more conventional logistic regression model
timization. As such, we could not compare those assigned to attend with unit re-weighting based on entropy balancing (EBAL)36. See
a meeting against a random selection from the wider Chicago popu- Methods for further design and estimation details.
lation (see Supplementary Results for details). Exploiting non-com-
pliance with the programme permits a comparison among units Results
deemed to be similarly high-risk ex ante. However, we cannot be Compliance effect on victimization. Compliance reduced the
certain that the choice to comply or not comply with the interven- probability of gunshot victimization in the two years after attend-
tion is unconfounded with the risk of victimization. In estimating ing an intervention meeting. The share of non-compliant individu-
the effects of the intervention on compliant seeds, we must therefore als who were victimized in the two years following non-attendance
account for the probability of selection into the compliant or non- was 18.1%; for compliant individuals, the corresponding share was
compliant condition. Moreover, because the risk of victimization 10.6%. From the BART model, we estimate that compliance caused
among connected peers and seeds is plausibly associated, we must a median reduction in the chance of victimization of −3.2 percent-
also account for the probability of being connected to a compliant age points (Fig. 2; mean estimate, −3.2, credible interval, −4.9 to
or non-compliant seed. −1.4). The magnitude of this reduction is substantially larger in
NAtuRe HumAN BeHAViouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Nature HumaN BeHaviour Articles
spillover effect estimates (estimate, −1.2, confidence interval, −2.7
4 to 0.3, P = 0.1178) in the EBAL model (see Supplementary Results).
2 Heterogeneity of compliance and spillover effects. To assess the
extent to which the compliance and spillovers effect resulted in
0 similar reductions in the risk of victimization among all compliant
seeds and compliant peers, we used the BART models to estimate the –2
effect for each seed and peer as a function of their baseline covari-
–4 ate profile. This is a natural extension of BART, which allows for
variation in the treatment effect across covariates33,35. The primary
–6 effect of compliance on the probability of victimization ranges from
−5.8 to −1.0 percentage points, at the extremes (Fig. 3a). Overall,
–8 however, our analysis shows little heterogeneity in the compliance
effect, with 46.1% of units falling within ±0.5 percentage points of
–10
the median estimated compliance effect and 74.9% of units falling
–12 within ±1 percentage point. Similarly, the spillover effect of compli-
ance is largely homogenous (Fig. 3b), ranging from −3.6 to −0.0
DIM BART
with 61.7 and 87.0% falling within ±0.5 and ±1 percentage points
Model
of the median spillover effect, respectively. Thus, there is little evi-
dence to suggest that the primary compliance and spillover effects
are moderated by the covariate profile of compliant seeds or peers
to a degree that would warrant restructuring of the intervention for
particular subgroups of assigned individuals.
Spillover effect of multiple exposures. Our results so far show that
compliance reduces the probability of victimization among seeds
and that compliance spillover effects reduce the probability of vic-
timization among peers. As a further test of the spillover effects of
compliance, we compared victimization outcomes among the sub-
set of peers with exposure to either two compliant seeds (n = 200)
the DIM model (estimate, −7.5, confidence interval, −10.7 to −4.3, or two non-compliant seeds (n = 350). In the two years following
P < 0.001), which does not adjust for selection into compliance and exposure, 12% of peers with connections to two compliant seeds
simply reflects the 7.5-percentage point difference between com- and 10.6% of peers connected to two non-compliant seeds were vic-
pliant and non-compliant units in post-intervention victimization timized (see Supplementary Results). Thus, the victimization rate
outcomes. The reduced effect size estimate in the BART model was higher among peers with a double exposure to compliant seeds
shows that adjusting for selection into compliance accounts for part than among those with a double exposure to non-compliant seeds.
of this difference in observed victimization outcomes. The BART Additionally, the incidence of victimization was higher among peers
estimate attributes 42.6% of the difference in victimization out- with exposure to two seeds than among those with a single exposure
comes to the effect of compliance. The estimated reduction in vic- (Supplementary Fig. 3). Peers with two or more exposures exhibit
timization caused by compliance is supported in the EBAL model a different pre-intervention covariate profile in terms of age, gen-
(see Supplementary Results). der and gang membership, as well as having a higher incidence of
victimization and arrest among their co-arrestees than peers with
Spillover effect on victimization. Analysis of peer outcomes a single exposure. From BART Model 1, we estimate that peers
showed that units with a social connection to a compliant seed had with a double-compliant exposure had a median −0.1 percentage
a lower rate of victimization than those with a connection to a non- points lower probability of victimization (mean, 0.0, credible inter-
compliant seed. In the two years following potential exposure to val, −0.6 to 1.8). However, the credible interval for the estimated
programme spillover effects, the share of non-compliant peers vic- effect includes zero with considerable posterior mass at both posi-
timized was 9.7% compared to 7.5% among compliant peers. From tive and negative values (Supplementary Fig. 4). We therefore have
the BART model, we estimate that compliance spillover caused a insufficient information to ascertain whether double exposure to
median reduction in the probability of victimization of 1.5 percent- compliant seeds increases, reduces or does not affect the probability
age points (Fig. 2; mean estimate, −1.4, credible interval, −2.5 to of victimization relative to double exposure to non-compliant seeds.
−0.2). The magnitude of the spillover effect is approximately 0.47
as large as the primary compliance effect. The effect size in the Expected victimizations under the counterfactual. The parameter
unadjusted DIM model (estimate, −2.2, confidence interval, −3.6 estimates support the idea that the violence reduction programme
to −0.8, P = 0.0024) reflects the raw 2.2-percentage points differ- reduced the probability of victimization among both seeds and
ence in victimization outcomes. The effect size is tempered in the peers. However, the magnitude of the reduction among peers that is
BART model, which attributed 69% of the difference in outcomes to attributable to spillover effects is small in absolute terms: a median
the effects of intervention spillover. The attribution of some of the reduction in the probability of victimization of 1.5 percentage points
difference in victimization to pre-intervention differences between (Fig. 2), with 25.7% of peers experiencing a spillover effect that is
compliant and non-compliant peers, rather than to spillover effects, smaller in magnitude (that is, closer to zero) than one percentage
implies that differential selection into compliance among seeds is point (Fig. 2). Moreover, the P value for the spillover effect estimate
informative for characterizing the risk of peer victimization. That is >0.05 in the EBAL model, which imposes a stronger parametric
is, both non-compliant seeds and the peers of non-compliant seeds form on the relationship between victimization, compliance and
appear to have a higher baseline risk of victimization than their com- the observed covariates than the BART model (see Supplementary
pliant counterparts. Notably, although similar in magnitude to the Results). To put the magnitude of this effect into context, 174 of
BART estimate, there is considerably greater uncertainty around the the 1,642 seeds who complied with the intervention were victimized
noitazimitciv
fo
ytilibaborp
no
tceffe
egarevA
)stniop
egatnecrep(
Compliance effect
Spillover effect
Fig. 2 | the estimated effect of compliance on programme seeds
(n = 2,349) and the estimated effect of compliance spillover on
programme peers (n = 6,132). DIM is the mean difference in the two-
year probability of victimization for individuals in the compliant versus
non-compliant condition. The BART model is a non-parametric estimate
of the conditional average treatment effect of compliance, accounting
for observed covariates. A 95% confidence interval is shown for the DIM
estimate, and a 95% credible interval for the BART estimate.
NAtuRe HumAN BeHAViouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles Nature HumaN BeHaviour
10 10
5 5
0 0
–5 –5
–10 –10
–15 –15
–20 –20
Top 25 50 75 100 Top 25 50 75 100
Seed units ranked by effect size (%) Peer units ranked by effect size (%)
in the two years after compliance. In the counterfactual condition in spillover effect among the subset of peers who were connected to
which these seeds did not comply, our BART effect estimate implies two or more compliant intervention participants. While the absence
that 227 (lower bound, 196, upper bound, 255) might have been vic- of a detectable effect may be due to the relatively small number of
timized. For the compliance spillover effect, 228 of the 3,034 peers peers in this subset, it could also be due to a difference between indi-
of compliant seeds were victimized in the two years after poten- viduals with exposure to two or more seeds and those with a single
tial exposure to the programme. In the counterfactual condition exposure. For example, individuals with greater seed exposure may
in which those peers were connected to non-compliant seeds, our be involved in higher-risk networks, as indicated by the greater inci-
BART effect estimate implies that 273 (lower bound, 234, upper dence of victimization among peers with two exposures compared
bound, 304) might have been victimized by gunshot violence. Our to those with one, and they may be less amenable to a behavioural
estimates therefore indicate that 53 victimizations were averted as shift in response to the intervention (see Supplementary Results).
a product of the primary effect and a further 45 through spillover Unlike many public health interventions37, gun violence reduc-
effects, albeit with considerable uncertainty around these estimates. tion programmes seldom utilize formal network metrics for the
In summary, these findings imply that, by holding call-in meetings selection of participants. Consistent with several recent evaluations
with 1,642 individuals in high-risk social networks for whom we of networked interventions31,38–40, our findings suggest that engag-
could identify 3,034 peers, the programme contributed to approxi- ing the social networks of intervention participants can yield strong
mately 98 fewer gunshot victimizations. direct effects as well as a potential amplification of programme
effects via treatment spillover. While the intervention directly
Discussion treated 1,642 individuals, the structure of the co-arrest network
Gun violence prevention, intervention and treatment programmes expanded the potential reach of the programme to an additional
are increasingly directing their efforts toward the small networks 3,034 indirectly treated individuals—a 1.8-fold expansion of the
and geographical areas disproportionately impacted by gunshot affected population. In total, our findings imply that direct and
victimization and associated trauma. Although a networked logic spillover effects resulted in approximately 98 fewer gunshot victim-
drives many such programmes, most evaluations to date have ana- izations over two years. However, it is worth noting that co-arrests
lysed changes in aggregate rates of victimization or crime before are unlikely to capture all peers of programme participants, which
and after programme implementation, paying little attention to the could result in the total reduction being underestimated. Moreover,
direct effects on individuals who are assigned to such programmes because it is not possible to test whether the observed covariates
let alone the spillover effects that are theoretically deemed to be fully account for selection into non-compliance, we cannot rule out
responsible for reductions in gun violence. the possibility that observed differences in victimization between
This study analysed a field intervention in Chicago that focused compliant and non-compliant seeds could be due to factors outside
on high-risk individuals who were actively involved in ongoing of the programme effects. Such factors could extend to the differ-
disputes. Using a quasi-experimental design and data on co-arrest ence in victimization between compliant and non-compliant peers
network ties, we evaluated the direct effect on those participating if peers are more likely to associate with seeds who have a similar
in the intervention as well as the spillover effect on their unas- latent risk of victimization41. Our findings nevertheless imply that
signed co-arrest associates. Our findings show that participation in further resources should be allocated to non-compliant individuals
the intervention reduced gunshot victimization by 3.2 percentage who exhibit considerably higher rates of victimization.
points over two years. At the same time, potential spillover reduced Programmes like the one studied here are not a panacea for gun
victimization by 1.5 percentage points among the unassigned asso- violence. Based on the mean two-year incidence of gunshot victim-
ciates of intervention participants. However, we did not detect a ization in Chicago during the period 2010–2016, the programme
tceffe
tnemtaert
lanoitidnoC
noitazimitciv
fo
ytilibaborp
no
)stniop
egatnecrep(
Unit CATE with 95% CI
a b
Median CATE on seeds 95% CI Median CATE on peers 95% CI
Fig. 3 | a,b, The CATE of compliance on the probability of victimization for programme seeds (n = 2,349) (a) and compliance spillover on the probability of
victimization for peers (n = 6,132) (b) . For each individual, the CATE is estimated as a function of their covariate profile using the fitted BART models for
the compliance and spillover effects; 95% credible intervals (CI) are shown for each CATE, and the median CATE and associated 95% CI are also shown.
NAtuRe HumAN BeHAViouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Nature HumaN BeHaviour Articles
effects equate to a reduction of roughly 1.5% in city-wide gun vic- Suitability of the observed covariates. The identification strategy is valid if
timization. However, the results suggest that violence reduction the observed covariates X i provide an admissible back-door adjustment from
the victimization outcome to compliance status49. The back-door adjustment
programmes can have a substantial impact on the incidence of vic-
is admissible if there are no unmeasured confounders of victimization and
timization among targeted high-risk individuals and their peers. compliance. In practice, it is not possible to demonstrate this admissibility. As
The programme is scalable and, importantly, it minimizes tradi- our outcome is gunshot victimization, we included several covariates related to
tional law enforcement responses that can have a negative impact gunshot violence50 and violence more generally, all measured pre-intervention.
on communities42, especially incarceration. Our evidence suggests These include gunshot victimizations; arrests on violence-related charges,
including first- and second-degree assault; and arrests on weapons-related charges,
that gun violence interventions might amplify programmatic effects
including carrying weapons without a permit and ownership of illegal firearms.
if designed more explicitly around maximizing network diffu- To account for the risk level in the co-arrest network surrounding each unit, we
sion21,43,44. For example, street outreach13 or hospital intervention included counts of victimizations, arrests, arrests on violence-related charges
programmes11 might use formal network analytics to guide their and arrests on weapons-related charges among adjacent units. To account for
the connectivity of each unit, we also included degree (that is, the number of
efforts and place workers into those parts of a network or neigh-
co-arrestees). Finally, we included age, race, gender and gang status, which are
bourhood experiencing acute rates of gun violence.
related to the incidence of gunshot victimization51–54. We assumed that this broad
Field interventions aimed at high-risk social networks have array of covariates adequately accounts for confounding due to selection into the
become a key policy tool for reducing gunshot violence. Studying compliant or non-compliant conditions. However, we cannot rule out unobserved
peer effects provides an avenue for enhancing the efficacy of these factors that could bias the estimates, although our adjustment may partly
reduce bias due to any unmeasured confounders that are correlated with the
interventions and improving our understanding of the role of social
observed covariates55,56.
influence in the emergence and perpetuation of gun violence and
violent conflict.
Estimation strategy. To estimate the compliance effect τc and spillover effect of
compliance τs = 1 we used both BART and DIM.
methods BART is a sum-of-trees model that allows a flexible relationship between the
Network exposure mapping. To measure exposure to the programme through victimization outcome Y i, compliance indicator C i (or C j in the case of spillover)
social ties, we used data on 868,607 arrests in the jurisdiction of the Chicago Police and observed covariates X i. We use this non-parametric approach to avoid
Department from the period 2007–2017. We created a co-arrest network in which imposing a structural form on the relationship between the compliance indicator
an edge is present between two individuals if they had been arrested together. and the observed covariates, avoiding researcher-imposed choices regarding the
We located each programme seed in the network and classified adjacent units as ways in which the covariates might be associated with selection into compliance
peers if those units were arrested alongside the seed at least once in the three-year and, instead, allowing automatic detection of interactions and nonlinearities in this
period before the date that the seed was assigned to an intervention meeting. We relationship35. We fit the BART model using the dbarts R package34 with the default
define the exposure mapping f(z, g), where z i = {0, 1} indicates whether a unit was settings (ntrees = 200, α = 0.95, β = 2), 1,000 burn-in Markov chain Monte Carlo
assigned to the programme, and g i = {0, 1} indicates whether a unit has a tie to a iterations and 5,000 posterior samples.
seed32,45. For units with z i = 1—that is, the seeds—we denote a compliance indicator We contrast this approach with a simple DIM,
C that is 1 if the unit was compliant and 0 if the unit was non-compliant. For units
wi
ith z i = 0, g i = 1—that is, the peers—we denote a compliance indicator C j, that is
Yi¼α þCi 8Zi¼1 ð3
Þ
1 if the seed to whom the peer is connected was compliant and 0 if the seed was
non-compliant. where α is an intercept and C i is the compliance indicator. Similarly, for the
For the estimate of the effect of additional spillover exposure on victimization, spillover effect we estimate,
we performed a subset analysis in which we identified 550 peers with exposure to
two seeds, z i = 0, g i ≥ 2. For units connected to three or more seeds, we considered
Yi¼α þCj 8Zi¼0;gi¼1 ð4
Þ
only the first two exposures to maintain a suitably large n for estimation. We
denote the compliance indicator C, which is 1 if the peer was connected to two where C is the indicator for the compliance status of the seed to whom the peer is
j j
compliant seeds and 0 if the peer was connected to two non-compliant seeds. connected. This model simply compares the average probability of victimization
within the compliant and non-compliant conditions without adjustment for
Identification strategy. Identifying the effect of the intervention is challenging, confounding. By contrasting the results between BART and the DIM model, we
due to the non-randomized assignment protocol. As a strategy for overcoming are able to gauge the extent to which the relationship between the victimization
this challenge, we exploited compliance and non-compliance with the outcomes Y and compliance status C (C for spillover) is moderated by the
i i j
programme (a recent study found that non-compliers and control units assigned covariates X. Reported P values for the compliance and spillover DIM estimates
i
by randomization had nearly identical post-assignment outcomes in a similar are based on two-tailed tests.
deterrence-based intervention in St. Louis46) to identify the effect of compliance To further assess the effect estimates, we compared the results from BART to
with the programme among assigned seeds who, by virtue of their assignment, those of a model that weights units based on covariate balancing propensity scores.
were deemed by the administrators of the programme to have a similar baseline See Supplementary Information for further details.
risk of victimization ex ante47. To identify the effect of compliance with the
programme, we compared two-year victimization outcomes among seeds z i = 1 Estimating heterogenous effects. The BART model naturally detects interactions
with C i = 1 and C i = 0. To identify the effect of compliance spillover, we compared between the compliance indicator and observed covariates33. To estimate the
two-year victimization outcomes among peers z i = 0, g i = 1 with C j = 1 and C j = 0. heterogeneity of the compliance and spillover effects, we used the fitted BART
We denote the potential outcome Y i(1), which is the outcome that would be model to estimate the conditional average treatment effect (CATE) of compliance
observed if unit i was in the compliant condition C i = 1, and Y i(0) if unit i was in on each unit as a function of that unit’s covariate profile. For the main effect we
the non-compliant condition C i = 0. duplicated the seed covariate data into two N × K matrices, where N is the number
To estimate the compliance effect, we rely on the conditional ignorability of seeds and K is the number of covariates. We set the compliance indicator to 1 in
assumption Y i(0), Y i(1)⊥C i|X i (ref. 48). That is, we assume independence between the first matrix and 0 in the second. We then took 1,000 posterior draws for each
the potential outcomes and compliance status conditional on observed covariates matrix from the fitted model and subtracted the second matrix from the first. The
X i. We define the effect of compliance, τc, as the average of the conditional CATE is calculated by taking the mean of the rows, while the 95% uncertainty
expectation, bounds are calculated by taking the 0.025 and 0.975 quantiles35. We repeated this
process for the spillover effect, substituting in the peer covariate data and the fitted
τ c¼E ½E ½Y ð1 ÞjCi¼1;Xi E ½Y ð0 ÞjCi¼0;Xi 8zi¼1 ð1
Þ spillover BART model.
For the spillover effect, we made the analogous assumption Y i(0), Y i(1)⊥C j|X i,
that is independence between the potential outcomes and the compliance status of Reporting Summary. Further information on research design is available in the
the seed j to whom the peer unit i is connected conditional on the peer’s observed Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.
covariates X i. We defined the spillover effect of compliance, τs = 1, as the average of
the conditional expectation, Data availability
τ s ¼1¼E ½E ½Y ð1 ÞjCj¼1;Xi E ½Y ð0 ÞjCj¼0;Xi 8zi¼0;gi¼1 ð2 Þ T ash pe a o rr ti og fi n aa dl ad ta at -a s hu as re id n gin a t gh ri es e s mtu ed ny t ww ie tr he tp hr eo Cvi id tye d o ft o C t hh ie c ac go or r ae nsp do tn hd e i Cn hg ia cu at gh oo r
Finally, we defined the spillover effect of double exposure to compliance τs = 2 as Police Department, and are prohibited from being shared directly. De-identified
in equation (2), substituting Z i = 0, g i ≥ 2 to restrict analysis to the subset of peers replication data generated and analysed in this study are available from the
with connections to at least two seeds. corresponding author upon request.
NAtuRe HumAN BeHAViouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles Nature HumaN BeHaviour
Code availability 28. Kennedy, D. M., Piehl, A. M. & Braga, A. A. Youth violence in Boston: gun
All analyses were carried out in R. Code for reproducing the results of this study is markets, serious youth offenders, and a use-reduction strategy. Law Contemp.
available from the corresponding author upon request. Probl. 59, 147–196 (1996).
29. Braga, A. A. & Weisburd, D. Focused deterrence and the prevention of
violent gun injuries: practice, theoretical principles, and scientific evidence.
Received: 19 October 2018; Accepted: 12 July 2019;
Annu. Rev. Public Health 36, 55–68 (2015).
Published: xx xx xxxx
30. Charette, Y. & Papachristos, A. V. The network dynamics of co-offending
careers. Soc. Netw. 51, 3–13 (2017).
References 31. Paluck, E. L., Shepherd, H. & Aronow, P. M. Changing climates of conflict: a
social network experiment in 56 schools. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 113,
1. Wintemute, G. J. The epidemiology of firearm violence in the twenty-first
566–571 (2016).
century United States. Annu. Rev. Public Health 36, 5–19 (2015).
32. Aronow, P. M. & Samii, C. Estimating average causal effects under general
2. Web-based injury statistics query and reporting system. National Center for
interference, with application to a social network experiment. Ann. Appl. Stat.
Injury Prevention and Control http://www.cdc.gov/injury/wisqars/index.html
11, 1912–1947 (2017).
(2019).
33. Hill, J. L. Bayesian nonparametric modeling for causal inference. J. Comput.
3. Peterson, R. D. & Krivo, L. J. Divergent Social Worlds: Neighborhood Crime
Graph. Stat. 20, 217–240 (2011).
and the Racial-Spatial Divide (Russell Sage, 2010).
34. Chipman, H. A., George, E. I. & McCulloch, R. E. Bart: Bayesian additive
4. Harper, S., Lynch, J., Burris, S. & Davey Smith, G. Trends in the
regression trees. Ann. Appl. Stat. 4, 266–298 (2010).
black-white life expectancy gap in the United States, 1983–2003. JAMA 297,
35. Green, D. P. & Kern, H. L. Modeling heterogenous treatment effects in survey
1224–1232 (2007).
experiments with Bayesian additive regression trees. Public Opin. Q. 76,
5. Sharkey, P. The acute effect of local homicides on children’s cognitive
491–511 (2012).
performance. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 107, 11733–11738 (2010).
36. Hainmueller, J. Entropy balancing for causal effects: a multivariate
6. Tracy, M., Braga, A. A. & Papachristos, A. V. The transmission of gun and
reweighting method to produce balanced samples in observational studies.
other weapon-involved violence within social networks. Epidemiol. Rev. 38,
Polit. Anal. 20, 25–46 (2012).
70–86 (2016).
37. Palinkas, L. A. et al. Influence network linkages across implementation
7. Papachristos, A. V., Wildeman, C. & Roberto, E. Tragic, but not random:
strategy conditions in a randomized controlled trial of two strategies for
the social contagion of nonfatal gunshot injuries. Soc. Sci. Med. 125,
scaling up evidence-based practices in public youth-serving systems.
139–150 (2015).
Implement. Sci. 8, 133 (2013).
8. Papachristos, A. V., Braga, A. A. & Hureau, D. Social networks and the risk of
38. Christakis, N. A. & Fowler, J. H. Social network sensors for early detection of
gunshot injury. J. Urban Health 89, 992–1003 (2012).
contagious outbreaks. PLoS One 5, e12948 (2010).
9. Green, B., Thibaut, H. & Papachristos, A. V. Modeling contagion through
39. Centola, D. The spread of behavior in an online social network experiment.
social networks to explain and predict gunshot violence in Chicago, 2006 to
Science 329, 1194–1197 (2010).
2014. JAMA Intern. Med. 177, 326–333 (2017).
40. Kim, D. A. et al. Social network targeting to maximise population
10. Cooper, C., Eslinger, D. M. & Stolley, P. D. Hospital-based violence
behavior change: a cluster randomised controlled trial. Lancet 386,
intervention programs work. J. Trauma Acute Care Surg. 61,
145–153 (2015).
534–540 (2006).
41. Shalizi, C. R. & Thomas, A. C. Homophily and contagion are generically
11. Purtle, J., Rich, J. A., Fein, J. A., James, T. & Corbin, T. J. Hospital-based
confounded in observational social network studies. Sociol. Methods Res. 40,
violence prevention: progress and opportunities. Ann. Intern. Med. 163,
211–239 (2011).
715–717 (2015).
42. Legewie, J. & Fagan, J. Aggressive policing and the educational performance
12. Butts, J. A., Roman, C. G., Bostwick, L. & Porter, J. R. Cure violence: a public
of minority youth. Am. Sociol. Rev. 84, 220–247 (2019).
health model to reduce gun violence. Annu. Rev. Public Health 36,
43. Valente, T. W. Social network thresholds in the diffusion of innovations.
39–53 (2015).
Soc. Netw. 18, 69–89 (1996).
13. Whitehill, J. M., Webster, D. W., Frattaroli, S. & Parker, E. M. Interrupting
44. Rogers, E. M. Diffusion of preventative innovations. Addict. Behav. 27,
violence: how the ceasefire program prevents imminent gun violence through
989–993 (2002).
conflict mediation. J. Urban Health 91, 84–95 (1994).
45. Forastiere, L., Airoldi, E. M. & Mealli, F. Identification and estimation of
14. Crandall, V. & Wong, S. L. Group Violence Reduction Strategy: Call-in
treatment and interference effects in observational studies on networks.
Preparation and Execution (The Office of Community Oriented Policing
Preprint at arXiv https://arxiv.org/abs/1609.06245 (2018).
Strategies, 2012).
46. Hamilton, B., Rosenfeld, R. & Levin, A. Opting out of treatment: self-
15. Braga, A. A. & Weisburd, D. The effects of focused deterrence strategies on
selection bias in a randomized controlled study of a focused deterrence
crime: a systematic review and meta-analysis of the empirical evidence.
notification meeting. J. Exp. Criminol. 14, 1–17 (2018).
J. Res. Crime Delinq. 49, 323–358 (2012).
47. Rosenbaum, P. R. Choice as an alternative to control in observational studies.
16. Braga, A. A., Papachristos, A. V. & Hureau, D. The effects of hot spots
Stat. Sci. 14, 259–304 (1999).
policing on crime: an updated systematic review and meta-analysis. Justice Q.
48. Rubin, D. B. Bayesian inference for causal effects: the role of randomization.
31, 633–663 (2014).
Ann. Stat. 6, 34–58 (1978).
17. Braga, A. A., Weisburd, D. & Turchan, B. Focused deterrence strategies and
49. Pearl, J. Causal inference in statistics: an overview. Stat. Surv. 3,
crime control: an updated systematic review and meta-analysis of the
96–146 (2009).
empirical evidence. Criminol. Public Policy 17, 205–250 (2018).
50. Steinman, K. J. & Zimmerman, M. A. Episodic and persistent gun-carrying
18. Heckman, J. J. The scientific model of causality. Sociol. Methodol. 35,
among urban African-American adolescents. J. Adolesc. Health 35,
1–97 (2006).
356–364 (2003).
19. Durlauf, S. N., Navarro, S. & Rivers, D. A. Understanding aggregate crime
51. Cook, P. J. & Laub, J. H. After the epidemic: recent trends in youth violence
regressions. J. Econ. 158, 306–317 (2010).
in the united states. Crime Justice 29, 1–37 (2002).
20. Gravel, J. & Tita, G. E. With great methods comes great responsibilities.
52. Peterson, R. D. & Krivo, L. J. Macrostructural analyses of race, ethnicity, and
Criminol. Public Policy 14, 559–572 (2015).
violent crime: recent lessons and new directions for research. Annu. Rev.
21. Valente, T. W. Network interventions. Science 337, 49–53 (2012).
Sociol. 31, 331–356 (2005).
22. Proestakis, A. et al. Network interventions for changing physical activity
53. Jones-Webb, R. & Wall, M. Neighborhood racial/ethnic concentration, social
behaviour in preadolescents. Nat. Hum. Behav. 2, 778–787 (2018).
disadvantage, and homicide risk: an ecological analysis of 10 U.S. cities.
23. Kennedy, D. M., Braga, A. A. & Piehl, A. M. The (un)known yniverse:
J. Urban Health 8, 662–676 (2008).
mapping gangs and gang violence in Boston. in Crime Mapping and Crime
54. Papachristos, A. V., Braga, A. A., Piza, E. & Grossman, L. S. The company
Prevention (ed. Weisburd, D. & McEwan, T.) 219–262 (Criminal Justice
you keep? The spillover effects of gang membership on individual gunshot
Press, 1997).
victimization in a co-offending network. Criminology 53, 624–649 (2015).
24. Papachristos, A. V. & Kirk, D. S. Changing the street dynamic: evaluating
55. Fewell, Z., Davey Smith, G. & Sterne, J. A. C. The impact of residual and
Chicago’s group violence reduction strategy. Criminol. Public Policy 14,
unmeasured confounding in epidemiologic studies: a simulation study.
525–558 (2015).
Am. J. Epidemiol. 166, 646–655 (2007).
25. National Network for Safe Communities. Group Violence Intervention: An
56. Groenwold, R. H. H. et al. Sensitivity analysis for the effects of multiple
Implementation Guide (US Department of Justice, Office of Community
unmeasured confounders. Ann. Epidemiol. 26, 601–605 (2016).
Oriented Policing Services, 2016).
26. Broockman, D. & Kalla, J. Durably reducing transphobia: a field experiment
on door-to-door canvassing. Science 352, 220–224 (2016). Acknowledgements
27. Clarke, R. V. & Weisburd, D. Diffusion of crime control benefits: observations This research was supported by a CAREER award (No. SES-1151449) from the Sociology
on the reverse of displacement. Crime Prev. Stud. 2, 165–184 (1994). and Law and Social Science Programs at the National Science Foundation. We thank
NAtuRe HumAN BeHAViouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Nature HumaN BeHaviour Articles
Y. Charette and D. Kirk for providing valuable feedback. The funder had no role in the Additional information
conceptualization, design, data collection, analysis, decision to publish or preparation of Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/
the manuscript. s41562-019-0688-1.
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Author contributions
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to A.V.P.
G.W. and A.V.P. designed research. A.V.P. obtained data. G.W. performed research and
analysed data. G.W. and A.V.P. wrote the paper. Peer review information: Primary Handling Editor: Aisha Bradshaw.
Publisher’s note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
Competing interests published maps and institutional affiliations.
The authors declare no competing interests. © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2019
NAtuRe HumAN BeHAViouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
1
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Corresponding author(s): Andrew Papachristos
Last updated by author(s): 28 June 2019
Reporting Summary
Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency
in reporting. For further information on Nature Research policies, see Authors & Referees and the Editorial Policy Checklist.
Statistics
For all statistical analyses, confirm that the following items are present in the figure legend, table legend, main text, or Methods section.
n/a Confirmed
The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
A statement on whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided
Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.
A description of all covariates tested
A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
A full description of the statistical parameters including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient)
AND variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)
For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted
Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.
For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated
Our web collection on statistics for biologists contains articles on many of the points above.
Software and code
Policy information about availability of computer code
Data collection N/A
Data analysis All data wrangling and analysis conducted in R. Primary packages used: broom, cobalt, dbarts, ebal, igraph, tidygraph, tidyverse, twang,
weightit.
For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors/reviewers.
We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Research guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.
Data
Policy information about availability of data
All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable:
- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets
- A list of figures that have associated raw data
- A description of any restrictions on data availability
The original data used in this study were provided to the corresponding author as part of a data-sharing agreement with the City of Chicago and the Chicago Police
Department and are prohibited from direct sharing. De-identified replication data generated and analyzed in this study are available from the corresponding author
upon request.
2
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Field-specific reporting
Please select the one below that is the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.
Life sciences Behavioural & social sciences Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences
For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/documents/nr-reporting-summary-flat.pdf
Behavioural & social sciences study design
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
Study description This is a quantitative quasi-experimental study. We compare gunshot victimization outcomes for units who complied with an intervention
against non-compliant units. We also compare victimization outcomes among the network peers of compliant units against the peers of
non-compliant units.
Research sample The research sample is individuals at high-risk of victimization in the jurisdiction of the Chicago Police Department (CPD). The
intervention aimed to reduce victimization among such individuals. The intervention effects are not generalizable to the general
population. The sample represents particularly high-risk individuals in Chicago. The differences between the sample and the broader
population of individuals with arrest records in Chicago is summarized in the Supplementary Results.
Sampling strategy The sampling procedure is a community-led partnership with law enforcement to identify individuals at high-risk of victimization. The
authors did not design or participate in the sampling strategy.
Data collection Three primary data sources are used: CPD arrest records, CPD gunshot victimization records, and intervention assignment and
compliance data. The arrest records and gunshot victimization records are routinely collected by the CPD and were supplied to the
researchers directly by the CPD. The assignment data were collected by the intervention team and supplied directly to the researchers.
Being routinely collected by the CPD, the outcome data (victimization) is not influenced by the research hypothesis.
Timing The arrest data covers the period August 2007 to May 2017. The victimization data covers the period August 2007 to November 2018.
Assignment and compliance data collected August 2010 to June 2016.
Data exclusions No data were excluded from the analysis.
Non-participation Non-compliant units are included in our research design.
Randomization Units were not randomly assigned. Participants were assigned to the program based on an evaluation of their risk of victimization. The
risk evaluation was not conducted by the authors of this study.
Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods
We require information from authors about some types of materials, experimental systems and methods used in many studies. Here, indicate whether each material,
system or method listed is relevant to your study. If you are not sure if a list item applies to your research, read the appropriate section before selecting a response.
Materials & experimental systems Methods
n/a Involved in the study n/a Involved in the study
Antibodies ChIP-seq
Eukaryotic cell lines Flow cytometry
Palaeontology MRI-based neuroimaging
Animals and other organisms
Human research participants
Clinical data
Human research participants
Policy information about studies involving human research participants
Population characteristics See above.
Recruitment Participants were invited to an intervention by a collaborative group who determined the participants to be at high-risk of
victimization. We compared units who complied (attended the intervention) against units who did not comply. There is a
possibility for selection bias if compliance or non-compliance is associated with the risk of victimization. Our estimation strategy
was designed to mitigate this selection bias. We adjusted for a broad array of covariates which may confound victimization and
compliance. We re-weighted units to provide an estimate of the effects conditional on the observed covariates. There is the
3
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
possibility for remaining selection bias if there are unobserved covariates which confound victimization and compliance,
particularly if these are uncorrelated with the observed covariates adjusted for in the study. This is untestable using available
data. We discuss this in more detail in the manuscript and Supplementary Information.
Ethics oversight Yale University IRB and Northwestern University IRB.
Note that full information on the approval of the study protocol must also be provided in the manuscript.