Articles
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-020-00936-2
A general dimension of genetic sharing
across diverse cognitive traits inferred from
molecular data
Javier de la Fuente 1,2,5, Gail Davies3,4,5, Andrew D. Grotzinger 1, Elliot M. Tucker-Drob 1,2,6 ✉
and Ian J. Deary 3,4,6 ✉
It has been known since 1904 that, in humans, diverse cognitive traits are positively intercorrelated. This forms the basis for
the general factor of intelligence (g). Here, we directly test whether there is a partial genetic basis for individual differences
in g using data from seven different cognitive tests (n = 11,263–331,679) and genome-wide autosomal single-nucleotide poly-
morphisms. A genetic g factor accounts for an average of 58.4% (s.e. = 4.8%) of the genetic variance in the cognitive traits
considered, with the proportion varying widely across traits (range, 9–95%). We distil genetic loci that are broadly relevant for
many cognitive traits (g) from loci associated specifically with individual cognitive traits. These results contribute to elucidat-
ing the aetiology of a long-known yet poorly understood phenomenon, revealing a fundamental dimension of genetic sharing
across diverse cognitive traits.
S
cores on psychometric tests of cognitive abilities are pro- the modern molecular genetic methods needed to separate general
spectively associated with educational performance, from specific genetic associations with cognitive traits at the level of
socio-economic attainments, everyday functioning, health individual genetic loci.
and longevity1–3. In 1904, Charles Spearman identified a positive Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have been applied
manifold of intercorrelations among school test results and esti- to individual cognitive measures or composite scores formed from
mates of intelligence, leading him to propose that they arise from multiple such cognitive measures19–23. However, existing univari-
a single general dimension of variation, which he termed general ate approaches are limited in their capability in separating g from s
intelligence (and which he denoted as g)4. He theorized that most of variance. In the case of GWAS of individual cognitive tests—for
the remaining variance in each cognitive test was accounted for by example, a measure of verbal declarative memory or processing
a factor specific to that test, which he called s. Thus, some variance speed—the identified loci could be related to g and/or to the named
in each cognitive test was thought to be shared with all other cogni- cognitive property22,23. This is a common limitation in both pheno-
tive tests (g), and some was thought to be specific to that test (its s). typic and genetic cognitive studies24. Here we sought to test for a
Hundreds of studies have since replicated the finding that, when genetic g factor directly, using genomic structural equation mod-
many diverse cognitive tests are administered to a sizeable sample elling (Genomic SEM25), a multivariate, genome-wide molecular
of people, a g factor is found that accounts for between about 25% genetics approach. We model both shared and unique genome-wide
and 50% of the total test variance, depending on the specific com- architecture in aggregate across the entirety of the genome, and we
position of the participants and test battery5–7. Considerable efforts distinguish individual variants that are broadly relevant for many
over the past century have been placed on identifying biological cognitive traits (via genetic g) from those associated with only indi-
associations with g, spanning levels of analysis from molecular, to vidual cognitive traits (via genetic s factors). Thus, this investiga-
neuro-anatomical, to cognitive8–12. tion attempts to provide insights into the shared genetic architecture
Psychometrically, a hierarchical structure of cognitive abilities is across multiple cognitive traits and affords the explicit identification
commonly agreed, with cognitive tests’ variance accounted for by of genetic variants underlying g.
three different strata of variation (Supplementary Fig. 1), represent-
ing (1) each test’s specific variance (s), (2) broad domains of cogni- Results
tive function (for example, reasoning, processing speed, memory) Data for the present study came from the UK Biobank (UKB), a
and (3) g (ref. 5). All cognitive tests have some g loading, though this biomedical cohort study that collects a wide range of genetic
varies from test to test. Twin studies that have employed multivari- and health-related measures from a population-based sample
ate methods to examine genetic associations within the hierarchy of community-dwelling participants in the United Kingdom.
of cognitive test score variance13 indicate a strong heritable basis Participants were measured on up to seven cognitive traits using tests
for g, suggesting that cognitive traits are positively correlated sub- that often show substantial concurrent validity with established psy-
stantially because of strongly overlapping genetic architecture14–18. chometric tests of cognitive abilities, and modest to good test–retest
Multivariate approaches, however, have not yet been combined with reliability26: reaction time (RT, n = 330,024, which assesses perceptual
1Department of Psychology, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA. 2Population Research Center, University of Texas at Austin, Austin,
TX, USA. 3Lothian Birth Cohorts, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK. 4Department of Psychology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
5These authors contributed equally: Javier de la Fuente, Gail Davies. 6These authors jointly supervised this work: Elliot M. Tucker-Drob, Ian J. Deary.
✉e-mail: tuckerdrob@utexas.edu; i.deary@ed.ac.uk
NATuRE HuMAN BEHAvIouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles Nature HumaN BeHaviour
g
(genetic)
0.83 0.65 0.31 0.83 0.98 0.85 0.72
Symbol–
Matrices Memory RT Trails-B Tower VNR
digit
(genetic) (genetic) (genetic) (genetic) (genetic) (genetic)
(genetic)
g
(phenotypic)
0.50 0.26 0.23 0.63 0.77 0.49 0.51
Symbol
Matrices Memory RT Trails-B Tower VNR
digit
(phenotypic) (phenotypic) (phenotypic) (phenotypic) (phenotypic) (phenotypic)
(phenotypic)
Fig. 1 | Standardized genetic and phenotypic factor solutions for the covariance structure of seven uKB cognitive traits used in the present study.
Squares represent observed variables (the phenotypes that are directly measured). Circles represent latent variables that are statistically inferred from the
data—that is, the genetic (top) and phenotypic (bottom) g factors that are inferred through factor analysis and the genetic components of the observed
phenotypes that are inferred through LDSC. Arrows are standardized factor loadings, which can be interpreted as standardized regression relations with
the arrow pointing from the predictor variable to the outcome variable. Genetic factor models were estimated using Genomic SEM, and phenotypic models
were estimated using the lavaan package for R. Matrix, matrix pattern completion task; memory, memory pairs-matching test; symbol digit, symbol digit
substitution task; tower, tower rearranging task. All variables are scaled such that higher scores indicate better cognitive performance. The genetic g
factor accounts for an average of 58.37% of genetic variance in the seven cognitive traits. The phenotypic g factor accounts for an average of 26.50% of
observed phenotypic variance in the seven cognitive traits.
motor speed); matrix pattern recognition (n = 11,356, non-verbal factor accounted for 26.5% (s.e. = 0.2%) of variance in the seven
reasoning); verbal numerical reasoning (VNR, n = 171,304, verbal cognitive traits. That this proportion is appreciably lower than that
and numeric problem solving; the test is called ‘fluid intelligence’ obtained from the PCA highlights the distinction between factor
in UKB); symbol digit substitution (n = 87,741, information pro- analysis, which formally models the effects of factors on constel-
cessing speed); memory pairs-matching test (n = 331,679, episodic lations of variables, and PCA, which simply seeks to maximize the
memory); tower rearranging (n = 11,263, executive functioning); variance of a weighted linear composite of those variables. All of the
and trail-making test-B (trails-B, n = 78,547, executive functioning). standardized loadings were statistically significant, ranging from
Scores on all tests were coded such that higher scores represented 0.231 to 0.766 (M = 0.48, s.d. = 0.19).
more optimal (that is, faster or more accurate) performance.
Multivariate genome-wide architecture. We next aimed to esti-
Phenotypic covariance structure. A positive manifold of pheno- mate the extent of genetic sharing across the cognitive traits using
typic correlations was observed across the seven cognitive traits. molecular genetic data. We used a multivariable version of linkage
All correlations were positive, ranging from 0.074 to 0.490, indi- disequilibrium score regression (LDSC)27 implemented in Genomic
cating that more optimal performance on a given test is associated SEM25 to estimate genetic correlations among the cognitive traits.
with more optimal performance on the other tests (Supplementary Prior to this formal modelling, we conducted descriptive analyses
Fig. 1 and Supplementary Table 1). The mean phenotypic correla- of the cognitive traits’ genetic correlations, similar to those often
tion was 0.232. In principal component analysis (PCA), the first conducted on cognitive phenotypes. We report those descriptive
unrotated component accounted for a total of 35.8% of the pheno- analyses’ results first.
typic variance. A confirmatory factor model with a single common As was first reported at the phenotypic level by Spearman in
g factor (Fig. 1, bottom) fit the phenotypic covariance matrix well 1904 (ref. 4), we identified, using LDSC, a positive manifold of
(χ2(14) = 740.748, P < 0.001; standardized root mean square resid- genetic correlations among the UKB cognitive traits, ranging from
ual (SRMR) = 0.024; comparative fit index (CFI) = 0.985; root mean 0.135 to 0.869 (M = 0.53, s.d. = 0.22; Supplementary Fig. 3 and
square error of approximation (RMSEA) = 0.013). Table 1 reports Supplementary Tables 2 and 3). The mean genetic correlation was
both the proportion of phenotypic g/phenotypic s variance for each 0.530, and the first principal component accounted for a total of
cognitive trait, and the respective absolute contributions. The g 62.17% of the genetic variance. Using genomic-relatedness-based
NATuRE HuMAN BEHAvIouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Nature HumaN BeHaviour Articles
Table 1 | Common factor solutions for the genetic (top) and phenotypic (bottom) covariance structure of seven uKB cognitive traits
Standardized factor Common (g) and specific (s) sources of genetic variation
loadings
Genetic g Proportion of genetic variation explained Proportion of phenotypic variation explained by genetic g and
by genetic g and genetic s genetic s (HapMap3 common variants only)
Cognitive trait Estimate s.e. Common (g), % Specific (s), % Common (g), % Specific (s), % Total SNP h2
Matrices 0.826 0.070 68.23 31.77 10.60 4.90 15.50
Memory 0.651 0.031 42.38 57.62 1.70 2.30 4.00
RT 0.308 0.026 9.49 90.51 0.70 6.70 7.40
Symbol digit 0.831 0.034 69.06 30.94 7.60 3.40 11.00
Trails-B 0.976 0.035 95.26 4.74 14.20 0.70 14.90
Tower 0.853 0.080 72.76 27.24 8.30 3.10 11.40
VNR 0.717 0.024 51.41 48.59 10.90 10.30 21.20
Mean (%) 58.36 41.64 7.71 4.49 12.20
Phenotypic g Proportion of phenotypic variation
explained by phenotypic g and
phenotypic s
Cognitive trait Estimate s.e. Common (g), % Specific (s), %
Matrices 0.501 0.009 25.10 74.90
Memory 0.257 0.003 6.60 93.40
RT 0.231 0.003 5.34 94.66
Symbol digit 0.628 0.004 39.44 60.56
Trails-B 0.766 0.003 58.68 41.32
Tower 0.487 0.009 23.72 76.28
VNR 0.514 0.003 26.42 73.58
Mean (%) 26.50 73.50
All traits are scaled such that higher scores indicate higher cognitive performance. Total single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) h2 = total proportion of phenotypic variance in the corresponding cognitive
trait accounted for by all tagged common variants. By definition, the common (g) and specific (s) proportional contributions to total phenotypic variation sum to total SNP h2, and the common (g) and
specific (s) proportional contributions to genetic variation sum to 100%. Standardized factor loadings indicate the standardized linear relationship between the factor and each of the cognitive outcomes.
Models are fit to LDSC-derived genetic covariance matrices using Genomic SEM. As per best practices for LDSC, genetic covariance matrices were derived using HapMap3 SNPs with minor allele
frequencies >1%, excluding SNPs with imputation quality (INFO) < 0.9 and those from the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) region.
restricted maximum likelihood (GCTA–GREML)28,29, a different fitted to the phenotypic covariance matrix (Supplementary Fig. 5
estimator of the genetic correlations among the seven cognitive and Supplementary Table 1). A factor model that constrained the
traits (Supplementary Fig. 4), the mean genetic correlation was standardized genetic factor loadings to be equal to the standardized
0.502, and the first principal component accounted for 61.24% of point estimates for loadings from the phenotypic model produced
the genetic variance. The correlation between LDSC- and GCTA– a substantial decrement in model fit (χ2(7) = 823.037, P < 0.001),
GREML-derived genetic correlations was r = 0.947, indicating indicating that the genetic and phenotypic factor structures were
very close correspondence between the results of the two methods not strictly equivalent. Indeed, the standardized genetic factor load-
(Supplementary Fig. 5). ings were consistently higher in magnitude than the standardized
We then proceeded with Genomic SEM to formally model phenotypic factor loadings, but there was a strong linear asso-
the genetic covariance matrix. This allowed us to evaluate the ciation between them (Supplementary Fig. 6). Table 1 reports the
fit of the genetic g factor model, estimate s.e. for model param- proportions of genetic g and genetic s variance for each cognitive
eters, estimate genetic correlations with collateral phenotypes and trait, and the respective absolute contributions. The genetic g factor
incorporate genetic g explicitly into multivariate discovery. We accounted for 58.36% (s.e. = 4.84%) of the genetic variance in the
applied Genomic SEM to fit a single common factor model to the seven cognitive traits. All of the standardized loadings on genetic g
LDSC-derived genetic covariance matrix among the seven cognitive were statistically significant, ranging from 0.308 to 0.976 (M = 0.74,
traits. This model specified the genetic component of each cogni- s.d. = 0.22).
tive trait to load on a single common factor, which we term genetic The proportion of genetic variation in each trait accounted for
g. For each trait, we additionally estimated residual, trait-specific by genetic g differed substantially across traits. Supporting this
genetic variance components (genetic s). Thus, we formally distil inference, a factor model that constrained the standardized genetic
the molecular genetic contributions of g and s to heritable varia- factor loadings to be equal across traits produced a substantial
tion in each of the cognitive traits, and test the fit of this model. decrement in model fit (χ2(12) = 749.122, P < 0.001). Four of the
Fit indices (χ2(14) = 117.019, P < 0.001; CFI = 0.970; SRMR = 0.088) cognitive traits have a genetic contribution to their variance that is
indicated that the factor model closely approximated the observed derived principally from genetic g and much less from genetic s;
genetic covariance matrix (Supplementary Figs. 7 and 8). Figure 1 these are trails-B (95.26% genetic g; 4.74% genetic s), tower (72.76%
displays the standardized estimates for this model (top) and the genetic g; 27.20% genetic s), symbol digit (69.06% genetic g; 30.94%
standardized estimates from a phenotypic factor model (bottom) genetic s) and matrices (68.23% genetic g; 31.77% genetic s). VNR
NATuRE HuMAN BEHAvIouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles Nature HumaN BeHaviour
20
Genetic g
10
10
Heterogeneity (Q)
20
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 11 13 15 17 20
Chromosome
(51.41% genetic g; 48.59% genetic s) and memory (42.38% genetic genome-wide significant loci for univariate phenotypes that are not
g; 57.62% genetic s) are more evenly split. RT has the majority of its genome-wide significant loci for g. These might be loci that are spe-
genetic influence from genetic s (9.49% genetic g, 90.51% genetic cific to the individual traits, but not genetic g. Fourth, highlighted
s). We emphasize one important implication of these results, which in yellow are loci that evince genome-wide significant heterogene-
is that univariate genetic analyses (for example, GWAS) of some of ity (Q), indicating that they show patterns of associations with cog-
these individual traits will largely reveal results relevant to g rather nitive traits departing from the pattern that would be expected if
than to the specific abilities thought to be required to perform the they were to act on the traits via genetic g. Q findings that exceed
test24. As the prespecified model was parsimonious and the fit was the genome-wide significance threshold for genetic g (yellow tri-
close, we chose to forego implementing data-driven exploratory angles) are implicated as false discoveries on genetic g that are likely
steps to further improve fit. Supplementary Tables 4 and 5 report driven by a strong signal in a subset of cognitive traits or in a single
full parameter estimates for genetic and phenotypic factor models. cognitive trait. The Q statistic helps to safeguard against these false
discoveries. The Q findings that do not surpass the genome-wide
Multivariate genome-wide discovery. We next aimed to deter- significance threshold for genetic g (yellow diamonds) are not sig-
mine the contributions of individual genetic loci specifically to nificantly related to genetic g but are significantly heterogeneous
genetic g, and to distil those from loci associated with other levels in their patterns of association with the cognitive traits. These loci
of the cognitive hierarchy. We fit a multivariate GWAS of genetic g may be relevant to specific cognitive traits, or to cognitive domains
within Genomic SEM25 to distinguish loci relevant to genetic g that are intermediate in specificity and generality between g and s,
from loci whose patterns of association across the individual traits but not to general intelligence (see Supplementary Fig. 1). Note that
are inconsistent with their operation on genetic g, as indexed by these four types of genome-wide significant loci are represented
the heterogeneity statistic, Q. We provide detailed explication of in both the top and bottom panels of the Miami plot, with their
the Q statistic and how it can be appropriately interpreted in the locations corresponding to the –log (P) of their associations with
10
section ‘Interpreting the heterogeneity statistic’ in Supplementary genetic g in the top panel, and with the –log (P) of their Q statistic
10
Information. in the bottom panel.
The GWAS results for genetic g and Q are displayed in Fig. 2 as Overall we identified 30 genome-wide significant (P < 5 × 10−8)
a Miami plot, with further information provided in Table 2. Our loci associated with genetic g. Of these, 18 (60%) have previously
method distinguishes four types of genome-wide significant loci. been reported as hits for cognitive tests (five loci) and/or cogni-
First, highlighted in red are genome-wide significant loci for genetic tively relevant phenotypes, such as educational attainment or high-
g that are not genome-wide significant loci for the univariate GWAS est maths course taken (16 loci) in GWAS that did not include data
analyses of individual traits. These are loci influencing general from UKB. Of the 18 genetic g hits that replicated outside of UKB,
intelligence identified by leveraging the joint genetic architecture of 16 were also hits on at least one cognitive test included in the mul-
the traits. Second, highlighted in blue are genome-wide significant tivariate UKB analysis. Of the 30 total genetic g loci, 12 were dis-
loci for g that are also genome-wide significant loci in the univari- coveries specific to UKB, five of which were specific to the present
ate GWAS analyses for at least one individual cognitive trait. These study’s multivariate modelling and seven of which were also hits on
loci might otherwise have been interpreted as relevant specifically at least one cognitive test included in the multivariate UKB analy-
to the individual trait, when in fact the multivariate results indicate sis. Thus, of the 30 total loci that were found here to be associated
that they are relevant to genetic g24. Third, highlighted in green are with genetic g, 23 were in common with the univariate GWAS of
)P(
gol–
01
0
Fig. 2 | Miami plot of unique, independent hits for genetic g and Q (7,857,346 variants). The heterogeneity statistic (Q) indexes whether a SNP evinces
patterns of association with cognitive traits departing from the pattern that would be expected if it were to act on the traits via genetic g. Thus, genetic g
loci in common with Q loci are false discoveries on genetic g. The dashed grey horizontal lines denote the genome-wide significance threshold (P < 5 × 10−8).
The genome-wide significant loci represented by the triangles, circles and diamonds are shown in both upper and lower parts of the Miami plot, with their
locations corresponding to the –log (P) of their associations with genetic g (upper) and the –log (P) of their Q statistic (lower). Red triangles, genetic g loci
10 10
unique to univariate loci; blue triangles, genetic g loci in common with univariate loci; green circles, univariate loci unique to genetic g loci; yellow triangles,
genetic g loci in common with Q loci; yellow diamonds, Q loci unique to genetic g loci.
NATuRE HuMAN BEHAvIouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Nature HumaN BeHaviour Articles
Table 2 | Summary of multivariate (genetic g) and univariate GWAS results
outcome Significant loci Independent of Independent of Common with loci Mean χ2(1) LDSC λGC
(P < 5 × 10−8) univariate loci Q loci previously reported intercept
for cognitive tests and
cognitively relevant traitsa
in GWAS that did not
include uKB
Multivariate GWAS
Genetic g 30 7 27 18 1.471 0.973 1.373
Significant loci Independent of Independent of Common with loci Mean χ2(1)
(P < 5 × 10−8) univariate loci genetic g loci previously reported
for cognitive tests and
cognitively relevant traitsa
in GWAS that did not
include uKB
Heterogeneity (Q) 24 9 21 5 1.337
univariate GWAS
Significant loci Independent of Independent of Mean χ2
(P < 5 × 10−8) genetic g loci Q loci
Matrices (n = 11,356) 0 – – 1.040 1.013 1.033
Memory n = 331,679) 10 9 7 1.223 1.002 1.187
RT (n = 330,024) 39 34 23 1.420 1.021 1.318
Symbol digit 1 0 0 1.188 1.021 1.169
(n = 87,741)
Trails-B (n = 78,547) 7 1 5 1.203 1.005 1.177
Tower (n = 11,263) 0 – – 1.022 1.001 1.025
VNR (n = 171,304) 89 71 83 1.640 1.025 1.471
The same 7,857,346 variants were used for univariate and multivariate GWAS. Genome-wide significant loci that were 250 kb or closer were merged into a single locus. Here we report loci that are
independent from each other at r2 < 0.1. λGC, genomic inflation factor. For Q, mean χ2 was calculated by conversion of Q statistics (which are χ2 distributed with six degrees of freedom) to distributed test
statistics with one degree of freedom, and then taking their mean. Matrices, matrix pattern completion task; memory, memory pairs-matching test; symbol digit, symbol digit substitution task; tower, tower
rearranging task. Supplementary Tables 8–28 report the individual SNPs, loci and, for those reported in previous studies, the references for the studies and implicated phenotypes. aCognitive tests and
cognitively relevant traits include performance-based cognitive test scores, educational attainment, self-reported maths ability and highest maths course taken.
individual cognitive traits that served as the basis for our multi- for cognitive ageing, the SNP displayed a negligible null asso-
variate analysis, indicating that seven loci were discoveries specific ciation with VNR (P = 0.142), which is a test that shows minimal
to multivariate modelling (Supplementary Tables 15 and 22). An age-related differences in the UKB data31. Another example of a Q
LDSC analysis of genetic g GWAS summary statistics yielded an finding is located on chromosome 17 (chr17:44021960–44852612),
intercept slightly <1.0, indicating that inflation of the test statistics which was reported to be significantly associated with both general
(mean χ2(1) = 1.471; λ = 1.373) was attributable to true polygenic cognitive ability and RT19. From the univariate GWAS results, the
GC
signal rather than to under-controlled population stratification. largest association for this locus was with RT, a measure of psycho-
We identified a total of 24 genome-wide significant loci for Q, motor speed with a relatively low loading on genetic g. This locus
three of which were significantly associated with genetic g (and may have a particularly pronounced association with speeded abili-
therefore likely to be relevant to more specific cognitive traits and ties, rather than a general association with genetic g. The third Q
false discoveries on g) and 15 of which were significantly associated locus that is also significant for genetic g is located on chromosome
with at least one individual cognitive trait in the test-specific GWAS 3 (chr3:49120040–50234126). This locus has previously reported
(and may therefore be interpreted as hits for more specific cognitive associations with general cognitive ability, educational attainment,
traits, rather than for a general dimension of cognitive function). Of intelligence and maths ability19–21,32. In the current study, this locus
the 24 loci for Q, five (21%) have previously been reported as hits for demonstrates significant heterogeneity and displays its largest
cognitive tests (one locus) and/or cognitively relevant phenotypes associations with VNR, tower, matrices and trails-B, all measures
(four loci) in GWAS that did not include data from UKB, and 19 loci of higher-order cognition. Its associations with measures of speed
were specific to UKB (Supplementary Tables 16 and 23). Two of the and episodic memory (arguably more basic cognitive processes)
Q loci previously reported in non-UKB GWAS were also genetic g are negligible.
loci (but, because they were Q hits, are most likely to be false dis-
coveries for genetic g and more relevant to specific cognitive traits). Genetic correlations with external GWAS traits. As expected,
Inspection of univariate GWAS results for the individual traits the genetic g factor identified here displayed strong but imperfect
may help to determine the sources of heterogeneity for the Q genetic correlations (as estimated by LDSC) with general cogni-
findings. For instance, a SNP (rs429358) within APOE, which is tive function from Davies et al.19 (r = 0.90, s.e. = 0.02) and Savage
g
a known risk factor for Alzheimer’s disease30, was a significant Q et al.21 (r = 0.87, s.e. = 0.05), which were univariate GWAS of
g
finding. With the exception of its association with VNR, this SNP broad cognitive phenotypes, and that from Hill et al.20 (r = 0.80,
g
displayed a pattern of association with traits corresponding closely s.e = 0.02), which was a GWAS of intelligence that incorporated
with the degree to which they represented genetic g. However, educational attainment GWAS summary statistics to boost power
consistent with the inference that APOE is specifically relevant via multi-trait analysis of GWAS33. As reported in Supplementary
NATuRE HuMAN BEHAvIouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles Nature HumaN BeHaviour
Table 6, genetic g had a positive genetic correlation with educational (Supplementary Table 7). Consistent with the above findings that
attainment32 (r = 0.48, s.e. = 0.02) that is lower than those found individual cognitive outcomes are associated with a combination of
g
between education and previous GWAS of cognitive ability (all esti- genetic g and specific genetic factors, we observed a pattern in which
mated at r > 0.69)19–21. To determine whether this lower association many of the regression models that included both the PGS from
was driven by the inclusion of RT, or more generally with speeded genetic g and test-specific PGS were considerably more predictive
measures as indicators of genetic g, we re-estimated the genetic cor- of the cognitive phenotypes in Generation Scotland than regression
relations using a genetic g factor formed from the cognitive traits models that included only either a genetic g PGS or a PGS for a
that excluded either RT or all speeded measures (RT, trails-B and single test. A particularly relevant exception involved the digit sym-
symbol digit). The version of the genetic g factor that excluded RT bol substitution test in Generation Scotland, which is a similar test
accounted for 66.76% (s.e. = 5.85%) of the genetic variance in the six to the symbol digit substitution test in UKB for which we derived
remaining cognitive traits, and the version that excluded all speeded a PGS. We found that the proportional increase in R2 in digit sym-
tests accounted for 69.66% (s.e. = 8.08%) of the genetic variance in bol by the symbol digit PGS beyond the genetic g PGS was <1%,
the four remaining cognitive traits. These versions of genetic g pro- whereas the genetic g PGS improved polygenic prediction beyond
duced somewhat higher genetic correlations between genetic g and the symbol digit PGS by >100%, reflecting the power advantage
educational attainment (r = 0.50 when excluding RT, r = 0.55 when obtained from integration of GWAS data from multiple genetically
g g
excluding all three speeded measures) that continued to be lower correlated cognitive traits using a genetic g model. An interesting
than those found between educational attainment and previous counterpoint is the PGS for the VNR test, which is unique in the
GWAS of general cognitive ability. UKB cognitive test battery in partly indexing verbal knowledge26,31.
Negative genetic correlations were found between genetic g Highlighting the role of domain-specific factors, a regression model
and Alzheimer’s disease34 (r = −0.34, s.e. = 0.06), schizophrenia35 that included this PGS and the genetic g PGS provided substantial
g
(r = −0.38, s.e. = 0.03) and attention deficit, hyperactivity dis- incremental prediction relative to the genetic g PGS alone for those
g
order (ADHD)36 (r = −0.23, s.e. = 0.04). Additionally, genetic g Generation Scotland phenotypes most directly related to verbal
g
had significant positive genetic associations with total brain vol- knowledge: Mill Hill Vocabulary (62.45% increase) and educational
ume37 (r = 0.20, s.e. = 0.04) and longevity38 (r = 0.26, s.e. = 0.03) attainment (72.59%).
g g
(Supplementary Table 6). Notably, the negative genetic associa-
tion between genetic g and schizophrenia was substantially stron- Discussion
ger than that obtained for associations between other GWAS of Until now, research on the positive manifold of correlations among
cognitive function and schizophrenia, and contrasts substantially cognitive traits has been phenotypic in nature, or has made infer-
with the mild positive genetic correlation that has been reported ences regarding the roles of genes using twin approaches. Here
between educational attainment and schizophrenia39. Genetic asso- we estimated and modelled the patterns of genetic sharing across
ciations between genetic g and Alzheimer’s disease, ASD, ADHD, diverse cognitive traits using genome-wide molecular data. Using
total brain volume and longevity were similar to those obtained for data from seven different cognitive traits from UKB, we identified a
other GWAS of cognitive function, particularly when the speeded positive manifold of genetic correlations. We found that a genetic g
tests were removed from the genetic g factor. factor accounts for an average of about 58% (s.e. ≈ 5%) of the genetic
variance in cognitive traits, with the proportion ranging widely
Replication of positive genetic manifold and polygenic predic- (~9% to ~95%) across the traits. We went on to distil specific genetic
tion in Generation Scotland. We sought to confirm key results in loci broadly relevant for many cognitive traits via genetic g from
the independent Generation Scotland study (n = 6,950 unrelated those displaying patterns of more associations with the individual
individuals). The cognitive measures in Generation Scotland were cognitive traits.
Wechsler Logical Memory (episodic memory), Mill Hill Vocabulary The importance of our results may be seen by contrasting the
(crystallized knowledge), Wechsler Digit Symbol Substitution (pro- results of trails-B with RT. Analyses of multivariate genome-wide
cessing speed) and Verbal Fluency (semantic fluency), as described architecture indicated that, for trails-B, 95% of the genetic vari-
previously40,41. Because the sample size of Generation Scotland is too ance is accounted for by genetic g and only 5% is specific to trails-B.
small to produce stable estimates of heritability and genetic corre- Moreover, all seven loci for trails-B have previously been reported
lation within LDSC, it was not feasible to directly integrate these in GWAS of other cognitive phenotypes (Supplementary Table 19),
analyses into the above Genomic SEM models to estimate joint and four of these were implicated as relevant for genetic g at
models with the UKB phenotypes and other external GWAS traits. non-significant levels of heterogeneity. In contrast, for RT, analy-
Instead, we estimated a genetic correlation matrix for the four cog- ses of multivariate genome-wide architecture indicated that 9.5% of
nitive tests in Generation Scotland using GCTA–GREML28,29, which the genetic variance is accounted for by genetic g while 90.5% of
is more appropriate than LDSC for moderately sized samples such the genetic variance is specific to RT. Many of the 39 loci associated
as this. The average genetic correlation in this matrix was 0.517, and with RT have not been found in univariate GWAS of other cognitive
eigen decomposition indicated that the percentage of genetic vari- traits (Supplementary Tables 17 and 24), and only four were impli-
ance explained by a single principal component was 64.90%. These cated as relevant for genetic g at non-significant levels of heteroge-
two values are similar to those obtained for UKB, which we reiterate neity. Therefore, when identifying loci associated with performance
here for ease of comparison: mean r LDSC = 0.530; mean r GCTA– on an individual cognitive test, it is essential to know the extent to
g g
GREML = 0.502; proportion of genetic variance accounted for by which its associations are broadly related to genetic g or specifically
PC1 LDSC = 62.17%; proportion of genetic variance accounted for related to the phenotype under investigation.
by PC1 GCTA–GREML = 61.24%. Failure to take the multivariate structure of cognitive traits into
Using summary statistics from the above-described UKB analy- account may lead to incorrect inferences24—either that discoveries
ses, we next created polygenic scores (PGS) for genetic g and the made in a univariate GWAS of a cognitive trait are generalizable to
individual UKB cognitive traits and used them to predict, both the broader universe of cognitive traits when they are in fact spe-
individually and simultaneously, in Generation Scotland, variance cific to that trait, or that discoveries made in a univariate GWAS
in performance on the individual cognitive tests, the first unro- of a cognitive trait are specific to that trait when they are in fact
tated principal component of all tests (to index phenotypic g), the broadly associated with all traits that load on genetic g. For instance,
first unrotated principal component of all tests except Mill Hill our multivariate analysis using GenomicSEM indicates that a locus
Vocabulary (to index a more fluid g) and educational attainment on chromosome 7 (chr7:104558814–104588161) is associated with
NATuRE HuMAN BEHAvIouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Nature HumaN BeHaviour Articles
genetic g. Similarly, we report an association of a locus on chromo- captured by individual tests from those relevant to intermediately
some 8 (chr8:64496159–64842662) with trails-B (an index of execu- broad traits. Future work that employs a denser battery of cognitive
tive function, which is itself strongly genetically correlated with g14) tests will be valuable for such discernment. Second, using data from
in the univariate GWAS, and our GenomicSEM analysis indicates Generation Scotland, we closely replicated the positive manifold of
that this locus is also related to genetic g. Lee et al.32 have previously genetic correlations observed in UKB and we demonstrated the util-
reported both of these loci as being associated with maths ability ity of polygenic scores for genetic g constructed on the basis of the
(Supplementary Table 22), but there are no previously reported UKB data, but Generational Scotland was not sufficiently powered
associations with general cognitive function or intelligence. The to conduct individual SNP-level analyses. Several large-scale GWAS
current results indicate that the loci are broadly relevant to many exist for intelligence, but UKB appears to be the only such large-scale
abilities via genetic g, not simply to maths ability. Multivariate dataset for which multiple tests spanning a broad range of cogni-
methods, such as that pioneered here, are necessary to distinguish tive traits is available. When large-scale datasets with multivariate
whether a locus is narrowly relevant for an individual cognitive trait cognitive data become available, it will be prudent to examine the
or broadly relevant to genetic g. replicability of the individual g and s loci identified here. Finally, our
Genetic g was highly, but imperfectly, genetically correlated with analyses were based exclusively on individuals of European ancestry
previous univariate GWAS of general cognitive function and intel- residing in the United Kingdom. It may not be assumed that the
ligence. Moreover, genetic g displayed lower (albeit still sizeable) results reported here will generalize beyond this population.
genetic correlations with educational attainment than have previ- In summary, we have inferred a genetic g factor using molecular
ous univariate GWAS of general cognitive function and intelligence. genetic data, and we have discerned genetic loci that are associated
This pattern suggests that previous GWAS of general cognitive abil- with genetic g from those associated with more specific cognitive
ity might have tapped more academic forms of cognitive function traits. We emphasize the large extant explanatory gap between
(that is, crystallized abilities such as verbal knowledge) than those genetic variation and shared (that is, general) variation in cognitive
tapped by the present group of cognitive tests. Consistent with this abilities.
hypothesis, a version of genetic g that excluded speeded tests—
which are known to be among the most culturally decontextual- Methods
ized of the cognitive traits42—produced somewhat higher genetic Sample. Data from the UKB study were used for the present study (https://
correlations with educational attainment, though these continued www.ukbiobank.ac.uk/). The UKB is a biomedical prospective cohort study that
collected a wide range of genetic and health-related measures from a national
be lower than those found between educational attainment and the
sample of community-dwelling participants in the United Kingdom. Ethical
previous univariate GWAS of general cognitive function and intel- approval for the UKB was granted by the Research Ethics Committee (no. 11/
ligence. A priority for future research will be to distinguish between NW/0382). This study uses European ancestry genome-wide genotyped data
genetic correlates of cognitive abilities that are driven by forms of from seven cognitive tests of varying sample size across phenotypes. Individuals
higher-order thinking and academic knowledge from those that were removed sequentially based on non-British ancestry, high missingness,
high relatedness (samples with over ten putative third-degree relatives) and sex/
are driven more so by forms of arguably more basic neurocogni-
gender mismatch between self-reported and genetic data. Our analysis sample
tive processing43. Moreover, given that the phenotypic g values from included 332,050 unrelated participants of European descent with high-quality
different cognitive test batteries administered to the same sample genotyping. Participant age ranged approximately 40–70 years at first assessment,
correlate very highly6, it will be useful in future research to discover and approximately 45–75 years at later assessments in which further cognitive tests
were administered. For each cognitive test, we included no more than one test
whether genetic g values obtained from different test batteries also
administration per participant in analyses.
have very high correlations. The advantage of modern genomic
methods, such as those used here, is that it is not necessary for the
same sample to be tested on both batteries, or even on the same tests Cognitive tests. Reaction time (n = 330,024): this test was self-administered by
participants at the baseline UKB assessment. In this task, pairs of either identical
within a given battery25.
or different cards were presented on a computer screen. If the two cards were
Some researchers have adroitly argued that a positive manifold of identical, participants had to push a button as quickly as possible. Reaction time
test intercorrelations may, in principle, arise from a pattern in which (RT) score corresponded with the time, in milliseconds, to identification of
individual genetic loci, biological mechanisms or cognitive pro- matching cards in four trials. Participants were presented with 12 trials in total.
The first five trials were used as a practice. Of the remaining seven trials, four
cesses contribute to subsets of traits, with the subsets varying across
presented identical cards. The score is the mean time (in milliseconds) for
loci, mechanisms or processes44–46. Others have similarly argued that
these four trials. Whereas there were only a few trials, internal consistency is
positive test intercorrelations may arise from reciprocal causation good (Cronbach α = 0.85). Scores were multiplied by −1 such that higher scores
among abilities, or between abilities and external forces, and that indicated more optimal performance.
genetic effects enter through specific points in the system and come Matrix pattern recognition (n = 11,356): the non-verbal fluid reasoning
matrix pattern recognition test is an adaptation of the matrices test included in
to be correlated through dynamic propagation47–49. Here we have
the COGNITO battery50, which is similar to the well-known Raven’s progressive
provided evidence not only of a positive manifold of genetic cor-
matrices test. This test was self-administered during the assessment centre
relations at the aggregate, genome-wide, level of analysis, but also imaging visit. This test involves the inspection of an abstract grid pattern with a
at the level of individual loci. Although these discoveries are them- piece missing in the lower right-hand corner. The pattern has a logical order.
selves insufficient for determining the causes of the positive mani- The participant is asked to select the correct multiple-choice option at the bottom
of the screen to complete the logical pattern both horizontally and vertically.
fold, they do help to inform and constrain past and future accounts
This 15-item test aims at assessing the ability to solve non-verbal, non-numerical
of the positive manifold and of the heritability of cognitive abilities. problems using novel and abstract materials. The score is the total number of
It is important to consider this work in light of its key limitations. items solved correctly in 3 min.
First, we had measures of different hierarchically intermediate traits Verbal numerical reasoning (n = 171,304): at the baseline assessment centre
(for example, processing speed, memory, reasoning), but we did not visit, a subsample of UKB participants self-administered the verbal numerical
reasoning test. Participants were asked 13 multiple-choice questions that assessed
have multiple measures per intermediate trait. We were therefore
verbal and numerical problem solving. The score was the number of questions
unable formally to model genetic associations with intermediate answered correctly in 2 min. This test has been shown to have adequate test–retest
traits as separate from those on s factors specific to the individual reliability (r = 0.65)51 and internal consistency (Cronbach α = 0.62)31. The verbal
cognitive traits. In other words, based on the data currently available, numerical reasoning test was also administered to three subsamples of participants
we have been well positioned to discriminate between genetic loci at the first repeat assessment visit, the assessment centre imaging visit and during
the web-based cognitive assessment. In the web-based version of this test, because
that are broadly relevant for genetic g from those that display more
there was an additional question the maximum score was 14. In the current
heterogeneous patterns of relations with individual cognitive tests, analysis the verbal numerical reasoning score used is taken from the first testing
but we are unable to distinguish loci relevant for very narrow traits occasion for each participant.
NATuRE HuMAN BEHAvIouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles Nature HumaN BeHaviour
Symbol digit substitution (n = 87,741): the symbol digit substitution test maximum-likelihood estimation. For genetic factor modelling in Genomic SEM,
was self-administered during both the assessment centre imaging visit and the the fit function used to estimate the model parameters takes into account the
web-based cognitive assessment. Participants were shown a key, pairing shapes precision of the elements of the S matrix, along with their sampling dependencies
with numbers. Participants were asked to use the key to fill the maximum number (which are needed to appropriately account for sample overlap across the GWAS
of empty boxes with the corresponding number paired with shapes in a series phenotypes) in the form of a sampling covariance matrix, V, that is estimated using
of rows. The score is the number of correct symbol–digit matches made in 60 s. a jackknife resampling procedure in the multivariable extension of LDSC available
Those with a score coded as 0 and those with a score >70 had their score set to in Genomic SEM. Model fit is considered good when ∑(θ) closely approximates
missing. In this analysis, the scores used were from the first testing occasion for S. For Genomic SEM, the fit function used was diagonally weighted least squares,
each participant. with a sandwich correction to adjust standard errors of model parameters based on
Memory pairs-matching test (n = 331,679): at the baseline UKB assessment, the off-diagonal elements of V. For phenotypic modelling, the fit function used was
memory was measured using a ‘pairs-matching task’. In this self-administered task, maximum likelihood.
participants are shown a randomly arranged, 4 × 3 grid of 12 ‘cards’, with six pairs In Genomic SEM, goodness-of-fit of the model is assessed by means of the
of matching symbols, for 5 s. The symbols were then hidden and the participant SRMR, model χ2, Akaike information criterion and CFI. For phenotypic factor
was instructed to select, from memory, the locations of the pairs that matched, in modelling, we additionally consider RMSEA. Hu and Bentler56 have proposed the
the fewest possible number of attempts. There was no time limit for this task. The following criteria for a good fit: CFI > 0.95, RMSEA < 0.08.
memory score was the total number of errors made during this task before all pairs
were identified. Scores were multiplied by –1 such that higher scores indicated Estimation of SNP-based heritability and genetic correlations using GCTA–
more optimal performance. GREML. Our primary means of estimating the UKB cognitive phenotype
Tower rearranging (n = 11,263): this test was self-administered during the SNP-based heritability and genetic correlations was with the multivariable version
imaging assessment centre visit. It is similar to the well-known ‘tower of Hanoi’ of LDSC available in Genomic SEM, as described in the “Factor models’ section.
task. Participants were presented with a display (display A) containing three However, to verify that the estimated genetic correlation matrix was consistent
different coloured hoops arranged on three pegs (towers). Another display (display across estimation methods reliant on different assumptions, we additionally
B) was shown underneath display A, with the three hoops arranged differently. implemented GCTA–GREML to estimate SNP-based heritability29 and genetic
The task involves deciding how many moves it would take to change display A correlations28. Due to computational requirements for the bivariate GCTA–GREML
into display B. The score was the number of correctly completed trials achieved analyses, a subset of individuals was created and used for all GCTA–GREML
in 3 min. analyses. This subset was created by performing listwise deletion for RT, memory,
Trail making test-B (n = 78,547): this test is a computerized version of the VNR, symbol digit substitution and trails-B (n = 72,583). The same covariates were
Halstead–Reitan trail-making test52. The trail-making test was self-administered included in all GCTA–GREML analyses as for the SNP-based association analyses.
during both the assessment centre imaging visit and the web-based cognitive One individual was excluded from any pair of individuals with an estimated
assessment. In part B of the test, participants were presented with the numbers coefficient of relatedness of >0.05.
1–13 and the letters A–L arranged quasi-randomly on a computer screen. The
participants were instructed to switch between touching the numbers in ascending Genetic correlations with neural phenotypes and longevity. We extended the
order, and the letters in alphabetical order (for example, 1-A-2-B-3-C) as quickly factor models in Genomic SEM to estimate the genetic correlations between the
as possible. The score was the time (in seconds) taken to successfully complete the genetic g factor from the UKB cognitive phenotypes and each of nine collateral
test. Those with a score coded as 0 (denoting trail not completed) had their score phenotypes in turn: educational attainment32; general cognitive function from
set to missing. Scores were multiplied by −1 such that higher scores indicated more Davies et al.19, Savage et al.21 and Hill et al.20; total brain volume from UKB37; and
optimal performance. In this analysis, the scores used were from the first testing Alzheimer’s disease34, schizophrenia35, ADHD36, autism spectrum disorder (ASD)57
occasion for each participant. and longevity38.
Genotyping. Prior to release of the UKB genetic dataset, quality control measures Multivariate GWAS in Genomic SEM. Using the univariate summary statistics for
were applied; these are described in Bycroft et al.53. Imputed dosage scores on up to each of the seven UKB cognitive phenotypes, Genomic SEM25 was used to conduct
80,639,280 autosomal variants were analysed (imputation reference panels included a multivariate GWAS, with the genetic g factor as the GWAS target (see left-hand
UK10K haplotype, 1000 Genomes Phase 3 and Haplotype Reference Consortium portion of Supplementary Fig. 9). Because the typical unit variance scaling cannot
panels); all variants had a minor allele frequency ≥0.000009 and an imputation be directly specified in a model in which the latent factor is a dependent variable,
quality (INFO) score of >0.6. we specified unit loading scaling (with matrices as the reference indicator;
Supplementary Table 29). Genomic SEM provides a SNP-specific heterogeneity
Genome-wide association analyses. Univariate genome-wide association statistic, Q, which indexes the extent to which the specified factor model is
analyses were performed for covariate-residualized scores on each UKB cognitive insufficient to account for the SNP effects on the individual traits analysed. High
phenotype using a linear association test in BGENIE53. The covariates were age, Q values for a given SNP indicate that a model that estimates SNP associations
assessment centre (where relevant), genotype batch, array and 40 genetic principal with each individual trait (see right-hand portion of Supplementary Fig. 9) fits
components. For phenotypes collected across multiple testing occasions, a separate better than a model that estimates a single SNP association with the factor. In other
GWAS was performed for non-overlapping participants from each occasion words, SNPs with genome-wide significant Q values may be interpreted as SNPs
and an inverse-variance-weighted meta-analysis was implemented in METAL54. that do not affect the genetic g. A detailed explanation of the Q statistic is provided
Because the size of the subsets of individuals for each phenotype varies greatly, an in the Supplementary Information (Interpreting the heterogeneity statistic).
additional quality control filter to remove SNPs with a minor allele count <25 was For multivariate GWAS in Genomic SEM, summary statistics for individual
applied to all GWAS summary results before further analyses. tests were restricted to SNPs with a minor allele frequency (MAF) > 1% and
INFO score >0.6, and to SNPs that were present for all seven cognitive tests.
Factor models. We performed genetic factor analysis on the UKB cognitive The summary statistics were also filtered to SNPs present in the European-only
phenotypes with Genomic SEM25, and phenotypic factor analysis with the lavaan 1000 Genomes Phase 3 reference panel, because the SNP minor allele frequencies
package for R55. In both genetic and phenotypic factor analysis, a common factor from the reference panel are necessary to obtain their variance for inclusion in the
model specifies that k phenotypes are described as linear functions of a smaller set genetic covariance (S) matrix. Using these quality control steps, 7,857,346 SNPs
of m (continuous) latent variables: y = Λη + ε. In this equation, y is a k × 1 vector of were present across all seven cognitive tests. Note that all cognitive phenotypes
indicators, ε is a k × 1 vector of residuals, η is an m × 1 vector of common factors had already been residualized for covariates when conducting the univariate
and Λ is a k × m matrix of factor loadings—that is, regressions relating the common GWAS, summary statistics for which are entered into multivariate analyses within
factors to the set of indicators. In the genetic factor model, y represents the genetic Genomic SEM such that further covariate adjustment was not needed at this stage.
components of the GWAS phenotypes whereas, in the phenotypic factor model, We adopt the field standard alpha threshold of 5 × 10−8 for GWAS. This
y represents the phenotypes themselves. The model-implied covariance matrix threshold amounts to a Bonferroni correction for the theoretical number of
of a confirmatory factor analysis is Σ(θ) = ΛΨΛ′ + Θ, where Ψ is an m × m latent independent tests in the genome given known linkage disequilibrium structure58.
variable covariance matrix (in the case of a single common factor, Ψ is simply equal Because all seven phenotypes are highly genetically correlated, it is inappropriate to
to the variance of the factor which we fix at 1 for scaling identification purposes), perform an additional Bonferroni correction for the seven additional phenotypes,
and Θ is a k × k matrix of covariances among the residuals, ε (typically a diagonal and we do not focus our interpretation on results of the seven univariate GWAS.
matrix, to indicate that all indicator residuals are assumed to be independent of one Rather, we focus on results of the multivariate GWAS within Genomic SEM for
another). A set of parameters (θ) is estimated such that the fit function indexing which there are two families of theoretical tests, each constituting a single set of
the discrepancy between the model-implied covariance matrix, ∑(θ), and the GWAS-type statistics: (1) genome-wide SNP associations with genetic g and
empirical covariance matrix, S, is minimized. (2) genome-wide SNP-specific heterogeneity indices (Q).
For genetic factor modelling in Genomic SEM25, S is a genetic covariance
matrix estimated using a multivariable extension of LDSC27. For phenotypic Genome-wide significant loci using functional mapping and annotation of
factor modelling in lavaan, S is a phenotypic covariance matrix that is genetic associations (FUMA). Genome-wide significant loci were defined from
empirically estimated from the raw phenotypic data using full-information the SNP-based association results using FUMA59. The SNP2GENE function was
NATuRE HuMAN BEHAvIouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Nature HumaN BeHaviour Articles
used to identify independent significant SNPs, defined as those with P ≤ 5 × 10−8 3. Calvin, C. M. et al. Childhood intelligence in relation to major causes
and independent of other genome-wide significant SNPs at r2 < 0.6. Tagged of death in 68 year follow-up: prospective population study. BMJ 357,
SNPs, for use in subsequent annotations, were then identified as all SNPs with j2708 (2017).
MAF ≥ 0.0005 and that were in linkage disequilibrium of r2 ≥ 0.6 with at least 4. Spearman, C. ‘General intelligence,’ objectively determined and measured.
one of the independent significant SNPs. These tagged SNPs included those Am. J. Psychol. 15, 201–292 (1904).
from the 1000 Genomes reference panel, and need not have been included in 5. Carroll, J. B. in Human Cognitive Abilities: A Survey of Factor-Analytic Studies
the GWAS performed in the current study. Genome-wide significant loci that (Cambridge Univ. Press, 1993).
were 250 kb or closer were merged into a single locus. Lead SNPs were defined as 6. Johnson, W., te Nijenhuis, J. & Bouchard, T. J. Still just 1 g: consistent results
independent significant SNPs that were independent from each other at r2 < 0.1. from five test batteries. Intelligence 36, 81–95 (2008).
We performed look-ups on all tagged SNPs (r2 > 0.6) within each locus, including 7. Tucker-Drob, E. M. Differentiation of cognitive abilities across the life span.
all 1000 Genomes SNPs; previously reported genome-wide significant findings are Dev. Psychol. 45, 1097–1118 (2009).
detailed in Supplementary Tables 22–28. 8. Cox, S. R., Ritchie, S. J., Fawns-Ritchie, C., Tucker-Drob, E. M. & Deary, I. J.
Structural brain imaging correlates of general intelligence in UK Biobank.
Polygenic prediction. Generation Scotland: the Scottish Family Health Study Intelligence 76, 101376 (2019).
(GS) is a family-structured, population-based cohort study recruited between 9. Deary, I. J. Looking Down on Human Intelligence: From Psychometrics to the
2006 and 2011. Participant recruitment occurred in Glasgow, Tayside, Ayrshire, Brain (Cambridge Univ. Press, 2000).
Arran and Northeast Scotland, yielding a total sample size of 24,084 with an age 10. Deary, I. J., Penke, L. & Johnson, W. The neuroscience of human intelligence
range of 18–100 years, and up to four generations per family, of which we selected differences. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 11, 201–211 (2010).
one participant per family. A full cohort description is provided elsewhere40,41 and 11. Haier, R. J. The Neuroscience of Intelligence (Cambridge Univ. Press, 2016).
online at http://www.generationscotland.org/. Ethical approval for GS was obtained 12. Kovas, Y. & Plomin, R. Generalist genes: implications for the cognitive
from the Tayside Committee on Medical Research Ethics (on behalf of the National sciences. Trends Cogn. Sci. 10, 198–203 (2006).
Health Service). Genotyping, using the Illumina HumanOmniExpressExome-8 13. Plomin, R. & Deary, I. J. Genetics and intelligence differences: five special
v.1.0 chip, was performed at the Edinburgh Clinical Research Facility, University findings. Mol. Psychiatry 20, 98–108 (2015).
of Edinburgh60. Participants were removed from GS if they had contributed to 14. Engelhardt, L. E. et al. Strong genetic overlap between executive functions
both GS and UKB (n = 622). For PGS analyses, 6,950 unrelated GS participants and intelligence. J. Exp. Psychol. Gen. 145, 1141–1159 (2016).
were retained. 15. Panizzon, M. S. et al. Genetic and environmental influences
The cognitive measures available in GS were Wechsler Logical Memory on general cognitive ability: is g a valid latent construct? Intelligence 43,
(episodic memory), Mill Hill Vocabulary (crystallized knowledge), Wechsler Digit 65–76 (2014).
Symbol Substitution (processing speed) and Verbal Fluency (semantic fluency), 16. Petrill, S. A. Molarity versus modularity of cognitive functioning? A
as described previously40,41. We created a phenotypic g using the first unrotated behavioral genetic perspective. Curr. Dir. Psychol. Sci. https://doi.
principal component of the cognitive measures, and also a fluid g using the first org/10.1111/1467-8721.ep11512833 (1997).
unrotated principal component of the cognitive measures excluding the Mill Hill 17. Petrill, S. A. et al. The genetic and environmental relationship between
Vocabulary scores. general and specific cognitive abilities in twins age 80 and older. Psychol. Sci.
Polygenic scores were created using PRSice v.2 (https://github.com/ https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-9280.00035 (1998).
choishingwan/PRSice) using a prespecified P value threshold of 1.0—that is, 18. Rijsdijk, F. V., Vernon, P. A. & Boomsma, D. I. Application of hierarchical
all SNPs61. Summary results from the genetic g and univariate cognitive test genetic models to Raven and WAIS subtests: a Dutch twin study. Behav.
GWAS were used to create PGS for the GS individuals. Before creating these Genet. 32, 199–210 (2002).
scores, SNPs with MAF < 0.01 were removed and clumping was used to obtain 19. Davies, G. et al. Study of 300,486 individuals identifies 148 independent
SNPs in linkage disequilibrium with r2 < 0.25 within a 250-kb window. Polygenic genetic loci influencing general cognitive function. Nat. Commun. 9,
scores for the individual cognitive tests were created using all available SNPs from 2098 (2018).
the GWAS summary results. For genetic g, all SNPs located within significant Q 20. Hill, W. D. et al. A combined analysis of genetically correlated traits
loci were removed from the GWAS summary results before the creation of identifies 187 loci and a role for neurogenesis and myelination in intelligence.
profile scores. Mol. Psychiatry 24, 169–181 (2019).
Linear regression models were used to examine the associations between 21. Savage, J. E. et al. Genome-wide association meta-analysis in 269,867
polygenic scores and cognitive performance and educational attainment in GS. individuals identifies new genetic and functional links to intelligence.
All models included age at measurement, sex and ten genetic principal Nat. Genet. 50, 912–919 (2018).
components, to adjust for population stratification. We created regression models 22. Davies, G. et al. Genome-wide association study of cognitive functions and
fitting each polygenic score individually, a multivariate model including all eight educational attainment in UK Biobank (N = 112,151). Mol. Psychiatry 21,
polygenic scores (genetic g, RT, memory, matrix, symbol digit substitution, trail-B 758–767 (2016).
and tower rearranging) and a series of models that fitted the genetic g polygenic 23. Debette, S. et al. Genome-wide studies of verbal declarative memory in
score plus one individual cognitive test score. From these models we were able to nondemented older people: The Cohorts for Heart and Aging Research in
determine the contributions of genetic g and each individual UKB cognitive test to Genomic Epidemiology Consortium. Biol. Psychiatry https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
prediction of variance in cognitive performance and educational attainment in an biopsych.2014.08.027 (2015).
independent sample, GS. 24. Schmidt, F. L. Beyond questionable research methods: the role of
omitted relevant research in the credibility of research. Arch. Sci. Psychol. 5,
32–41 (2017).
Reporting Summary. Further information on research design is available in the
25. Grotzinger, A. D. et al. Genomic structural equation modelling provides
Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.
insights into the multivariate genetic architecture of complex traits.
Nat. Hum. Behav. 3, 513–525 (2019).
Data availability 26. Fawns-Ritchie, C. & Deary, I. J. Reliability and validity of the UK Biobank
Complete summary GWAS results from this paper are available at https://www. cognitive tests. PloS ONE 15, e0231627 (2020).
lothianbirthcohort.ed.ac.uk/content/summary-data-and-other-resources. Raw 27. Bulik-Sullivan, B. et al. An atlas of genetic correlations across human diseases
data for UKB can be requested at https://www.ukbiobank.ac.uk/register-apply/. and traits. Nat. Genet. 47, 1236–1241 (2015).
Raw data for Generation Scotland can be requested at https://www.ed.ac.uk/ 28. Lee, S. H., Yang, J., Goddard, M. E., Visscher, P. M. & Wray, N. R. Estimation
generation-scotland/for-researchers/access-to-resources/access. of pleiotropy between complex diseases using single-nucleotide
polymorphism-derived genomic relationships and restricted maximum
likelihood. Bioinformatics 28, 2540–2542 (2012).
Code availability
29. Yang, J., Lee, S. H., Goddard, M. E. & Visscher, P. M. GCTA: a tool for
Code to perform common factor modelling and multivariate GWAS within Genomic genome-wide complex trait analysis. Am. J. Hum. Genet. https://doi.
SEM can be found at https://github.com/MichelNivard/GenomicSEM/wiki. org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.11.011 (2011).
30. Marioni, R. E. et al. GWAS on family history of Alzheimer’s disease.
Received: 30 September 2019; Accepted: 27 July 2020; Transl. Psychiatry 8, 99 (2018).
Published: xx xx xxxx 31. Hagenaars, S. P. et al. Shared genetic aetiology between cognitive functions
and physical and mental health in UK Biobank (N = 112 151) and 24 GWAS
consortia. Mol. Psychiatry 21, 1624–1632 (2016).
References 32. Lee, J. J. et al. Gene discovery and polygenic prediction from a genome-wide
1. Deary, I. J., Strand, S., Smith, P. & Fernandes, C. Intelligence and educational association study of educational attainment in 1.1 million individuals.
achievement. Intelligence 35, 13–21 (2007). Nat. Genet. 50, 1112–1121 (2018).
2. Strenze, T. Intelligence and socioeconomic success: a meta-analytic review of 33. Turley, P. et al. Multi-trait analysis of genome-wide association summary
longitudinal research. Intelligence 35, 401–426 (2007). statistics using MTAG. Nat. Genet. 50, 229–237 (2018).
NATuRE HuMAN BEHAvIouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles Nature HumaN BeHaviour
34. Lambert, J. C. et al. Meta-analysis of 74,046 individuals identifies 11 new 56. Hu, L. T. & Bentler, P. M. Cutoff criteria for fit indexes in covariance
susceptibility loci for Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Genet. 45, 1452–1458 (2013). structure analysis: conventional criteria versus new alternatives. Struct. Equ.
35. Lee, P. H. et al. Genomic relationships, novel loci, and pleiotropic Modeling 6, 1–55 (1999).
mechanisms across eight psychiatric disorders. Cell https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 57. Grove, J. et al. Identification of common genetic risk variants for autism
cell.2019.11.020 (2019). spectrum disorder. Nat. Genet. 51, 431–444 (2019).
36. Demontis, D. et al. Discovery of the first genome-wide significant 58. Pe’er, I., Yelensky, R., Altshuler, D. & Daly, M. J. Estimation of the multiple
risk loci for attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Nat. Genet. 51, testing burden for genomewide association studies of nearly all common
63–75 (2019). variants. Genet. Epidemiol. 32, 381–385 (2008).
37. Zhao, B. et al. Large-scale GWAS reveals genetic architecture of brain white 59. Watanabe, K., Taskesen, E., Van Bochoven, A. & Posthuma, D. Functional
matter microstructure and genetic overlap with cognitive and mental health mapping and annotation of genetic associations with FUMA. Nat. Commun.
traits (n = 17,706). Mol. Psychiatry https://doi.org/10.1038/s41380-019-0569-z 8, 1826 (2017).
(2019). 60. Kerr, S. M. et al. Pedigree and genotyping quality analyses of over 10,000
38. Timmers, P. R. et al. Genomics of 1 million parent lifespans implicates novel DNA samples from the Generation Scotland: Scottish Family Health Study.
pathways and common diseases and distinguishes survival chances. eLife 8, BMC Med. Genet. 14, 38 (2013).
e39856 (2019). 61. Euesden, J., Lewis, C. M. & O’Reilly, P. F. PRSice: polygenic risk score
39. Anttila, V. et al. Analysis of shared heritability in common disorders of the software. Bioinformatics 31, 1466–1468 (2015).
brain. Science 360, 6395 (2018).
40. Smith, B. H. et al. Generation Scotland: The Scottish Family Health Study;
Acknowledgements
a new resource for researching genes and heritability. BMC Med. Genet. 7,
74 (2006). This article benefited from valuable discussions with M. Nivard. This work was
41. Smith, B. H. et al. Cohort profile: Generation Scotland: Scottish supported by National Institutes of Health (NIH) grant no. R01AG054628. The
Family Health Study (GS: SFHS). The study, its participants and their Population Research Center at the University of Texas is supported by NIH grant no.
potential for genetic research on health and illness. Int. J. Epidemiol. 42, P2CHD042849. I.J.D. and G.D. are with the Lothian Birth Cohorts group, which is
689–700 (2013). funded by Age UK (Disconnected Mind grant), the Medical Research Council (grant
42. Jensen, A. R. Clocking the mind: mental chronometry and individual no. MR/R024065/1) and the University of Edinburgh’s School of Philosophy, Psychology
differences. Pers. Psychol. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1744-6570.2008.00111_7.x and Language Sciences. This research was conducted using the UK Biobank Resource
(2008). (Application Nos. 10279 and 4844). We are grateful for the availability of data from
43. Demange, P. A. et al. Investigating the genetic architecture of non-cognitive Generation Scotland: Scottish Family Health Study. Generation Scotland received core
skills using GWAS-by-subtraction. Preprint at bioRxiv https://doi. support from the Chief Scientist Office of the Scottish Government Health Directorates
org/10.1101/2020.01.14.905794 (2020). (no. CZD/16/6) and the Scottish Funding Council (no. HR03006). Genotyping of the GS:
44. Kovacs, K. & Conway, A. R. A. process overlap theory: a unified account of Scottish Family Health Study samples was carried out by the Genetics Core Laboratory at
the general factor of intelligence. Psychol. Inq. 27, 151–177 (2016). the Edinburgh Clinical Research Facility, University of Edinburgh, UK and was funded
45. Bartholomew, D. J., Deary, I. J. & Lawn, M. A new lease of life for Thomson’s by the Medical Research Council UK and the Wellcome Trust (Wellcome Trust Strategic
bonds model of intelligence. Psychol. Rev. 116, 567–579 (2009). Award, Stratifying Resilience and Depression Longitudinally, no. 104036/Z/14/Z). The
46. Ceci, S. J. On Intelligence–More or Less: A Bio-ecological Treatise on Intellectual funders had no role in study design, data analysis, decision to publish or preparation of
Development (Prentice Hall, 1990). the manuscript.
47. Van Der Maas, H. L. J. et al. A dynamical model of general intelligence:
the positive manifold of intelligence by mutualism. Psychol. Rev. 113, Author contributions
842–861 (2006). I.J.D. and E.M.T.-D. jointly conceived of the idea, designed the study and formulated
48. Dickens, W. T. What is g? Brookings Rev. https://www.brookings.edu/research/ the analytic plan. J.F. and G.D. performed the analyses, with contributions from A.D.G.
what-is-g/ (2007). I.J.D. and E.M.T.-D. wrote the paper, with contributions from J.F. and G.D. All authors
49. Tucker-Drob, E. M., Brandmaier, A. M. & Lindenberger, U. Coupled cognitive contributed to editing the paper.
changes in adulthood: a meta-analysis. Psychol. Bull. 145, 273–301 (2019).
50. Karen, R. et al. COGNITO: computerized assessment of information
processing. J. Psychol. Psychother. https://doi.org/10.4172/2161-0487.1000136 Competing interests
(2014). I.J.D. is a participant in UKB. All other authors declare no competing interests.
51. Lyall, D. M. et al. Cognitive test scores in UK biobank: data reduction in
480,416 participants and longitudinal stability in 20,346 participants. PLoS Additional information
ONE 11, e0156366 (2016).
Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/
52. Reitan, R. M. & Wolfson, D. The Halstead–Reitan Neuropsychological Test
s41562-020-00936-2.
Battery: Theory and Clinical Interpretation Vol. 4 (Neuropsychology Press,
1985). Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to E.M.T.-D. or I.J.D.
53. Bycroft, C. et al. The UK Biobank resource with deep phenotyping and Peer review information Primary Handling Editor: Charlotte Payne.
genomic data. Nature 562, 203–209 (2018).
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
54. Willer, C. J., Li, Y. & Abecasis, G. R. METAL: fast and efficient meta-analysis
of genomewide association scans. Bioinformatics 26, 2190–2191 (2010). Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
55. Rosseel, Y. Lavaan: an R package for structural equation modeling. J. Stat. published maps and institutional affiliations.
Softw. https://doi.org/10.18637/jss.v048.i02 (2012). © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2020
NATuRE HuMAN BEHAvIouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
1
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Corresponding author(s): Elliot M. Tucker-Drob & Ian J. Deary
Last updated by author(s): Jul 17, 2020
Reporting Summary
Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency
in reporting. For further information on Nature Research policies, see Authors & Referees and the Editorial Policy Checklist.
Statistics
For all statistical analyses, confirm that the following items are present in the figure legend, table legend, main text, or Methods section.
n/a Confirmed
The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
A statement on whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided
Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.
A description of all covariates tested
A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
A full description of the statistical parameters including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient)
AND variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)
For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted
Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.
For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated
Our web collection on statistics for biologists contains articles on many of the points above.
Software and code
Policy information about availability of computer code
Data collection We did not collect data as part of this study, but obtained data from UK Biobank and Generation Scotland. See Data availability statement
below.
Data analysis Code
Code to perform common factor modeling and multivariate GWAS within Genomic SEM can be found at
https://github.com/MichelNivard/GenomicSEM/wiki
For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors/reviewers.
We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Research guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.
Data
Policy information about availability of data
All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable:
- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets
- A list of figures that have associated raw data
- A description of any restrictions on data availability
Complete summary GWAS results from this paper will be made available at the time of publication
at https://www.lothianbirthcohort.ed.ac.uk/content/gwas-summary-data . Raw data for UK Biobank can be requested at
https://www.ukbiobank.ac.uk/register-apply/. Raw data for Generation Scotland can be requested at
https://www.ed.ac.uk/generation-scotland/using-resources/access-to-resources/access-process.
2
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Field-specific reporting
Please select the one below that is the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.
Life sciences Behavioural & social sciences Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences
For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/documents/nr-reporting-summary-flat.pdf
Life sciences study design
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
Sample size Describe how sample size was determined, detailing any statistical methods used to predetermine sample size OR if no sample-size calculation
was performed, describe how sample sizes were chosen and provide a rationale for why these sample sizes are sufficient.
Data exclusions Describe any data exclusions. If no data were excluded from the analyses, state so OR if data were excluded, describe the exclusions and the
rationale behind them, indicating whether exclusion criteria were pre-established.
Replication Describe the measures taken to verify the reproducibility of the experimental findings. If all attempts at replication were successful, confirm this
OR if there are any findings that were not replicated or cannot be reproduced, note this and describe why.
Randomization Describe how samples/organisms/participants were allocated into experimental groups. If allocation was not random, describe how covariates
were controlled OR if this is not relevant to your study, explain why.
Blinding Describe whether the investigators were blinded to group allocation during data collection and/or analysis. If blinding was not possible,
describe why OR explain why blinding was not relevant to your study.
Behavioural & social sciences study design
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
Study description We analyzed multivariate quantitative data from cognitive tests in combination with genome-wide association data.
Research sample Participants can from the UK Biobank and Generation Scotland studies, which are both population-based biomedical studies.
Sampling strategy We did not collect the data as part of this study. Data were made available to us for secondary data analysis by the UK Biobank and
Generation Scotland lead investigators.
Data collection We did not collect the data as part of this study. Data were made available to us for secondary data analysis by the UK Biobank and
Generation Scotland lead investigators.
Timing We did not collect the data as part of this study. Data were made available to us for secondary data analysis by the UK Biobank and
Generation Scotland lead investigators.
Data exclusions Exclusions were made to ensure that only unrelated, European-ancestry, participants were included in the analyses.
Non-participation We did not collect the data as part of this study. Data were made available to us for secondary data analysis by the UK Biobank and
Generation Scotland lead investigators.
Randomization This was not an experimental study. We analyzed observational data.
Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences study design
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
Study description Briefly describe the study. For quantitative data include treatment factors and interactions, design structure (e.g. factorial, nested,
hierarchical), nature and number of experimental units and replicates.
Research sample Describe the research sample (e.g. a group of tagged Passer domesticus, all Stenocereus thurberi within Organ Pipe Cactus National
Monument), and provide a rationale for the sample choice. When relevant, describe the organism taxa, source, sex, age range and
any manipulations. State what population the sample is meant to represent when applicable. For studies involving existing datasets,
describe the data and its source.
Sampling strategy Note the sampling procedure. Describe the statistical methods that were used to predetermine sample size OR if no sample-size
calculation was performed, describe how sample sizes were chosen and provide a rationale for why these sample sizes are sufficient.
3
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Data collection Describe the data collection procedure, including who recorded the data and how.
Timing and spatial scale Indicate the start and stop dates of data collection, noting the frequency and periodicity of sampling and providing a rationale for
these choices. If there is a gap between collection periods, state the dates for each sample cohort. Specify the spatial scale from which
the data are taken
Data exclusions If no data were excluded from the analyses, state so OR if data were excluded, describe the exclusions and the rationale behind them,
indicating whether exclusion criteria were pre-established.
Reproducibility Describe the measures taken to verify the reproducibility of experimental findings. For each experiment, note whether any attempts to
repeat the experiment failed OR state that all attempts to repeat the experiment were successful.
Randomization Describe how samples/organisms/participants were allocated into groups. If allocation was not random, describe how covariates were
controlled. If this is not relevant to your study, explain why.
Blinding Describe the extent of blinding used during data acquisition and analysis. If blinding was not possible, describe why OR explain why
blinding was not relevant to your study.
Did the study involve field work? Yes No
Field work, collection and transport
Field conditions Describe the study conditions for field work, providing relevant parameters (e.g. temperature, rainfall).
Location State the location of the sampling or experiment, providing relevant parameters (e.g. latitude and longitude, elevation, water
depth).
Access and import/export Describe the efforts you have made to access habitats and to collect and import/export your samples in a responsible manner and
in compliance with local, national and international laws, noting any permits that were obtained (give the name of the issuing
authority, the date of issue, and any identifying information).
Disturbance Describe any disturbance caused by the study and how it was minimized.
Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods
We require information from authors about some types of materials, experimental systems and methods used in many studies. Here, indicate whether each material,
system or method listed is relevant to your study. If you are not sure if a list item applies to your research, read the appropriate section before selecting a response.
Materials & experimental systems Methods
n/a Involved in the study n/a Involved in the study
Antibodies ChIP-seq
Eukaryotic cell lines Flow cytometry
Palaeontology MRI-based neuroimaging
Animals and other organisms
Human research participants
Clinical data
Antibodies
Antibodies used Describe all antibodies used in the study; as applicable, provide supplier name, catalog number, clone name, and lot number.
Validation Describe the validation of each primary antibody for the species and application, noting any validation statements on the
manufacturer’s website, relevant citations, antibody profiles in online databases, or data provided in the manuscript.
Eukaryotic cell lines
Policy information about cell lines
Cell line source(s) State the source of each cell line used.
Authentication Describe the authentication procedures for each cell line used OR declare that none of the cell lines used were authenticated.
Mycoplasma contamination Confirm that all cell lines tested negative for mycoplasma contamination OR describe the results of the testing for
mycoplasma contamination OR declare that the cell lines were not tested for mycoplasma contamination.
4
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Commonly misidentified lines Name any commonly misidentified cell lines used in the study and provide a rationale for their use.
(See ICLAC register)
Palaeontology
Specimen provenance Provide provenance information for specimens and describe permits that were obtained for the work (including the name of the
issuing authority, the date of issue, and any identifying information).
Specimen deposition Indicate where the specimens have been deposited to permit free access by other researchers.
Dating methods If new dates are provided, describe how they were obtained (e.g. collection, storage, sample pretreatment and measurement),
where they were obtained (i.e. lab name), the calibration program and the protocol for quality assurance OR state that no new
dates are provided.
Tick this box to confirm that the raw and calibrated dates are available in the paper or in Supplementary Information.
Animals and other organisms
Policy information about studies involving animals; ARRIVE guidelines recommended for reporting animal research
Laboratory animals For laboratory animals, report species, strain, sex and age OR state that the study did not involve laboratory animals.
Wild animals Provide details on animals observed in or captured in the field; report species, sex and age where possible. Describe how animals
were caught and transported and what happened to captive animals after the study (if killed, explain why and describe method; if
released, say where and when) OR state that the study did not involve wild animals.
Field-collected samples For laboratory work with field-collected samples, describe all relevant parameters such as housing, maintenance, temperature,
photoperiod and end-of-experiment protocol OR state that the study did not involve samples collected from the field.
Ethics oversight Identify the organization(s) that approved or provided guidance on the study protocol, OR state that no ethical approval or
guidance was required and explain why not.
Note that full information on the approval of the study protocol must also be provided in the manuscript.
Human research participants
Policy information about studies involving human research participants
Population characteristics Data from the UK Biobank study was used for the present study (https://www.ukbiobank.ac.uk/). The UK Biobank is a biomedical
prospective cohort study, which collected a wide range of genetic and health related measures from a national sample of
community dwelling participants from the UK.
Generation Scotland: the Scottish Family Health Study (GS) is a family-structured, population-based cohort study recruited
between 2006 and 2011. Participant recruitment occurred in Glasgow, Tayside, Ayrshire, Arran, and North-East Scotland,
yielding a total sample size of 24,084 with an age range between 18 and 100 years, and up to four generations per family, of
which we selected one participant per family. A full cohort description is provided online at http://www.generationscotland.org/.
Recruitment We did not recruit participants as part of this study. Data were made available to us for secondary data analysis by the UK
Biobank and Generation Scotland lead investigators.
Ethics oversight Ethical approval for the UK Biobank was granted from the Research Ethics Committee (11/NW/0382). Ethical approval for GS
was obtained from the Tayside Committee on Medical Research Ethics (on behalf of the National Health Service).
Note that full information on the approval of the study protocol must also be provided in the manuscript.
Clinical data
Policy information about clinical studies
All manuscripts should comply with the ICMJE guidelines for publication of clinical research and a completed CONSORT checklist must be included with all submissions.
Clinical trial registration Provide the trial registration number from ClinicalTrials.gov or an equivalent agency.
Study protocol Note where the full trial protocol can be accessed OR if not available, explain why.
Data collection Describe the settings and locales of data collection, noting the time periods of recruitment and data collection.
Outcomes Describe how you pre-defined primary and secondary outcome measures and how you assessed these measures.
5
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
ChIP-seq
Data deposition
Confirm that both raw and final processed data have been deposited in a public database such as GEO.
Confirm that you have deposited or provided access to graph files (e.g. BED files) for the called peaks.
Data access links For "Initial submission" or "Revised version" documents, provide reviewer access links. For your "Final submission" document,
May remain private before publication. provide a link to the deposited data.
Files in database submission Provide a list of all files available in the database submission.
Genome browser session Provide a link to an anonymized genome browser session for "Initial submission" and "Revised version" documents only, to
(e.g. UCSC) enable peer review. Write "no longer applicable" for "Final submission" documents.
Methodology
Replicates Describe the experimental replicates, specifying number, type and replicate agreement.
Sequencing depth Describe the sequencing depth for each experiment, providing the total number of reads, uniquely mapped reads, length of
reads and whether they were paired- or single-end.
Antibodies Describe the antibodies used for the ChIP-seq experiments; as applicable, provide supplier name, catalog number, clone
name, and lot number.
Peak calling parameters Specify the command line program and parameters used for read mapping and peak calling, including the ChIP, control and
index files used.
Data quality Describe the methods used to ensure data quality in full detail, including how many peaks are at FDR 5% and above 5-fold
enrichment.
Software Describe the software used to collect and analyze the ChIP-seq data. For custom code that has been deposited into a
community repository, provide accession details.
Flow Cytometry
Plots
Confirm that:
The axis labels state the marker and fluorochrome used (e.g. CD4-FITC).
The axis scales are clearly visible. Include numbers along axes only for bottom left plot of group (a 'group' is an analysis of identical markers).
All plots are contour plots with outliers or pseudocolor plots.
A numerical value for number of cells or percentage (with statistics) is provided.
Methodology
Sample preparation Describe the sample preparation, detailing the biological source of the cells and any tissue processing steps used.
Instrument Identify the instrument used for data collection, specifying make and model number.
Software Describe the software used to collect and analyze the flow cytometry data. For custom code that has been deposited into a
community repository, provide accession details.
Cell population abundance Describe the abundance of the relevant cell populations within post-sort fractions, providing details on the purity of the samples
and how it was determined.
Gating strategy Describe the gating strategy used for all relevant experiments, specifying the preliminary FSC/SSC gates of the starting cell
population, indicating where boundaries between "positive" and "negative" staining cell populations are defined.
Tick this box to confirm that a figure exemplifying the gating strategy is provided in the Supplementary Information.
Magnetic resonance imaging
Experimental design
Design type Indicate task or resting state; event-related or block design.
6
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Design specifications Specify the number of blocks, trials or experimental units per session and/or subject, and specify the length of each trial
or block (if trials are blocked) and interval between trials.
Behavioral performance measures State number and/or type of variables recorded (e.g. correct button press, response time) and what statistics were used
to establish that the subjects were performing the task as expected (e.g. mean, range, and/or standard deviation across
subjects).
Acquisition
Imaging type(s) Specify: functional, structural, diffusion, perfusion.
Field strength Specify in Tesla
Sequence & imaging parameters Specify the pulse sequence type (gradient echo, spin echo, etc.), imaging type (EPI, spiral, etc.), field of view, matrix size,
slice thickness, orientation and TE/TR/flip angle.
Area of acquisition State whether a whole brain scan was used OR define the area of acquisition, describing how the region was determined.
Diffusion MRI Used Not used
Preprocessing
Preprocessing software Provide detail on software version and revision number and on specific parameters (model/functions, brain extraction,
segmentation, smoothing kernel size, etc.).
Normalization If data were normalized/standardized, describe the approach(es): specify linear or non-linear and define image types
used for transformation OR indicate that data were not normalized and explain rationale for lack of normalization.
Normalization template Describe the template used for normalization/transformation, specifying subject space or group standardized space (e.g.
original Talairach, MNI305, ICBM152) OR indicate that the data were not normalized.
Noise and artifact removal Describe your procedure(s) for artifact and structured noise removal, specifying motion parameters, tissue signals and
physiological signals (heart rate, respiration).
Volume censoring Define your software and/or method and criteria for volume censoring, and state the extent of such censoring.
Statistical modeling & inference
Model type and settings Specify type (mass univariate, multivariate, RSA, predictive, etc.) and describe essential details of the model at the first
and second levels (e.g. fixed, random or mixed effects; drift or auto-correlation).
Effect(s) tested Define precise effect in terms of the task or stimulus conditions instead of psychological concepts and indicate whether
ANOVA or factorial designs were used.
Specify type of analysis: Whole brain ROI-based Both
Statistic type for inference Specify voxel-wise or cluster-wise and report all relevant parameters for cluster-wise methods.
(See Eklund et al. 2016)
Correction Describe the type of correction and how it is obtained for multiple comparisons (e.g. FWE, FDR, permutation or Monte
Carlo).
Models & analysis
n/a Involved in the study
Functional and/or effective connectivity
Graph analysis
Multivariate modeling or predictive analysis
Functional and/or effective connectivity Report the measures of dependence used and the model details (e.g. Pearson correlation, partial
correlation, mutual information).
Graph analysis Report the dependent variable and connectivity measure, specifying weighted graph or binarized graph,
subject- or group-level, and the global and/or node summaries used (e.g. clustering coefficient, efficiency,
etc.).
Multivariate modeling and predictive analysis Specify independent variables, features extraction and dimension reduction, model, training and evaluation
metrics.