Articles
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-020-00963-z
Infants relax in response to unfamiliar foreign
lullabies
Constance M. Bainbridge 1,8 ✉, Mila Bertolo 1,8 ✉, Julie Youngers1,2, S. Atwood 1,3, Lidya Yurdum 1,
Jan Simson 1, Kelsie Lopez 1,4, Feng Xing1,5, Alia Martin 6 and Samuel A. Mehr 1,6,7 ✉
Music is characterized by acoustic forms that are predictive of its behavioural functions. For example, adult listeners accurately
identify unfamiliar lullabies as infant-directed on the basis of their musical features alone. This property could reflect a func-
tion of listeners’ experiences, the basic design of the human mind, or both. Here, we show that US infants (N = 144) relax in
response to eight unfamiliar foreign lullabies, relative to matched non-lullaby songs from other foreign societies, as indexed
by heart rate, pupillometry and electrodermal activity. They do so consistently throughout the first year of life, suggesting that
the response is not a function of their musical experiences, which are limited relative to those of adults. The infants’ parents
overwhelmingly chose lullabies as the songs that they would use to calm their fussy infant, despite their unfamiliarity. Together,
these findings suggest that infants may be predisposed to respond to common features of lullabies found in different cultures.
M
usic is a human universal1–4 that appears often in the lives difficulties, nursing less often; and they tend to be lethargic26.
of infants and their families5–9. Infants demonstrate a Children with Angelman syndrome show the opposite pattern:
remarkable variety of responses to music as they develop: they elicit more parental investment, with frequent drooling and
in the first few days of life, newborns remember melodies heard chewing, uncoordinated overfeeding and high degrees of social
in the womb10, distinguish consonant from dissonant intervals11 engagement27.
and detect musical beats12. Older infants differentiate synchronous Genomic imprinting disorders also alter the psychology of music,
movement from asynchronous movement in response to music13, in a fashion consistent with the idea that infant-directed song signals
become attuned to the rhythms of their native culture’s music by parental investment. Compared with the relaxation response that
their first birthday14, garner social information from the songs they typically developing people display during passive music listening,
hear15,16 and recall music in impressive detail17,18 after long delays15. Prader–Willi syndrome is associated with an increased relaxation
Why are infants so interested in music? One possibility centres response28, and Angelman syndrome is associated with a reduced
on the dynamics of parent–offspring interactions. Relative to relaxation response29. These effects are specific to music; they are
other animals, human infants are helpless; to survive, they rely on not elicited by listening to pleasant speech, suggesting that singing
resources provided by parents and alloparents19. Such resources, is a particularly effective means of satisfying parental investment
whether material (such as food) or not (such as attention) consti- elicitations in Prader–Willi syndrome, and a particularly ineffective
tute parental investment20. Human parental investment is routinely means of doing so in Angelman syndrome.
provided to infants in response to their elicitations, which often take Credible signals have evolved repeatedly in many species, with
the form of fussiness and crying21. similar patterns across senders and receivers23,30. The resulting
Infant-directed songs may credibly signal parental attention to innate links between the forms and functions of vocal signals31–33
infants, conveying information to infants that an adult is nearby, explain why, for example, hostile vocalizations across species—
attending to them and keeping them safe22,23. Singing indicates from growling tigers to shrieking eagles—are recognized as hostile
the location, proximity and orientation of the singer (even when by human listeners34. Because these signals are shaped by natural
the singer is not visible, as at night); and it is also costly, in that selection, they are expected to show consistency across members
the singer could be expending their energy on some other activity. of a species.
Because parental attention is a key resource for helpless infants, they Infant-directed vocalizations appear to fit this pattern. Infant-
probably are predisposed to attend to signals of it: infants should be directed speech is acoustically distinct from adult-directed speech
particularly interested in and reassured by vocal music with features across cultures35–40. Lullabies, a common form of infant-directed
suggesting that it is directed toward them. song, are reliably distinguishable from other songs41; in a representa-
Studies of people with genomic imprinting disorders provide a tive sample of music from small-scale societies, adult naïve listeners
unique test of this hypothesis because these disorders are charac- considered foreign lullabies likely to be ‘used to soothe a baby’, rela-
terized by divergent behaviours related to parental investment24,25. tive to dance, healing and love songs42. This result, which has also
For example, infants with Prader–Willi syndrome elicit less parental been supported by a massive conceptual replication (N = 29,357),
investment than do typically developing infants: they have feeding is explained in large part by the striking musical consistency of
1Department of Psychology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA. 2Department of Psychology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada. 3Department of Psychology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA. 4Department of Cognitive, Linguistic, and Psychological
Sciences, Brown University, Providence, RI, USA. 5Department of Education, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA. 6School of Psychology, Victoria
University of Wellington, Wellington, New Zealand. 7Data Science Initiative, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA. 8These authors contributed equally
and are listed alphabetically: Constance M. Bainbridge and Mila Bertolo. ✉e-mail: cbainbridge@g.harvard.edu; mila_bertolo@g.harvard.edu;
sam@wjh.harvard.edu
NAture HuMAN BeHAvIour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTUre HUMaN BeHavioUr
lullabies found across cultures: their slow tempos and smooth, min-
imally accented melodic contours1. Strikingly, these same musical
features appear in infant-directed or low-arousal Western music43–46. Baseline
preference trial
If infant-directed song indeed functions as a credible signal of (silent)
parental attention, then the universal features of the signal should
produce reliable relaxation effects in the receiver: singing should
satisfy infants’ fussy demands for parental investment, calm-
ing them. Common sense does suggest that infants are calmed by
Singing trial
infant-directed song, but typically, this question has been tested in (for example, lullaby)
the context of songs that are known to the infant and/or are sung
in a familiar language. This makes it difficult to measure the spe-
cific soothing effects of infant-directed song, independently of the
soothing effects of familiar sounds, more generally. Adults’ ratings
Singing trial
of the familiarity and perceived relaxation of music are positively
(×4) (for example, non-
correlated47, and parents produce music for their children often5–9, lullaby)
so familiar music may produce mere-exposure effects48 on infant
relaxation.
Indeed, infant arousal, as indexed by electrodermal activity,
decreased in response to maternal singing in a ‘soothing’ style, rela-
Preference trial
tive to a ‘playful’ style; but both styles were produced in familiar (silent)
songs49. Listening to live or recorded lullabies reduced heart rate in
pre-term infants, more so than a silent control, but the songs were
well known and produced in a familiar language50. Singing reduced
distress after a still-face procedure, as indexed by increased smiling Fig. 1 | Structure of the experiment. Infants viewed videos of animated
and decreased ratings of negative affect, but the effects were driven characters who either appeared in silence (during preference trials) or sang
by the familiarity of the songs51. Infants attended longer to singing the songs one at a time, next to a distracting animation of slowly moving
than speech before becoming fussy, when both were produced in a coloured boxes.
foreign language52, but whether this effect reflects increased atten-
tion to songs or increased relaxation as a result of listening to music is
unknown. In sum, while there is some evidence that infant-directed In the main analyses, we analysed trial-wise mean z-scores for
songs produce relaxation effects in infants, the effects in prior stud- each infant, split by song type. As in previous work28,29, we trimmed
ies may be attributable to infants’ familiarity with the songs, rather (a) all values on trials for which there were fewer than five heart rate
than the songs’ acoustic properties (as would be predicted by a cred- observations during the normalization period (the previous trial),
ible signalling account22,23). as this would produce uninterpretable standard deviation values
Here, we ask whether infants relax in response to infant-directed with which to compute z-scores, and (b) extreme values, defined as
songs produced in unfamiliar languages from foreign societies. ∣z∣ > 5. These trimming rules dropped 2.19% and 0.31% of the heart
We studied 144 infants’ responses to videos of animated charac- rate observations, respectively, and 2 of the 144 participants. These
ters who lip-synched to songs drawn from the Natural History of decisions did not substantively affect any of the results. For this
Song Discography1, a collection of lullabies, dance songs, healing and all following analyses, assumptions for the relevant statistical
songs and love songs recorded in 86 world cultures. The songs were tests were met.
either infant-directed (the lullabies) or not (the other song types) Mean normalized heart rate during lullabies (Fig. 2a) differed
(Fig. 1 and Table 1). We measured infants’ heart rate, pupil dila- significantly from 0, indicating a decrease in heart rate relative to
tion, electrodermal activity, frequency of blinking and gaze direc- the previous trial (in z-scores, mean (M) = –0.15, s.d. = 0.43, 95%
tion. Based on prior results in a similar listening paradigm28,29, we CI [–0.23, –0.08]; t(140) = –4.28, P < 0.001, d = 0.36, one-sample
pre-registered a hypothesis that infants would show decreased heart two-tailed t-test). In contrast, heart rate during non-lullabies was
rate (that is, a relaxation response) during the lullabies, relative to the comparable to 0, indicating no change in heart rate relative to
non-lullabies. We report a test of that hypothesis, a series of planned the previous trial (M = –0.01, s.d. = 0.4, 95% CI [–0.07, 0.06];
exploratory analyses of other measures of infants’ responses and a t(139) = –0.21, P = 0.83, one-sample two-tailed t-test).
measure of parents’ intuitions about the songs. The within-subjects difference between mean heart rates
(that is, the main pre-registered analysis) showed a clear difference
results between song types, such that lullabies decreased heart rates signifi-
Confirmatory analysis. We pre-registered the prediction that cantly more than non-lullabies (Fig. 2a; t(138) = –2.75, P = 0.007,
infants’ heart rate would decrease more substantially as a result of paired two-tailed t-test). These findings confirm the pre-registered
listening to foreign lullabies than non-lullabies (the pre-registration prediction of reduced heart rate in response to unfamiliar foreign
is available at https://osf.io/f69mn). To this end, we normalized lullabies.
heart rate values during singing trials relative to the previous trial We conducted three planned follow-up analyses. First, to deter-
(where the previous trial was either a singing trial or a silent pref- mine what drove the mean difference in heart rate across lullabies
erence trial, in which the animated characters were silent but still and non-lullabies, we visualized the trajectory of heart rate within
visible; Fig. 1), such that z-scores are interpretable as immediate singing trials in a time-series analysis (Fig. 2b). While heart rates
changes in heart rate, indexing moment-to-moment relaxation dropped almost immediately following the onset of singing, regard-
(note that this normalization procedure was also pre-registered): less of song type, this drop was more pronounced during lullabies.
positive z-scores thus indicate an increase in heart rate from the Because time-wise heart rate trends were nonlinear, and in the
previous trial, and negative scores a decrease. We obtained heart absence of any a priori predictions about those trends, we elected
rate data by using a non-invasive physiology monitor (Empatica not to model them directly.
E4), which also measured electrodermal activity (see Exploratory Second, we tested whether the heart rate effects were driven
analyses, below). by any particular age range of infants. They were not: a regression
NAture HuMAN BeHAvIour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTUre HUMaN BeHavioUr Articles
Table 1 | the songs infants heard. using the Natural History of Song Discography1, we chose eight lullabies and paired them with
non-lullabies drawn from the other three song types in the corpus (dance, love or healing), matching the perceived sex of the singer.
All songs were produced by solo voices without instrumental accompaniment
Lullaby Paired non-lullaby
Sex Society region Language type Society region Language
Female Saami Scandinavia Luk Saami Love Nenets North Asia Tundra Nenets
Nahua Maya Area Western Nahuatl Love Serbs Southeastern Europe Serbian Standard
Igulik Inuit Arctic and Subarctic Western Canadian Dance Chachi Northwestern South Cha’palaa
Inuktitut America
Kuna Central America Border Kuna Love Highland Scots British Isles Scottish Gaelic
Male Iroquois Eastern Woodlands Cherokee Love Kurds Middle East Central Kurdish
Hopi Southwest and Basin Hopi Healing Hawaiians Polynesia Hawaiian
Ona Southern South Selk’nam Love Chuuk Micronesia Chuukese
America
Highland Scots British Isles Scottish Gaelic Healing Seri Northern Mexico Seri
2
**
1
0
***
–1
–2
Lullaby Non-lullaby
of the within-subjects difference between mean heart rate during size across infants (main effect when sex of singer was matched to
lullabies versus non-lullabies on infant age found no significant primary caregiver: M = –0.16, s.d. = 0.68, 95% CI [–0.32, 0.01]; main
effect (Supplementary Fig. 3; F(1, 137) = 1.22, P = 0.27, R2 = 0.01, effect when sex of singer was not matched to primary caregiver:
omnibus test). M = –0.14, s.d. = 0.57, 95% CI [–0.27, 0]; t(131.28) = 0.18, P = 0.85,
Third, we tested whether a match between the sex of the infant’s independent-samples two-tailed t-test).
primary caregiver (as specified by the parent who attended the
experiment with the infant) and the perceived sex of the singers Exploratory analyses. We conducted a series of exploratory analy-
predicted any difference in within-subjects main effects, because, ses to test for convergent evidence supporting the pre-registered
for instance, when hearing male-sounding lullabies, those infants result reported above, and to examine an alternative interpretation
who have male primary caregivers may be likely to relax more of the heart rate findings suggested by an anonymous reviewer:
than those infants with female primary caregivers, since male sing- that rather than relaxing infants, the lullabies simply captured their
ers may sound more familiar to them. We found no evidence for attention more so than the other songs. Indeed, in some contexts,
such an effect: the within-subjects main effect was of comparable heart rate decreases can indicate increased attention to a stimulus53,
)z(
etar
traeh
naeM
a
0.25
Non-lullaby
0
Lullaby
–0.25
–0.50
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14
Time during trial (s)
)z(
etar
traeH
b
Fig. 2 | Lullabies reduce infant heart rate. a, The points depict mean trial-wise heart rates, normalized to the previous 14 s trial (regardless of its type), for
each infant (N = 142), with the gray lines indicating the pairs of points that represent the same infants; the violin plots (coloured areas) are kernel density
estimations; the horizontal black lines indicate the means across all participants, and the shaded white boxes indicate the 95% confidence intervals of the
means. The points are jittered to improve clarity. Heart rates were reduced during lullabies (the mean z-score was negative and significantly different from
0 (in z-scores, M = –0.15, s.d. = 0.43, 95% CI [–0.23, –0.08]; t(140) = –4.28, P < .001, d = 0.36, one-sample two-tailed t-test), denoted by the horizontal
dotted line), relative to the previous trial, but no such effect was found for non-lullabies (M = –0.01, s.d. = 0.4, 95% CI [–0.07, 0.06]; t(139) = –0.21,
P = 0.83, one-sample two-tailed t-test). Within-infants, heart rate during lullabies was significantly lower than during non-lullabies (t(138) = –2.75,
P = 0.007, paired two-tailed t-test). b, An analysis of heart rate over time, averaged across all trials, shows that while heart rate dropped initially in all
singing trials, the drop was more pronounced in lullabies, driving the overall effect. The lines and confidence bands are from a generalized additive model
that does not account for nesting. ***P < 0.001; **P < 0.01.
NAture HuMAN BeHAvIour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTUre HUMaN BeHavioUr
0.15
0.10 Non-lullaby
0.05
0
–0.05
Lullaby
–0.10
–0.15
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10111213
Time during trial (s)
and music is known to attract infants’ attention52. Additional mea-
sures can arbitrate between these interpretations.
First, we analysed infants’ pupil dilation, an indicator of both
attention to a stimulus54 and emotional arousal in response to no time-by-trial-type interaction; this is likely because pupil size
it55, including during music listening56,57. If the lullabies relaxed appeared to regress to the mean by the end of each trial (Fig. 3).
infants, then pupil size should decrease during lullabies, relative to
non-lullabies—contrasting sharply with an attention account for the Relaxation response as indexed by electrodermal activity. We used
heart rate findings, which would predict increases in pupil size. the same normalization approach as the pupillometry analysis,
Second, we analysed infants’ electrodermal activity, an indi- because normalizing to the previous trial, as in the heart rate analy-
cator of arousal used in prior studies of relaxation responses to ses, produced a distribution with unacceptably long tails (zs > 100).
music49,51. If the lullabies relaxed infants, then electrodermal activity This is likely because the short trial length (14 s) affords only mini-
should decrease during lullabies, relative to non-lullabies. Increased mal variability in electrodermal activity, which generally changes
attention, however, does not imply a directional effect on electro- much more slowly than does heart rate, inflating z-scored values.
dermal activity. Normalization to the full experiment period produced a more
Third, we analysed infants’ gaze toward the animated charac- acceptably narrow range of z scores, such that applying the same
ters, and rate of blinking, as measures of interest in the songs. These trimming criterion as we used for heart rate (∣z∣ > 5) resulted in the
measures do not bear on the relaxation hypothesis, but rather, they removal of only 4 observations of nearly 100,000.
test the degree to which infants’ attention to the animated charac- First, we noted an overall positive trend in electrodermal activity
ters varied as a function of whether they were singing lullabies or throughout the study, irrespective of the songs the infant was lis-
non-lullabies. tening to. We fitted a random-effects linear model to all z-scored
Last, in two additional analyses (unrelated to the relaxation and observations (N = 25,938 from 144 infants, mean = 180 observa-
attention accounts described above), we explored the degree to tions per infant), which showed that electrodermal activity steadily
which the perceived infant-directedness of the songs was predictive increased throughout the experiment, on average (t(25,819) = 38.5,
of infants’ heart rates; and the degree to which parents made infer- P < 0.001, β = 0.002).
ences about the different song types. Note that this result contrasts sharply with infants’ responses
during a distress induction procedure, as in previous research on
Relaxation response as indexed by pupillometry. Using videos of the calming effects of singing51. In that type of study, arousal and
infants’ faces during the experiment, we developed a procedure for fussiness increase during a negative interaction (for example, a
manual annotation of pupil size and obtained pupil size annota- still-face procedure), and subsequently decrease during a positive
tions for the singing trials (Methods and Supplementary Figs. 1 and ‘recovery phase’. This is unsurprising, however, given the structure
2). We normalized these annotations across all available data from of this experiment: infants often become bored and fussy during
each infant, after binning observations by second to reduce noise. repetitive experiments, increasing arousal.
We analysed changes in pupil dilation over the course of a singing As such, we measured the rate of increase in electrodermal
trial, collapsing across all trials; and tested for differences between activity, and analysed changes in electrodermal activity as a func-
lullabies and non-lullabies. tion of lullaby or non-lullaby listening relative to this increase. This
Consistent with a relaxation account, and in contrast to an required centring the z-scores infant- and trial-wise. The key ques-
attention account, pupils were smaller during lullabies than during tion is thus whether listening to a lullaby yields lower electrodermal
non-lullabies (Fig. 3). We fitted a random-effects linear model to activity than the predicted overall trial-wise increase, all else equal.
the z-scored observations, predicted from the time course of each The results supported the relaxation account (Fig. 4). We fitted
trial, with a random effect of trial (N = 3,096 binned relative pupil a random-effects linear model of electrodermal activity change
size observations from 30 infants, mean = 103.2 observations per scores over time, trial-wise, so as to test for a time by song type
infant; likelihood ratio χ2 = 7.682, P = 0.021). The model showed interaction. The model fit was acceptable (likelihood ratio χ2 = 443,
that pupil size was smaller during lullabies than non-lullabies, P < 0.001), the interaction term was significant (t(61,174) = −10.3,
on average (t(3,086) = 2.507, P = 0.012, β = 0.089). We found P < 0.001, β = −0.006) and a general linear hypothesis test showed
)z(
ezis
eye
ot
evitaler
ezis
lipuP
0.10
0.08
Non-lullaby
0.06
0.04
0.02
0
Lullaby
–0.02
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1011121314
Time during trial (s)
Fig. 3 | Pupil dilation is reduced during lullabies. Collapsing across all
singing trials, pupil size was lower during lullabies than non-lullabies
(t(3,086) = 2.507, P = 0.012, β = 0.089), in the subset of the participants
studied (N = 30). The blue and red lines and confidence bands are from a
LOESS regression that does not account for nesting.
)z
deretnec(
ytivitca
lamredortcelE
Fig. 4 | Lullabies attenuate increases in arousal. The black dotted line
denotes the expected rise in electrodermal activity during a trial, from a
linear model (N = 25,938 observations from 144 infants, t(25,819) = 38.5,
P < 0.001, β = 0.002). This rise is attenuated during lullaby trials but not
during non-lullaby trials, such that the expected level of electrodermal
activity by the end of a lullaby trial is reduced (expected difference at
time = 14 s; β = 0.075, 95% CI [–0.098, –0.052], χ2 = 289.2, P < 0.001,
d = 0.25).
NAture HuMAN BeHAvIour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTUre HUMaN BeHavioUr Articles
an expected difference in electrodermal activity between lullabies
80
and non-lullabies at the end of the trial (time = 14 s; β = −0.075,
95% CI [–0.098, –0.052], χ2 = 289.2, P < 0.001, d = −0.25). These 70
results indicate that lullabies attenuated increases in electrodermal
60
activity.
50
Visual attention to singers. We ran two sets of exploratory analy- 40
ses concerning infants’ visual attention to the animated characters,
30
using manual annotations of infants’ duration of gaze toward them
(see Methods). In previous research, infants demonstrated social 20
preferences for a person who had previously sung a song familiar to 10
the infant15,16; as such, we explored whether such a preference could
0
be elicited purely on the basis of a difference in the types of songs a
0 1 2 3 4
singer produced. Number of lullaby-singer choices
We found no evidence for such an effect. Infants looked for
comparable durations to the two characters during singing trials
(Supplementary Fig. 4; in seconds, lullabies: M = 8.1, s.d. = 2.57,
95% CI [7.68, 8.53]; non-lullabies: M = 7.92, s.d. = 2.77, 95% CI
[7.46, 8.37]; t(144) = 0.68, P = 0.5, two-tailed paired t-test). The
two one-sided test procedure for equivalence testing58 confirmed
that these rates of attention were statistically equivalent (Δ = 1 s;
Δ: t(144) = 4.335, P < 0.001; Δ : t(144) = − 2.972, P = 0.002). L U
The same pattern was observed during the preference trials:
attention to the two characters in silence, and after they had each
sung a lullaby or non-lullaby, did not differ (Supplementary Fig. 4;
attention in seconds to lullaby singer: M = 4.42, s.d. = 2.45, 95% CI
[4.02, 4.82]; non-lullabies: M = 4.62, s.d. = 2.66, 95% CI [4.18, 5.05];
t(145) = –0.53, P = 0.6, two-tailed paired t-test). These rates were Parent intuitions about foreign lullabies. After each infant had
statistically equivalent (Δ = 1 s; Δ: t(145) = 2.202, P = 0.015; Δ : participated in the experiment, we showed a parent the same
L U
t(145) = −3.264, P < 0.001). Note that these analyses include a few animated characters that the infant had seen. The characters sang
more infants than the heart rate analyses do; this is because some the eight songs that were not presented during the experiment, such
infants completed the study and were subsequently excluded from that the songs were unfamiliar to the parent.
the heart rate analyses due to a poor physiology monitor signal, but We asked the parent, for each pair of songs, to choose the charac-
had usable gaze data. ter whose song they would prefer to sing to soothe their infant, if the
As an additional exploratory measure, we counted the num- infant were fussy and the parent knew how to sing the songs. Given
ber of eye blinks during the singing trials, as blinks may index previous findings that adults are sensitive to the soothing functions
perceived stimulus salience59. Infants blinked slightly less during of foreign lullabies1,42, we expected parents to choose the lullaby
lullabies (number of blinks per trial: median = 1, interquartile range: singers more often than the non-lullaby singers.
0.5–1.5) than non-lullabies (median = 1, interquartile range: 0.5–2), They did (Fig. 5). For the four pairs of songs, the median number
suggesting that they were more interested in the singers during of choices for the lullaby singer was four (all of them), a rate higher
lullabies than during non-lullabies (z = –2.25, P = 0.02, Wilcoxon than the chance level of two choices (interquartile range: 3–4;
two-tailed signed-rank test). But blinking was rare, so this explor- z = −9.89, P < 0.001, Wilcoxon two-tailed signed-rank test).
atory result should be interpreted with caution, as it may be an
artefact of restricted range. Discussion
We found that infants relax in response to unfamiliar foreign
Relation between songs’ infant-directedness and relaxation effects. lullabies. Relative to non-lullabies, infants’ heart rates slowed while
The lullabies we studied differ acoustically from non-lullabies in a listening to lullabies; this effect did not merely reflect attention-related
number of ways: they tend to be less accented and slower in tempo, heart rate deceleration, as it was accompanied by decreased pupil
and have smaller pitch ranges and more variable macro-meters dilation and attenuated electrodermal activity. Moreover, the size of
than the other songs1. These features are reflected in naïve listeners’ the heart rate effect remained steady across all ages of infants in
ratings: the lullabies are perceived to have lower melodic and rhyth- the age range 2–14 months, suggesting that it was not altered by
mic complexity, slower tempo, less steady beat, lower arousal, lower infants’ rapidly growing experience with music. And the effect was
valence and lower pleasantness42. Together, these features predict predictable as a function of the degree of infant-directedness of
the degree to which listeners perceive a song as infant-directed35,42. the songs, suggesting that a core set of acoustic features asso-
Infants’ relaxation responses to lullabies should be explica- ciated with infant-directedness across cultures produced the
ble by their responses to these acoustic features. To test this, we psychophysio logical effects in the infants.
asked whether we could predict variability in infant physiological Infants were also highly attentive to the simple animated charac-
responses as a function of the degree of infant-directedness of each ters who produced the songs: they reliably attended to the characters
song, using the adult ratings from prior work42. Modelling trials and for the majority of each singing trial, rarely blinking, and blinking
participants as random effects in a linear regression, we predicted modestly less during lullabies than non-lullabies. Moreover, parents
infant heart rate from songs’ perceived infant-directedness. We uniformly chose lullabies over non-lullabies as the songs that they
found a significant negative relationship, of modest size, such that themselves would prefer to use to calm a fussy infant.
the more infant-directed a song was, the larger the expected reduc- Infants and parents demonstrated all these behaviours without
tion in infant heart rate (t(15,239) = −6, P < 0.001, β = −0.052). having previously learned anything about the music in question:
This result confirms that the acoustic features of the songs drove the they were given no cues as to the original behavioural contexts of
relaxation effects on infants. the songs, as all the music was produced by solo voices without
stnerap
fo
rebmuN
Fig. 5 | Parents prefer foreign lullabies to non-lullabies for soothing their
own infants. The histogram displays the distribution of parents’ choices
of whose song (lullaby singer or non-lullaby singer) they would prefer to
sing to their own infant (if the infant were fussy and if they knew how to
sing both songs; N = 135 parents of our 144 infants participated in this
follow-up survey). Parents made this choice four times, so the maximum
number of lullaby singer choices was four. The dashed line indicates the
chance level of two choices. Parents almost always chose the lullaby
singer (interquartile range: 3–4; z = 9.89, P < 0.001, Wilcoxon two-tailed
signed-rank test).
NAture HuMAN BeHAvIour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTUre HUMaN BeHavioUr
accompanying instruments; and they were unfamiliar with the Experiments in adults might also inform whether soothing
songs they heard, unfamiliar with the languages they were sung in, effects of particular acoustic features in music could underlie later
and unfamiliar with the musical styles of the societies that originally responses to music in adulthood. While adults no longer seek
produced the songs. out parental investment, perhaps the musical features that soothe
These findings support a hypothesized role for infant-directed fussy infants (for example, slower tempos and fewer rhythmic
song in the ecosystem of parental investment22,23—including the accents) correspond with musical features that shape adults’ emo-
proclivity of parents to sing to their infants6–8, the acoustic features tional responses to music66,67, which could influence physiological
that characterize infant-directed songs worldwide1,35,41–46, infants’ responses to music listening.
ability to perceive them and motivation to engage with them60,61 Second, while infants in our studies listened to songs produced
and their calming effects49–52—that is both universal and innately by simple animated characters in isolation, their real-world musical
specified. experiences are far richer, obviously. Parents sing to their infants
Note, however, that we only studied infants and parents from in a multitude of environments (before a nap, in the car, during a
a single Western, educated, industrialized, rich and democratic bath) and as part of complex multimodal experiences including
(WEIRD) society62, who heard music from many other societies other actions (rocking, bouncing) and other content (stories,
during this experiment. We expect that the findings will repeat with instructions). The relaxing properties of lullabies demonstrated
infants and parents in any society and are eager to find out whether here likely interact with all of these other features. Experiments that
they do. manipulate them—for example, by comparing the relaxation effects
The findings reported here may also be compatible with an of music listening in isolation with those of music listening while
alternative account. Over the course of early infancy, infants prob- being rocked—would more fully lay out the feature space of the
ably learn associations between soothing, sleep-inducing contexts infant’s musical experience, specifying what it is about lullabies that
and lullabies produced by their caregivers. Perhaps the infants we infants find satisfying in natural contexts of parental investment.
studied listened to the unfamiliar, foreign lullabies, found that they Moreover, lullabies are but one of many forms of infant-directed
sounded somewhat similar to the lullabies that their caregivers songs; songs directed toward infants in the context of play68, which
produce and subsequently relaxed. Such an account would not also appear universally1, likely have their own unique, contrasting
explain cross-cultural consistency in lullaby features, but these features, and corresponding effects on infants.
could have arisen via mechanisms other than innate specifications Third, at present we know very little about what inferences
of infant responses (for example, convergent cultural evolution63). infants make about the songs they hear or the people who sing
The consistency of the relaxation effects across a full year of infancy them. In previous work, infants preferred the singer of a song that
(see Supplementary Fig. 3), a time when infant music percep- infants had previously learned in the context of live social interac-
tion is actively shaped by musical experience14, weighs against an tions15,16. Here, although infants relaxed more when listening to
experience-dependent interpretation, but we cannot rule it out. lullabies, they showed no preference for the lullaby singer over the
Whether the relaxation effects reflect infants’ predisposi- other singer during the silent preference trials or during singing.
tions, early learning, or both, two aspects of infants’ responses to This suggests that infants’ physiological responses to music may be
music are surprising. First, whereas prior work has demonstrated dissociated from their musical and/or social preferences. One pos-
effects of music on infant arousal50,51, they were likely bolstered by sibility is that the lullabies are more relaxing than the other songs for
mere-familiarity effects48, as infants have robust preferences for infants, but that they do not necessarily prefer hearing the lullabies.
familiar, positive experiences. Here, because infants were unfamil- Another is that infants do prefer listening to the lullabies over the
iar with all aspects of the lullabies (including the languages in which other songs, but that this does not translate to a social preference for
they were sung and the societies in which they were recorded), the their singers. Infants’ social preferences for singers may rely instead
results imply a specific soothing effect of music, over and above any on the context in which they learned the songs they know, such that
potential effects of familiarity. Second, despite the fact that lulla- infants consider singers of songs which they previously learned in a
bies are characterized by a universal set of acoustic features, there is social interaction to be particularly good social partners or sources
nevertheless a great deal of variability in the lullabies infants heard of parental investment15,16.
(see stimuli at https://osf.io/2t6cy). This implies that infants’ Taking this possibility a step further, might infants expect
responses are robust to a degree of musical variability, providing caregiving characters to produce infant-directed music for other
further support for the idea that infant-directed song induces relax- distressed babies, just as they expect different adults who soothe the
ation in infants. same baby to affiliate with one another69? Such results are plausible,
We leave open at least three series of questions about how and given the known links between musical experience and infant social
why infant-directed music works the way it does. cognition15,16,70,71, but have not yet been tested.
First, what is it about lullabies that makes them relaxing for However these lines of research play out, the present findings
infants? The acoustic features of lullabies differ from those of other immediately suggest that singing is an effective means by which
songs in systematic ways, universally1: which of these features drive caregivers can relax infants, and raise the possibility of cumula-
the relaxing effect of lullabies, and how? Do those features reflect tive positive effects of music on infant and parent well-being. Live
evolved predispositions that are specific to music22,23? Or might they and recorded music have shown promise in improving a variety of
reflect general form–function principles of animal vocal signals, clinical outcomes72,73, including in parents and infants74–78. Music
such as those that lead alarm signals to be consistently loud and may also play an everyday role in improving health in infants—a
harsh across species31,32,64? Future studies could test these questions role it has taken on across cultures and across human history1.
by comparing infants’ physiological responses across different song
types and across different acoustic signals, or by systematically Methods
manipulating the acoustic features present in songs to measure their Participants. This research was approved by the Committee on the Use of Human
relaxation effects on listeners. Prior research has outlined some Subjects, Harvard University’s Institutional Review Board and complies with all
musical features that parents in Western cultures exaggerate while relevant ethical regulations. Parents provided informed consent before their and
singing lullabies43,65, which correspond with acoustic differences their infant’s participation.
We recruited 144 typically developing infants from the Greater Boston area
between infant- and adult-directed song across many societies35;
(72 females, mean age = 7.2 months, s.d. = 3.1, range: 2.1–14.3). Data from an
these are good candidates for possible features that may drive relax- additional 21 infants were collected but excluded due to infant fussiness (n = 11),
ation effects. lack of attention (n = 1), technical error (n = 8) or experimenter error (n = 1).
NAture HuMAN BeHAvIour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTUre HUMaN BeHavioUr Articles
Nearly all infants were born full-term. Information about language exposure was depending on the size of the infant, and usually on the left side. The monitor
available from 98 of the participants; of these, none of the languages spoken at records heart rate via a photoplethysmograph at the site of the device and
home matched those used in the stimuli of this study (see Table 1). electrodermal activity via electrodes attached to the side or bottom of the infant’s
Infants who became fussy and ended their participation partway through the foot (with BIOPAC isotonic gel); it has been successfully validated in adults80.
study were included in the analyses if they attended to the first pair of songs and
the subsequent preference trial (see Stimuli). Most infants (n = 125) contributed Pupillometry. We developed a procedure to manually annotate pupil dilation
data for all four song pairs and preference trials. For compensation, parents and applied it to still images from 30 of the infants. We extracted still images of
received a $5 gift card and infants were given a prize. All testing took place at the the infant’s face from the videos and used the dlib face recognition library81
Music Lab at Harvard University. to automatically rotate the frame, levelling the eye horizontally; and to isolate
one of the infant’s eyes (we randomly selected either the left or right eye for each
Stimuli. We chose 16 songs from the Natural History of Song Discography1 that infant). Workers on Amazon Mechanical Turk then viewed each eye image (see
were originally produced in 15 different societies and languages (Table 1). Eight Supplementary Fig. 1) and were asked (1) to adjust its brightness and contrast, so
of the songs were infant-directed, having been used as lullabies (that is, they were as to optimize visibility of the pupil; (2) to rate how visible the pupil was (from one
originally used to soothe, calm or put an infant/child to sleep) in the societies of six options: Pupil is clearly visible; Pupil is visible, but it’s difficult to see; Pupil is
where they were recorded, according to the anthropologist or ethnomusicologist NOT visible, but I could see enough of it to make a guess about its outline; Pupil is
who collected each recording. The other eight songs were originally produced in NOT visible but the eye is still open; Pupil is NOT visible because the eye is closed;
the context of expressing love (five), healing the sick (two) or dancing (one). Other); and (3) to draw a superimposed ellipse on the image, surrounding the
We chose this particular subset of 16 songs by first limiting the corpus to those visible area of the pupil.
songs produced by a single singer with no instrumental accompaniment; then, We set two qualification criteria for workers based on their performance in ten
using adults’ ratings of the songs from a previous study42, we chose a set of lullabies eye images: (1) a correlation of at least r = 0.8 between their annotations (that is,
rated as likely to be ‘used to soothe a baby’ and a set of non-lullabies with low the width and height of their ellipses) and the mean annotations from a pilot
ratings on that item. study (N = 46 workers); and (2) in at least seven of the ten images, a matching
We paired the lullabies and non-lullabies from these sets so as to match the visibility rating with the option selected by at least 15% of pilot participants.
perceived sex of the singer as closely as possible, because infants are sensitive to Workers were not aware of whether or not an image being annotated was counted
the sex of voices79. We ordered the pairs such that those with larger differences toward the qualification, but they were told that their performance was being
on the rating ‘used to soothe a baby’ were presented first, so as to maximize the evaluated in real time.
measurable differences in responses to lullabies versus non-lullabies in each infant, The pool of qualified workers then annotated three images per second of infant
even if they became inattentive or fussy partway through the study. All recordings video, drawn from the singing trials only and presented in a random order. Each
were normalized to approximately balance their perceived loudness and were also worker annotated approximately 263 images and spent 19.5 s per image, on average
manually edited to remove background noise and microphone artefacts, using (trimming top and bottom 1%). Four images per trial were ‘validation images’ that
noise reduction filters and equalization. were presented more than once to the same worker, providing a measure of internal
We generated animations of two characters who lip-synched to each song, reliability of the annotations. Reliability was high, as measured in two ways. First,
giving the impression that they were singing (Fig. 1; videos are available at visibility ratings were internally consistent (that is, validation images were generally
https://osf.io/2t6cy). Each character sang four songs, such that one exclusively classified repeatedly in the same fashion by annotators; see confusion matrix in
sang lullabies while the other exclusively sang non-lullabies. The videos were Supplementary Fig. 2). Second, the annotated pupil sizes were internally consistent:
counterbalanced on four dimensions: which was the first song heard (lullaby or validation annotations correlated with the original annotations at r = 0.88 (using
non-lullaby), which character was the lullaby singer (red or blue), which side the total pupil area). The degree of reliability varied as a function of how visible the
lullaby singer appeared on (left or right, to match character placement during pupil was; validation images marked “Pupil is clearly visible” correlated at r = 0.95,
silent preference trials; see Procedure) and the perceived sex of the singer (male or whereas those marked “Pupil is NOT visible, but I could see enough of it to make
female). This yielded 16 conditions, which we balanced across ages, such that each a guess about its outline” correlated less strongly, at r = 0.86. Because the workers
counterbalancing condition included infants across the full range of ages tested. were unaware of what songs the infants were listening to at the time of each still
Regardless of the counterbalancing condition, we varied the presentation order image (or even that the infants were listening to music at all) they always remained
of lullabies versus non-lullabies, so that they did not appear in strict alternation, blinded to the conditions of the study.
which could introduce order effects. This yielded trial orderings that were either To produce the data used in analyses, we computed a relative pupil size measure
P-L-N-P-N-L-P-L-N-P-N-L-P or P-N-L-P-L-N-P-N-L-P-L-N-P, where L denotes by dividing the pupil area by the full eye area, in pixels and within-participants, so
a lullaby singing trial, N denotes a non-lullaby singing trial and P denotes a as to adjust for increases in visible pupil size due to motion toward or away from
preference trial. Because there were two characters, and each character sang four the camera (which would erroneously increase or decrease the visible area of the
songs, each infant in the experiment listened to 8 of the 16 songs. pupil, respectively). Last, we removed all observations above the 99th percentile
and below the 1st percentile; these appeared to be impossibly large or small values
Procedure. Infants sat in a high chair (n = 62), recliner (n = 57) or a parent’s lap due to face recognition errors in the automated image extraction.
(n = 25) approximately 150 cm away from a 107.5 × 60.5 cm2 television screen;
parents chose the seat based on the physical size of the infant and whether the Gaze and blinking. We manually annotated infant gaze and blinks, frame-by-frame
infant was comfortable sitting in it. When infants sat in a high chair or recliner, the at 60 fps using Datavyu82. Annotators always worked with the audio muted, so that
parent sat behind them. When infants sat on their parent’s lap, the parent listened they remained unaware of the songs each character sang, and thus were blinded to
to masking music through passive noise-cancelling headphones throughout the the conditions of the study.
experiment; we also asked parents to keep their eyes closed. We recorded videos of For gaze, we randomly selected 20% of the videos, which a second person then
the infants at ultra-high definition (8-bit 4K at 150 Mbps; Panasonic Lumix GH5S annotated, independently of the first set of annotations. We assessed reliability
and Lumix G Vario 14–140 mm lens). by correlating trial-wise durations of gaze toward the two locations on the screen
Figure 1 depicts the order of events. The experiment began with a 14 s across pairs of annotators for each infant. Reliability was high (median r = 0.98,
baseline preference trial, in which the two animated characters were presented interquartile range: 0.90–0.99).
simultaneously in silence. Four sets of three trials followed, with each set For blinks, which are more difficult to annotate, and, given their sparsity,
consisting of two singing trials and one preference trial. On the singing trials, one are more likely to produce internally unreliable annotations, we used a slightly
of the animated characters sang a song, appearing alone on the screen next to a different procedure. Two annotators independently annotated all the videos,
screensaver-like animation (to reduce the likelihood that infants would look only and we assessed the reliability of each video’s annotations by correlating the
at the singer). Each singing trial was 14 s long. The preference trials were identical two annotators’ trial-wise counts of blinks for each infant. The distribution of
to the baseline preference trial. Attention-grabbing animations appeared at the correlations was strongly left-skewed, with approximately ten low outliers
centre of the screen before each preference trial. The experiment lasted about five (rs < 0.6). The annotators revisited those ten videos and corrected any evident
minutes. Experimenters were unaware of the order of presentation of stimuli and errors, or elected to drop these infants from analyses, because they disagreed about
thus were unable to influence the infants’ behaviour or responses in relation to the the timing and frequency of the blinking. The decision to drop these participants
music they heard. was made blind to the results of any analyses. Among the remaining participants
Characters on the screen were 25 cm wide. They were presented 45 cm apart (n = 140) reliability was high (median r = 0.94, interquartile range: 0.85–1).
when appearing simultaneously during the preference trials. Videos were presented
at 4K resolution, and audio played from two speakers (Neumann KH80 DSP) Parent measures. After the infant completed the experiment, parents viewed
at approximately the height of the infants’ ears, 125 cm apart, placed such that videos of singing trials for the eight songs which their infant had not heard during
the infant was seated at the apex of an equilateral triangle formed with the two the study, using a tablet. For each pair, we asked parents to choose the song they
speakers. The songs had a maximum volume of approximately 60 dB. would prefer to sing if their baby were fussy (and assuming the parent already knew
how to sing both songs). We analysed all available data, regardless of whether or not
Psychophysiology. We recorded infant heart rate and electrodermal activity the parent’s infant had completed the experiment. Parents also completed a survey
with a physiological monitor (Empatica E4) attached to the infant’s thigh or calf, concerning their infant’s home musical environment, for use in a separate study.
NAture HuMAN BeHAvIour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTUre HUMaN BeHavioUr
Statistical power. We used data from a similar listening experiment in typically 22. Mehr, S. A. & Krasnow, M. M. Parent–offspring conflict and the evolution of
developing adults28 to compute a plausible within-subjects effect size, based infant-directed song. Evol. Hum. Behav. 38, 674–684 (2017).
on the difference in mean heart rate during speech versus song in people with 23. Mehr, S. A., Krasnow, M., Bryant, G. A. & Hagen, E. H. Origins of music
Prader–Willi syndrome (d = 0.36). We chose a target sample size of N = 144 before in credible signaling. Behav. Brain Sci. https://doi.org/10.1017/
running the experiment to provide power greater than 0.99 for the main planned S0140525X20000345 (2020).
comparison (that is, mean heart rate during lullaby trials relative to non-lullaby 24. Haig, D. & Wharton, R. Prader–Willi syndrome and the evolution of human
trials). We also chose this sample size to facilitate even counterbalancing of stimuli childhood. Am. J. Hum. Biol. 15, 320–329 (2003).
across a wide range of infant ages, maximizing our ability to measure age effects 25. Ubeda, F. Evolution of genomic imprinting with biparental care: implications
while avoiding effects of stimulus ordering. for Prader–Willi and Angelman syndromes. PLoS Biol. 6, 1678–1692 (2008).
26. Cassidy, S. B. & Driscoll, D. J. Prader–Willi syndrome. Eur. J. Hum. Genet. 17,
Reporting Summary. Further information on research design is available in the 3–13 (2008).
Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article. 27. Williams, C. A. et al. Angelman syndrome 2005: updated consensus for
diagnostic criteria. Am. J. Med. Genet. 140, 413–418 (2006).
Data availability 28. Mehr, S. A., Kotler, J., Howard, R. M., Haig, D. & Krasnow, M. M. Genomic
imprinting is implicated in the psychology of music. Psychol. Sci. 28,
All data reported here are available at https://github.com/themusiclab/infant-relax.
1455–1467 (2017).
Stimuli are available at https://osf.io/2t6cy. Audio excerpts from the Natural
29. Kotler, J., Mehr, S. A., Egner, A., Haig, D. & Krasnow, M. M. Response to
History of Song Discography are available at https://osf.io/vcybz; the full corpus
vocal music in Angelman syndrome contrasts with Prader–Willi syndrome.
can be explored interactively at https://themusiclab.org/nhsplots. For assistance
Evol. Hum. Behav. 40, 420–426 (2019).
with data or materials, please contact M.B., C.M.B. and S.A.M.
30. Maynard Smith, J. & Harper, D. Animal Signals (Oxford Univ. Press, 2003).
31. Morton, E. S. On the occurrence and significance of motivation-structural
Code availability
rules in some bird and mammal sounds. Am. Nat. 111, 855–869 (1977).
A reproducible version of this manuscript, including all analysis and visualization 32. Owren, M. J. & Rendall, D. Sound on the rebound: bringing form and
code, is available at https://github.com/themusiclab/infant-relax. For assistance function back to the forefront in understanding nonhuman primate vocal
with code, please contact M.B., C.M.B. and S.A.M. signaling. Evol. Anthropol. 10, 58–71 (2001).
33. Endler, J. A. Some general comments on the evolution and design of animal
Received: 17 January 2020; Accepted: 11 September 2020; communication systems. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B 340, 215–225 (1993).
Published: xx xx xxxx 34. Filippi, P. et al. Humans recognize emotional arousal in vocalizations
across all classes of terrestrial vertebrates: evidence for acoustic universals.
Proc. R. Soc. B 284, (2017).
references 35. Moser, C. J. et al. Acoustic regularities in infant-directed vocalizations across
1. Mehr, S. A. et al. Universality and diversity in human song. Science 366, cultures. bioRxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.09.032995v1 (2020).
957–970 (2019). 36. Fernald, A. Intonation and communicative intent in mothers’ speech to
2. Jacoby, N. & McDermott, J. H. Integer ratio priors on musical rhythm revealed infants: is the melody the message? Child Dev. 60, 1497–1510 (1989).
cross-culturally by iterated reproduction. Curr. Biol. 27, 359–370 (2017). 37. Kuhl, P. K. et al. Cross-language analysis of phonetic units in language
3. Jacoby, N. et al. Universal and non-universal features of musical pitch addressed to infants. Science 277, 684–686 (1997).
perception revealed by singing. Curr. Biol. 29, 3229–3243 (2019). 38. Piazza, E. A., Iordan, M. C. & Lew-Williams, C. Mothers consistently alter
4. Ravignani, A., Delgado, T. & Kirby, S. Musical evolution in the lab exhibits their unique vocal fingerprints when communicating with infants. Curr. Biol.
rhythmic universals. Nat. Hum. Behav. 1, 0007 (2016). 27, 3162–3167 (2017).
5. Mendoza, J. K. & Fausey, C. M. Everyday music in infancy. PsyArXiv 39. Broesch, T. & Bryant, G. A. Fathers’ infant-directed speech in a small-scale
https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/sqatb (2019). society. Child Dev. 89, e29–e41 (2018).
6. Custodero, L. A., Rebello Britto, P. & Brooks-Gunn, J. Musical lives: a 40. Bryant, G. A. & Barrett, H. C. Recognizing intentions in infant-directed
collective portrait of American parents and their young children. J. Appl. Dev. speech: evidence for universals. Psychol. Sci. 18, 746–751 (2007).
Psychol. 24, 553–572 (2003). 41. Trehub, S. E., Unyk, A. M. & Trainor, L. J. Adults identify infant-directed
7. Custodero, L. A. & Johnson-Green, E. A. Passing the cultural torch: music across cultures. Infant Behav. Dev. 16, 193–211 (1993).
musical experience and musical parenting of infants. J. Res. Music Educ. 51, 42. Mehr, S. A., Singh, M., York, H., Glowacki, L. & Krasnow, M. M. Form and
102–114 (2003). function in human song. Curr. Biol. 28, 356–368 (2018).
8. Mehr, S. A. Music in the home: new evidence for an intergenerational link. 43. Trainor, L. J., Clark, E. D., Huntley, A. & Adams, B. A. The acoustic
J. Res. Music Educ. 62, 78–88 (2014). basis of preferences for infant-directed singing. Infant Behav. Dev. 20,
9. Trehub, S. E., Hill, D. S. & Kamenetsky, S. B. Parents’ sung performances for 383–396 (1997).
infants. Can. J. Exp. Psychol. 51, 385–396 (1997). 44. Trehub, S. E. et al. Mothers’ and fathers’ singing to infants. Dev. Psychol. 33,
10. Granier-Deferre, C., Bassereau, S., Ribeiro, A., Jacquet, A.-Y. & DeCasper, A. J. 500–507 (1997).
A melodic contour repeatedly experienced by human near-term fetuses 45. Gomez, P. & Danuser, B. Relationships between musical structure and
elicits a profound cardiac reaction one month after birth. PLoS ONE 6, psychophysiological measures of emotion. Emotion 7, 377–387 (2007).
e17304 (2011). 46. Rock, A., Trainor, L. & Addison, T. Distinctive messages in infant-directed
11. Zentner, M. R. & Kagan, J. Perception of music by infants. Nature 383, lullabies and play songs. Dev. Psychol. 35, 527–534 (1999).
29 (1996). 47. Tan, X., Yowler, C. J., Super, D. M. & Fratianne, R. B. The interplay of
12. Winkler, I., Háden, G. P., Ladinig, O., Sziller, I. & Honing, H. Newborn infants preference, familiarity and psychophysical properties in defining relaxation
detect the beat in music. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 106, 2468–2471 (2009). music. J. Music Ther. 49, 150–179 (2012).
13. Hannon, E. E., Schachner, A. & Nave-Blodgett, J. E. Babies know bad dancing 48. Zajonc, R. B. Mere exposure: a gateway to the subliminal. Curr. Dir. Psychol. Sci.
when they see it: older but not younger infants discriminate between 10, 224–228 (2001).
synchronous and asynchronous audiovisual musical displays. J. Exp. Child 49. Cirelli, L. K., Jurewicz, Z. B. & Trehub, S. E. Effects of maternal singing
Psychol. 159, 159–174 (2017). style on mother–infant arousal and behavior. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 37,
14. Hannon, E. E. & Trehub, S. E. Tuning in to musical rhythms: infants learn 1213–1220 (2019).
more readily than adults. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 102, 12639–12643 (2005). 50. Garunkstiene, R., Buinauskiene, J., Uloziene, I. & Markuniene, E. Controlled
15. Mehr, S. A., Song, L. A. & Spelke, E. S. For 5-month-old infants, melodies are trial of live versus recorded lullabies in preterm infants. Nord. J. Music Ther.
social. Psychol. Sci. 27, 486–501 (2016). 23, 71–88 (2014).
16. Mehr, S. A. & Spelke, E. S. Shared musical knowledge in 11-month-old 51. Cirelli, L. K. & Trehub, S. E. Familiar songs reduce infant distress. Dev. Psychol.
infants. Dev. Sci. 21, (2017). 56, 861–868 (2020).
17. Trainor, L. J., Wu, L. & Tsang, C. D. Long-term memory for music: infants 52. Corbeil, M., Trehub, S. E. & Peretz, I. Singing delays the onset of infant
remember tempo and timbre. Dev. Sci. 7, 289–296 (2004). distress. Infancy 21, 373–391 (2016).
18. Volkova, A., Trehub, S. E. & Schellenberg, E. G. Infants’ memory for musical 53. Richards, J. E. & Cronise, K. Extended visual fixation in the early preschool
performances. Dev. Sci. 9, 583–589 (2006). years: look duration, heart rate changes, and attentional inertia. Child Dev.
19. Hrdy, S. B. Mothers and Others: The Evolutionary Origins of Mutual 71, 602–620 (2000).
Understanding (Harvard University Press, 2009). 54. Laeng, B., Sirois, S. & Gredebäck, G. Pupillometry: a window to the
20. Trivers, R. L. in Sexual Selection and the Descent of Man (ed. Campbell, B. G.) preconscious? Perspect. Psychol. Sci. 7, 18–27 (2012).
136–179 (Aldine, 1972). 55. Bradley, M. M., Miccoli, L., Escrig, M. A. & Lang, P. J. The pupil as a
21. Soltis, J. The signal functions of early infant crying. Behav. Brain Sci. 27, measure of emotional arousal and autonomic activation. Psychophysiology 45,
443–458 (2004). 602–607 (2008).
NAture HuMAN BeHAvIour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTUre HUMaN BeHavioUr Articles
56. Laeng, B., Eidet, L. M., Sulutvedt, U. & Panksepp, J. Music chills: the eye 77. Filippa, M., Devouche, E., Arioni, C., Imberty, M. & Gratier, M. Live
pupil as a mirror to music’s soul. Conscious. Cogn. 44, 161–178 (2016). maternal speech and singing have beneficial effects on hospitalized preterm
57. Widmann, A., Schröger, E. & Wetzel, N. Emotion lies in the eye of the infants. Acta Paediatr. 102, 1017–1020 (2013).
listener: emotional arousal to novel sounds is reflected in the sympathetic 78. Fancourt, D. & Perkins, R. Could listening to music during pregnancy be
contribution to the pupil dilation response and the P3. Biol. Psychol. 133, protective against postnatal depression and poor wellbeing post birth?
10–17 (2018). Longitudinal associations from a preliminary prospective cohort study.
58. Lakens, D., Scheel, A. M. & Isager, P. M. Equivalence testing for psychological BMJ Open 8, e021251 (2018).
research: a tutorial. Adv. Methods Pract. Psychol. Sci. 1, 259–269 (2018). 79. Miller, C. L. Developmental changes in male/female voice classification by
59. Shultz, S., Klin, A. & Jones, W. Inhibition of eye blinking reveals infants. Infant Behav. Dev. 6, 313–330 (1983).
subjective perceptions of stimulus salience. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 108, 80. van Lier, H. G. et al. A standardized validity assessment protocol for physio-
21270–21275 (2011). logical signals from wearable technology: methodological underpinnings and
60. Trehub, S. E. Musical predispositions in infancy. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 930, an application to the E4 biosensor. Behav. Res. Methods 52, 607–629 (2020).
1–16 (2001). 81. King, D. E. Dlib-ml: a machine learning toolkit. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 10,
61. Hannon, E. E. & Trainor, L. J. Music acquisition: effects of enculturation and 1755–1758 (2009).
formal training on development. Trends Cogn. Sci. 11, 466–72 (2007). 82. Datavyu Team. Datavyu: a video coding tool (Databrary Project, New York
62. Henrich, J., Heine, S. J. & Norenzayan, A. The weirdest people in the world? Univ., 2014).
Behav. Brain Sci. 33, 61–83 (2010).
63. Sperber, D. & Hirschfeld, L. A. The cognitive foundations of cultural stability Acknowledgements
and diversity. Trends Cogn. Sci. 8, 40–46 (2004). We thank the infants and parents who participated in this research; J. Kominsky, N. Soja,
64. Blumstein, D. T., Bryant, G. A. & Kaye, P. The sound of arousal in music is W. Pepe, E. Spelke and S. Carey for their support with participant recruitment; H. Alton,
context-dependent. Biol. Lett. 8, 744–747 (2012). A. Bergson, A. Bitran, G. Jessani, A. Keomurjian and B. Milosh for research assistance;
65. Trainor, L. J. Infant preferences for infant-directed versus noninfant-directed and C. Payne and three anonymous reviewers for detailed and constructive feedback on
playsongs and lullabies. Infant Behav. Dev. 19, 83–92 (1996). the manuscript. This research was supported by the NIH Director’s Early Independence
66. Sievers, B., Polansky, L., Casey, M. & Wheatley, T. Music and movement Award DP5OD024566, the Harvard University Department of Psychology and the
share a dynamic structure that supports universal expressions of emotion. Harvard Data Science Initiative. The funders had no role in the conceptualization,
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 110, 70–75 (2013). design, data collection, analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.
67. Cowen, A. S., Fang, X., Sauter, D. & Keltner, D. What music makes us
feel: at least 13 dimensions organize subjective experiences associated Author contributions
with music across different cultures. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 117,
S.A.M., S.A. and C.M.B. designed the research, supported with ideas from A.M. J.Y.,
1924–1934 (2020).
C.M.B. and S.A. led data collection, assisted by M.B., L.Y., K.L. and F.X., under the
68. Trehub, S. E. & Trainor, L. Singing to infants: lullabies and play songs.
supervision of S.A.M. M.B., J.S. and S.A.M. analysed the data. J.S. and S.A.M. designed
Adv. Infancy Res 12, 43–78 (1998).
the pupil annotation method. S.A.M. provided funding. M.B., J.Y., C.M.B. and S.A.M.
69. Spokes, A. C. & Spelke, E. S. The cradle of social knowledge: infants’
wrote the manuscript, and all authors approved it.
reasoning about caregiving and affiliation. Cognition 159, 102–116 (2017).
70. Soley, G. & Sebastián-Gallés, N. Infants prefer tunes previously introduced
Competing interests
by speakers of their native language. Child Dev. 86, 1685–1692 (2015).
71. Tsang, C. D., Falk, S. & Hessel, A. Infants prefer infant-directed song over The authors declare no competing interests.
speech. Child Dev. 88, 1207–1215 (2017).
72. Hole, J., Hirsch, M., Ball, E. & Meads, C. Music as an aid for postoperative Additional information
recovery in adults: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet 386, Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/
1659–1671 (2015). s41562-020-00963-z.
73. Richard-Lalonde, M. et al. The effect of music on pain in the adult
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to C.M.B., M.B. or
intensive care unit: a systematic review of randomized controlled trials.
S.A.M.
J. Pain Symptom Manage. 59, 1304–1319 (2019).
74. Bieleninik, Ł., Ghetti, C. & Gold, C. Music therapy for preterm infants and Primary handling editor: Charlotte Payne.
their parents: a meta-analysis. Pediatrics 138, e20160971 (2016). Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
75. Bo, L. K., Mn, B. & Callaghan, P. Soothing pain-elicited distress in Chinese
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
neonates. Pediatrics 105, e49–e49 (2000).
published maps and institutional affiliations.
76. Keith, D. R., Russell, K. & Weaver, B. S. The effects of music listening on
inconsolable crying in premature infants. J. Music Ther. 46, 191–203 (2009). © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2020
NAture HuMAN BeHAvIour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
1
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
April
2020
Corresponding author(s): Samuel Mehr
Last updated by author(s): Aug 11, 2020
Reporting Summary
Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency
in reporting. For further information on Nature Research policies, see our Editorial Policies and the Editorial Policy Checklist.
Statistics
For all statistical analyses, confirm that the following items are present in the figure legend, table legend, main text, or Methods section.
n/a Confirmed
The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
A statement on whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided
Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.
A description of all covariates tested
A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
A full description of the statistical parameters including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient)
AND variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)
For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted
Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.
For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated
Our web collection on statistics for biologists contains articles on many of the points above.
Software and code
Policy information about availability of computer code
Data collection Datavyu, QuickTime, Empatica Connect
Data analysis R, Stata
For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors and
reviewers. We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Research guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.
Data
Policy information about availability of data
All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable:
- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets
- A list of figures that have associated raw data
- A description of any restrictions on data availability
Participant-level data and study materials are available at http://osf.io/2t6cy. Audio excerpts from the *Natural History of Song* Discography are available at
https://osf.io/vcybz. For assistance with data or materials, please contact S.A.M.
2
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
April
2020
Field-specific reporting
Please select the one below that is the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.
Life sciences Behavioural & social sciences Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences
For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/documents/nr-reporting-summary-flat.pdf
Behavioural & social sciences study design
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
Study description Quantitative observational
Research sample Infants from Cambridge, MA
Sampling strategy Convenience sample. Power analysis reported in paper to determine sample size.
Data collection See Methods for full details. Video and audio equipment, parent was present during data collection but blinded to study condition.
Researchers were always blind to condition.
Timing Data were collected between 13 June 2018 and 14 May 2019, continuously.
Data exclusions All data exclusions are documented in the paper.
Non-participation No participants dropped out of the paper voluntarily, but participants were excluded on the basis of their behavior (see paper).
Randomization No random assignment; full counterbalancing into study conditions.
Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods
We require information from authors about some types of materials, experimental systems and methods used in many studies. Here, indicate whether each material,
system or method listed is relevant to your study. If you are not sure if a list item applies to your research, read the appropriate section before selecting a response.
Materials & experimental systems Methods
n/a Involved in the study n/a Involved in the study
Antibodies ChIP-seq
Eukaryotic cell lines Flow cytometry
Palaeontology and archaeology MRI-based neuroimaging
Animals and other organisms
Human research participants
Clinical data
Dual use research of concern
Human research participants
Policy information about studies involving human research participants
Population characteristics See above.
Recruitment Participants were recruited via web-based advertising, physical flyers, and an existing participant database. Parents could
selfselect into this particular study rather than other studies for infants from collaborating labs.
Ethics oversight Harvard University Committee on the Use of Human Subjects in Research
Note that full information on the approval of the study protocol must also be provided in the manuscript.