Articles
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-019-0584-8
Gaze bias differences capture individual choice
behaviour
Armin W. Thomas 1,2,3,7, Felix Molter 2,3,4,5,7, Ian Krajbich6, Hauke R. Heekeren 2,3
and Peter N. C. Mohr 2,3,4,5*
How do we make simple choices such as deciding between an apple and an orange? Recent empirical evidence suggests that
choice behaviour and gaze allocation are closely linked at the group level, whereby items looked at longer during the decision-
making process are more likely to be chosen. However, it is unclear how variable this gaze bias effect is between individuals.
Here we investigate this question across four different simple choice experiments and using a computational model that can
be easily applied to individuals. We show that an association between gaze and choice is present for most individuals, but dif-
fers considerably in strength. Generally, individuals with a strong association between gaze and choice behaviour are worse at
choosing the best item from a choice set compared with individuals with a weak association. Accounting for individuals’ vari-
ability in gaze bias in the model can explain and accurately predict individual differences in choice behaviour.
In everyday life, we are constantly confronted with simple con- economic research), they can be unsuitable for understanding the
sumer choices such as whether to have an apple or a banana choice behaviour of an individual. Aggregate models can lead to
for breakfast or which bottle of juice to buy at the supermarket. false conclusions about true underlying individual processes27,28. In
Traditional models describing this type of consumer choice assume a learning task, for example, the group-level average learning curve
that people assign a utility (or value) to each available option and would appear as a gradual, smooth function over time, even if all
make utility-maximizing choices1. Notably, choices are assumed to individuals showed abrupt, step-like learning curves (much like an
be based solely on the attributes of the option, and are therefore epiphany), but with variable learning onsets across individuals29. In
independent of information search processes during the decision- this case, the group-level model would not accurately describe any
making process2. This assumption has recently been challenged by individual of the group, and the deduction that individual learn-
a variety of empirical findings showing that the allocation of gaze ing occurs smoothly would be false. Similarly, using a single model
during the decision-making process also plays a substantial role, as a parameter set to describe the choice behaviour of a group could lead
longer gaze towards one option is regularly associated with a higher to false conclusions about the behaviour of the underlying individu-
choice probability for that option (independent of its value)3–17. als. Therefore, it is crucial to study choice behaviour at the level of
Similarly, stimulus salience has been shown to influence decision the individual.
behaviour18–20. Furthermore, external manipulation of gaze allo- Previously reported group-level models that quantify the asso-
cation leads to changes in choice probabilities3,12,14. Similar effects ciation between gaze and choice specified a constant gaze bias for
have recently been demonstrated in perceptual decision-making, all individuals without rigorously testing the performance of the
whereby participants judge perceptual attributes of stimuli based on model at the level of the individual9,10. A rigorous test of gaze bias
the available sensory information (for example, the orientation of effects at the level of the individual should ideally be based on non-
line segments21). restricted individual model fits, include comparisons to models
These findings led to the development of computational mod- without gaze bias, establish that the model provides an accurate
els that integrate eye movement data into the choice process and account of individually observed data and test how individu-
formalize the empirically observed association between gaze and als’ gaze biases relate to their response behaviour. If, for example,
choice4,9–11,20,22–24. These models are based on classical evidence- people’s decisions were affected differently by gaze behaviour, we
accumulation models25,26, but make the additional assumption would find that the choices of some individuals were more biased
that the momentary rate of evidence accumulation depends on the by gaze than others and possibly be more inconsistent with the
eye movements of the decision-maker. Evidence accumulation for values of the items. Imagine, for example, a choice between two
an option is assumed to be discounted by a constant factor while bottles of juice at the supermarket: one has a slightly higher value
another item is fixated on. Accounting for this gaze bias, these for the decision-maker than the other, but it is also less visually
models provide a precise account of many aspects of simple choice salient20,30. If a person’s association of gaze and choice behaviour
behaviour at the group level4,9–11,20,22–24. was strong, their choice would be biased towards the more visually
While group-level statistics are informative for some research salient bottle that attracts more of their gaze, even though it has a
questions (for example, to specifically address differences between lower value. Conversely, if the person’s association was weak, they
groups or experimental conditions or to forecast product sales in would be able to select the higher valued option, despite their gaze
1Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Technische Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany. 2Department of Education and Psychology,
Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany. 3Center for Cognitive Neuroscience Berlin, Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany. 4School of Business and
Economics, Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany. 5WZB Berlin Social Science Center, Berlin, Germany. 6Department of Psychology and Department of
Economics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA. 7These authors contributed equally: Armin W. Thomas, Felix Molter.
*e-mail: peter.mohr@neuroeconomics-lab.de
NATuRe HuMAN BeHAvIouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NATuRe HumAN BeHAviouR
being attracted more towards the visually salient but lower valued Individual differences in the data. We analysed the following three
option. Accordingly, if the strength of this association is variable metrics for individual differences: participants’ mean response time
across individuals, it is necessary to account for these differences to (RT); mean probability of choosing the best item (we define the best
accurately predict individual choice behaviour. item either as the item with the highest liking rating or willingness-
Here, we investigated whether the previously reported link to-pay in the value-based choice tasks, or the item with the smaller
between gaze and choice behaviour is variable across individuals. angular distance to the target in the perceptual choice task); and
We analysed four previously published choice datasets6,9,10,21, in total influence of gaze allocation on choice probability (defined as the
including 118 individuals, two choice set sizes (two- and three-alter- mean increase in choice probability for an item that was fixated on
native) and two choice domains (value-based and perceptual). For longer than the others, after correcting for the influence of the item
the analysis, we developed a computational model that can be easily value; see below). We found that participants differed considerably
applied to individual participant and multialternative choice data. in all metrics (Fig. 2). The participants’ (n = 118) overall mean RTs
With this model, we reaffirmed that an association between gaze ranged from 958 to 7,577 ms, with a mean ± s.d. of 2,844 ± 1,676 ms
and choice is present for most individuals. The strength of this asso- (Fig. 2a), while their probabilities of choosing the best item in a trial
ciation, however, varied substantially. This variability was directly ranged from 45% to 97%, with a mean ± s.d. of 77% ± 12% (Fig. 2c).
linked to an individual’s ability of choosing the best item from a We also probed the relationship between individual allocation
choice set, such that stronger associations of gaze and choice were of gaze and choice. Previous studies of simple choice tasks have
linked to lower probabilities of choosing the best item. Accounting shown that individuals are more likely to choose an option when
for the variability in individuals’ gaze biases, we were able to explain they spent more time fixating on it compared with the other opti
and accurately predict observed differences in choice behaviour. ons3,4,6,9,10. Here, we devised a measure to quantify this relationship
for each individual. Following previous work9,10, we first estimated
Results a participant’s probability of choosing an item in a choice set using
Datasets and task overview. We investigated individual differ- logistic regression, based on its relative item value (the difference
ences in the influence of gaze allocation on simple choice behav- between the item’s value and the mean value of all other items in
iour across four previously published datasets6,9,10,21. In each dataset, that trial) and the range between the other items’ value (this regres-
healthy participants made repeated decisions between multiple sor was omitted in all two-item datasets). We then subtracted this
options while their eye movements were recorded (for additional estimated probability from the empirically observed choice (either
details, see Fig. 1 and Supplementary Methods 1). 1 if the item was chosen or 0 otherwise). Finally, we averaged the
The first dataset is from Krajbich and colleagues10 (henceforth resulting ‘residual’ choice probability for trials in which the item
referred to as Krajbich 2010). In the corresponding experiment, had a positive and negative final gaze advantage (computed as the
hungry participants made choices between two snack food items difference in the fraction of the total fixation time that the partici-
without any time restrictions (Fig. 1a). Participants also gave a lik- pants spent fixating on the item and the average fraction that they
ing rating for each of the 70 snack food items that were used in the spent fixating on the others). The difference between these two
experiment. This dataset includes 39 participants, each of whom described the average difference in choice probability for the items
performed 100 trials. with a positive versus negative final gaze advantage, when corrected
The second dataset from Krajbich and Rangel9 (henceforth for the influence of the values of the items. We found that individual
referred to as Krajbich 2011) is similar to that from Krajbich 2010. scores on this measure varied substantially and ranged from −11%
In Krajbich 2011, participants chose between three snack food items to 72%, with a mean ± s.d. of 24% ± 15% (Fig. 2b). Notably, 98% of
(Fig. 1b). As in Krajbich 2010, participants provided liking ratings the participants showed positive scores, indicating an overall posi-
for all available items in a separate task. This dataset includes 30 tive relationship between gaze allocation and choice.
participants, each of whom performed 100 trials. The four datasets differed strongly in the three behavioural
The third dataset consists of experiment 2 from the study by metrics (Table 1). Differences between datasets, however, can-
Folke and colleagues6 (henceforth referred to as Folke 2016). In not be attributed to the effect of choice domain (perceptual versus
this experiment, 24 hungry participants performed 144 trials of value-based) or set size (two versus three items) alone, as original
a task that closely resembled the Krajbich 2011 three-alternative tasks also differed in other aspects (for example, different stimuli
forced-choice snack food task (Fig. 1c). Unlike in Krajbich 2011, in value-based versus perceptual tasks, different number of trials
however, the choice task used a gaze-contingent presentation, and different presentation format). However, when comparing the
whereby items were only revealed when the participant’s gaze was two- and three-alternative choice data, individuals exhibited shorter
directed to an item’s location on the screen. In addition, after each response times (Mann–Whitney U = 821, P < 0.001, Pearson’s
choice, the participants provided confidence ratings (which we did r = 0.52) and a higher probability of choosing the best item (U = 444,
not use in this study). Similar to Krajbich 2010 and Krajbich 2011, P < 0.001, r = 0.74) when making choices between two alternatives.
item values were estimated in a separate task, in which a Becker– Furthermore, individuals exhibited a weaker association of gaze
DeGroot–Marschak auction procedure was used to elicit willing- and choice behaviour, indicated by the gaze influence measure
ness-to-pay estimates31. (U = 1,001, P < 0.001, r = 0.42), when making choices between two
The fourth dataset is the first experiment from the study by alternatives. Comparing behavioural data from value-based and
Tavares and colleagues21 (henceforth referred to as Tavares 2017). perceptual choice tasks, we found that response times were shorter
This dataset is qualitatively different from the other three value- (U = 632, P < 0.001, r = 0.46) and individuals had a higher probabil-
based choice datasets. Participants made perceptual judgments ity of choosing the best item (U = 342, P < 0.001, r = 0.71) in the per-
about the orientations of two line segments and were asked to ceptual choice task. The average strength of the association of gaze
decide which is closer to a target (Fig. 1d). In this case, we define and choice behaviour in the perceptual choice task, however, was
the value of an item by its angular distance to the target (with higher similar to that measured in the two-alternative value-based choice
values for smaller distances). This dataset includes 25 participants, experiment (U = 419, P = 0.17, r = 0.14).
each of whom performed 1,344 trials across four sessions. All regression coefficients reported throughout represent
In sum, our analyses span a total of four datasets (n = 118) that fixed effects from Bayesian mixed-effects linear (for continuous-
contain data from two- and three-alternative forced-choice tasks dependent variables) or logistic (for binary-dependent variables)
in two different choice domains (value-based and perceptual) and regression models, including a random intercept and slope for
from two different laboratories. each dataset on each predictor. For each fixed effect, we report the
NATuRe HuMAN BeHAvIouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NATuRe HumAN BeHAviouR Articles
a
b
c
d
coefficient’s posterior mean (β) and the associated 95% highest model comparison). We therefore adopted a computational model-
posterior density interval (HDI) values (for further details, see the ling approach to investigate whether a formalized gaze bias mecha-
“Mixed effects modelling” section). nism, in conjunction with individual gaze patterns, can improve
To further probe the relationship between the three behavioural model predictions of individual choice and RT data when compared
metrics, we computed pairwise mixed-effects regression models with a model without gaze bias.
between them (Fig. 2d–f). We did not find any association between We propose a model called the Gaze-weighted Linear
participants’ probability of choosing the best item and their RTs Accumulator Model (GLAM; Fig. 3) that we view as an analytical
(Fig. 2d; β = −0.19%, 95% HDI = [−3.08%, 2.87%] per second tool to study gaze bias effects at the level of the individual and that
increase in RT). Similarly, participants’ gaze influence was not is inspired by the multialternative attentional Drift Diffusion Model
related to their RTs (Fig. 2e; β = −1 ms, 95% HDI = [−33 ms, 33 ms] (aDDM)9. Similar to the aDDM, the GLAM assumes accumulation
per percentage increase in the gaze influence measure). However, of evidence in favour of each item that is modulated by gaze behav-
participants’ probability of choosing the best item from a choice iour. While an item is not fixated on, accumulation occurs at a rate
set decreased with increasing individual gaze influence measures discounted by the gaze bias parameter γ (Fig. 3a). A choice is made
(Fig. 2f; β = −0.34%, 95% HDI = [−0.71%, 0.08%] per percentage as soon as evidence in favour of one item reaches a decision thresh-
increase in gaze influence, 95.2% of posterior density below 0). old. In contrast to the aDDM, which focuses on the effect of indi-
vidual trial fixation sequences on the decision-making process, the
Modelling individual differences in gaze influence on simple GLAM focuses on gaze bias effects at the level of the trial. Therefore,
choice. The behavioural and eye-tracking data suggested that there it can average over the observed sequence of fixations within a trial
is substantial variability in the extent to which gaze affects partici- (Fig. 3b). The resulting gaze-weighted decision signals are then fed
pants’ choice behaviour (Fig. 2b). However, conclusive quantitative through a logistic transform into a linear stochastic race32,33 (Fig. 3c,d).
evidence for or against the presence of a mechanism that biases Race models are generalizable to choice scenarios with more than
choices depending on the distribution of gaze has yet to be provided two items and remain analytically tractable, allowing for more
at the level of the individual (for example, by means of a formal complex applications (for example, Bayesian parameter estimation,
hcibjarK
hcibjarK
ekloF
seravaT
0102
1102
6102
7102
Valuation task Choice task
Fixation Choice Feedback
+
–10 +10
Rating (free RT) 2 s (enforced) Free RT, 1 s (enforced)
all visible
+
–10 +10
Rating (free RT) 2 s (enforced) Free RT, 1 s (enforced)
all visible
£0 £3
Bidding (free RT) Not reported Free RT, Not reported
gaze-contingent
Block target
every 5 trials
+
No valuation task 2 s 0.5 s (enforced) Free RT, 1 s (enforced)
all visible
Fig. 1 | experimental paradigms. a–d, We included four datasets in our analyses. These include three value-based experiments (a Krajbich 201010,
b Krajbich 20119, c Folke 20166) and one perceptual choice experiment (d Tavares 201721). In all experiments, participants were instructed to choose the best
out of two (a, d) or three (b, c) items (that is, the item they would like to eat most in value-based tasks or the item most similar to a target stimulus that
was presented every five trials in the perceptual task). Value-based experiments included a valuation task before the main choice task, whereby participants
either rated each item (a, b) or indicated their willingness-to-pay in a Becker–DeGroot–Marschak procedure (c). All choices were made without time
restrictions. The choice task in c used a gaze-contingent presentation, whereby items were only revealed when the participant’s gaze was directed to an
item’s location on the screen. Experiments used real snack food items instead of illustrations. For additional details, see Supplementary Methods 1.
NATuRe HuMAN BeHAvIouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NATuRe HumAN BeHAviouR
10
0
10
0
10
0
10
0
0
embedding in a hierarchical Bayesian framework). In addition to allows the application of the GLAM in situations in which only lim-
the gaze bias parameter γ, the GLAM includes a velocity parameter ited trial-level data are available (for example, the Folke 2016 dataset
v, a noise parameter σ and a scaling parameter τ (for further details, included here, which only contains trial-averaged gaze data). In the-
see the “GLAM details” section). ory, a similar simplification of the multialternative aDDM9 would be
Even though both models are closely related, the GLAM has a possible, but would result in a model highly similar to the GLAM.
practical advantage over the aDDM in that it sidesteps the complex Furthermore, fitting such a simplified aDDM variant would still rely
problem of modelling and simulating the fixation process in a given on simulations of the decision-making process. These simulations
task. The development of such fixation models for individual par- are particularly costly in the case of the aDDM, whereby every trial
ticipants, particularly in more complex choice scenarios with more represents a unique condition owing to the incorporation of trial-
than two items or multiple item attributes, is often not trivial (for specific eye movement data.
example, see ref. 20) or not of main interest to the researcher. The
GLAM solely uses the observed distribution of gaze to the items Testing the presence of gaze biases in individuals. We fitted and
over the course of the trial. In contrast, the aDDM is fitted to empir- compared two GLAM variants to the RT and choice data of each par-
ical data using model simulations, which themselves rely on an ticipant to gauge the evidence in favour of the previously described
accurate simulation of the fixation trajectories. As a side effect, this gaze bias mechanism and to quantify its strength on an individual
ycneuqerF
)tseb
esoohc(P
)sm(
TR
naeM
ycneuqerF
ecneulfni
ezaG
)eulav
∣
eciohc(P
no
ycneuqerF
a b c
10 10
0 0
10 10
0 0
10 10
0 0
10 10
0 0
2,000 4,000 6,000 8,000 –0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 0 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Mean RT (ms) Gaze influence P(choose best)
on P(choice ∣ value)
d 1.0 e f
8,000 0.8
0.8 0.6
6,000
0.4
0.6
4,000
0.2
0.4 2,000 0.0
Krajbich 2010 Folke 2016
Krajbich 2011 Tavares 2017
–0.2
0 0
0 2,000 4,000 6,000 8,000 –0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 0 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Mean RT (ms) Gaze influence P(choose best)
on P(choice ∣ value)
Fig. 2 | Individual differences in the three studied behavioural metrics and their associations. a–c, Distributions of individuals’ mean RT (a), gaze
influence (mean increase in choice probability for an item that is fixated longer than the others, after correcting for the influence of item value) (b) and
probability of choosing the best item (c) per dataset. d, There is no association between mean RTs and the individual probability of choosing the best item
(β = −0.19%, 95% HDI = [−3.08%, 2.87%] per second increase in RT). e, There is no association between gaze influence and the mean RT (β = −1 ms,
95% HDI = [−33 ms, 33 ms]) per percentage increase in the gaze influence measure. f, An individual’s probability of choosing the best item decreases with
increasing gaze influence (β = −0.34%, 95% HDI = [−0.71%, 0.08%] per percentage increase in the gaze influence measure). Each circle represents one
individual participant. Grey lines represent the fixed effect from mixed-effects regression models with random slopes and intercepts for each dataset. The
key in d is applicable to all panels.
Table 1 | Description of the behavioural metrics of the included datasets
Dataset Krajbich 2010 Krajbich 2011 Folke 2016 Tavares 2017 overall
N 39 30 24 25 118
Set size 2 3 3 2 –
Choice domain Value-based Value-based Value-based Perceptual –
Mean RT (ms) 2,192 ms (851 ms) 2,462 ms (1,298 ms) 5,414 ms (1,284 ms) 1,849 ms (601 ms) 2,844 ms (1,676 ms)
P(choose best) 81% (6%) 72% (10%) 66% (12%) 86% (5%) 77% (12%)
Gaze influence 19% (17%) 25% (14%) 35% (11%) 19% (9%) 24% (15%)
Means are given, with respective standard deviations in parentheses.
NATuRe HuMAN BeHAvIouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NATuRe HumAN BeHAviouR Articles
a This analysis also suggested a categorical distinction between
the perceptual and value-based choice datasets (such that the com-
parison more clearly favours the model with gaze bias in percep-
tual decisions). However, these more extreme differences in relative
model fit (difference in WAIC scores; Fig. 4b) could be driven by the
fact that the perceptual dataset contains approximately nine times
more trials per participant than the other datasets, allowing the
comparison to be more decisive. Consequently, they cannot neces-
sarily be attributed to the difference between perceptual and value-
b based decision processing alone.
Individual estimates of the gaze bias parameter γ in the full
model ranged from −1.03 (strong gaze bias) to 0.97 (almost no gaze
A bias), with a mean ± s.d. of 0.15 ± 0.39 (n = 118) (Supplementary
i
Fig. 1). Importantly, sizeable gaze biases were present for all data-
sets (across choice domains and set sizes), with mean ± s.d. values
c of 0.26 ± 0.48 (Krajbich 2010, n = 39), 0.18 ± 0.41 (Krajbich 2011,
Time n = 30), −0.017 ± 0.28 (Folke 2016, n = 24) and 0.08 ± 0.23 (Tavares
d R 2017, n = 25). Note, however, that the order of datasets according to
i
γ estimates differs from their order based on the behavioural gaze
p i influence measure (Fig. 2b and Table 1). This result demonstrates
the conceptual difference between the behavioural measure and the
model’s estimates of the latent gaze bias variable. While the behav-
ioural measure aggregates instances of observed behaviour, the latent
E
i
gaze bias γ describes the assumed underlying generative mechanism.
We further probed the relationship between the difference in the
Time
models’ WAIC scores (which describe how much better the data of
an individual is described by the full GLAM relative to the no-gaze-
Fig. 3 | The GLAM. a–d, The GLAM describes the influence of gaze
bias variant) and the three behavioural metrics. We did not find any
allocation on the decision-making process in the form of a linear stochastic
association between the differences in WAIC scores and mean RTs
race. While participants look at the available choice options (a), an
(β = 1 ms, 95% HDI = [−17 ms, 10 ms] per unit increase in WAIC
absolute evidence signal A for each option in the choice set is computed
i difference). However, both the probability of choosing the best item
(b). The magnitude of this signal is dependent on the allocation of gaze,
in a trial (Fig. 2c; β = 0.10%, 95% HDI = [−0.01%, 0.22%] per unit
with lower magnitudes for options that are momentarily not fixated on.
increase in WAIC difference; 95.9% of posterior density above 0)
Absolute evidence signals are transformed into relative decision signals
and the strength of participants’ influence of gaze on choice (Fig. 2b;
(indicating relative item preferences) by computing the average absolute
β = −0.21%, 95% HDI = [−0.42%, 0.01%] per unit increase in WAIC
evidence signal for each item in the trial (broken lines in b) and computing
difference, 96.4% of the posterior density below 0) varied system-
the difference between each of these averages and the maximum of the
atically with the WAIC differences. The full GLAM therefore out-
other two. The GLAM assumes an adaptive representation of these relative
performed the no-bias variant, particularly for individuals with low
evidence signals that is maximally sensitive to small differences in the
choice accuracies and a strong influence of gaze on their choices.
relative decision signals. To this end, a logistic transform is applied (c). The
Taken together, these findings provide strong empirical evidence
resulting scaled relative evidence signals determine the drift terms R of
i to indicate that a gaze bias mechanism is present for most partici-
the relative evidence accumulators E in the stochastic race (d). A choice
i pants. Importantly, the extent to which the accumulation process
for an option is made as soon as the accumulated relative evidence E
i was influenced by gaze, as captured by individual gaze bias (γ) esti-
reaches a choice threshold. The stochastic race provides first-passage time
mates, showed nontrivial individual differences.
distributions p, describing the likelihood of each item being chosen at each
i
time point. For a more detailed model description, see the “GLAM details”
Probing the functional form of individuals’ gaze bias. We also
section. Colours indicate choice alternatives.
compared the gaze bias mechanism implemented in the GLAM
against another variant that included an additive effect of gaze on
choice behaviour (see also ref. 4; for a detailed description of this
level. The first is a full GLAM variant (with gaze bias) with free variant, see Supplementary Methods 2). This comparison revealed
parameters v, γ, σ and τ. This model allowed the gaze bias parameter that similar proportions of participants were better described
γ to vary freely between individuals. The second is a no-gaze-bias by either model variant, with an additional group of participants
GLAM variant, whereby the gaze bias parameter γ was fixed to 1 whose choice behaviour was described similarly well by both vari-
(resulting in no influence of gaze on the accumulation process). ants (Supplementary Fig. 2a). We therefore concluded that there
The two models differ in their complexity. The full model has is not a ‘winning’ gaze bias mechanism that we can identify across
one more free parameter and can therefore be expected to provide a individuals. Model simulations also revealed that both variants
better absolute fit to the data. We used the widely applicable infor- described participants’ response behaviour similarly well and mim-
mation criterion (WAIC)34 to perform model comparisons at the icked each other considerably in their predictions, both on the
level of the individual, as it includes a penalty for model complexity. individual (Supplementary Fig. 2b–d) and group-averaged level
Lower WAIC scores indicate a better model fit, accounting for dif- (Supplementary Fig. 3). The variants’ gaze bias estimates were also
ferences in model complexity. highly correlated (Spearman’s ρ(117) = −0.86, P < 0.001). Therefore,
Overall, the full GLAM fitted 109 out of 118 (92%) participants we decided to continue using the original multiplicative variant, as
better than the no-gaze-bias variant. Within each dataset, the data multiplicative effects have received more empirical support in the
of 79% (Krajbich 2010), 97% (Krajbich 2011), 100% (Folke 2016) literature9–11,20,21,35–37. Importantly, however, the results and conclu-
and 100% (Tavares 2017) of the participants were better described sions of our study would not change if we had used the additive
by the full GLAM (Fig. 4a). variant instead (Supplementary Fig. 2). Further distinguishing these
NATuRe HuMAN BeHAvIouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NATuRe HumAN BeHAviouR
100
80
60
40
20
0
variants would ideally require choice datasets that include both −13.20%] difference between the observed and predicted data),
appetitive and aversive choice options (positive and negative val- resulting in no association between the predicted and empirical
ues, respectively), as the two mechanisms’ predictions diverge more data in our gaze influence measure. This illustrates the inferiority of
clearly in these choice settings (for example, a multiplicative effect the restricted model. The full model further accurately captured the
would predict that a longer gaze towards an aversive item should distribution of RTs within and across individuals (Supplementary
reduce its probability of being chosen, whereas an additive effect Figs. 5 and 6).
would predict the opposite). Overall, these results show that the full model with gaze bias
outperformed the restricted model in accurately predicting the par-
Predicting individual choice behaviour. We found that in a rela- ticipants’ empirical choices, as it also captured empirical choice pat-
tive model comparison, the data of most participants were better terns that are driven by gaze and not solely by the values of the items.
described by the full model with a gaze bias mechanism compared
with a restricted variant with no gaze bias (γ = 1; Fig. 4). However, Model parameters explain individual choice behaviour. We found
this analysis did not take into account whether the model with bias that the full model with gaze bias accurately predicted individuals’
also accurately predicts individuals’ behaviour on an absolute level. response behaviour. Next, we tested whether the model’s param-
To test this, we used both model variants to simulate response data eters are able to explain variability in participants’ choice behaviour.
for each individual. This time, however, we split the data into even- Again, we used mixed-effects models to predict the three behav-
and odd-numbered trials. We then used all even trials to estimate ioural metrics in the odd-numbered trials from the parameters
individual model parameters. Subsequently, we predicted choices estimated from the even-numbered trials (Fig. 6). We found that
and RTs for all odd-numbered trials, thereby comparing model pre- v (velocity parameter) scaled logarithmically with the participants’
dictions to data that did not inform the parameter estimates. We mean RT (Fig. 6a; β = −0.79 log(ms), 95% HDI = [−0.85 log(ms),
note, however, that even- and odd-numbered trials from the same −0.71 log(ms)] per unit increase in log(v)). We did not find a
participant are not fully independent from one another. meaningful relationship between σ estimates and the probability of
To assess the quality of the fit of both models’ predictions to the choosing the best item (β = −0.23%, 95% HDI = [−2.32%, 1.25%]
empirically observed data across datasets, we performed the follow- per 0.001 increase in σ), even though the σ parameter determines
ing test. For each model and each behavioural measure, we computed the magnitude of noise in the accumulation process. We also found
a mixed-effects regression, regressing the respective measure onto a that γ estimates predicted the strength of participants’ gaze influence
binary variable, which indicates whether each value on this measure on choice probability (Fig. 6b; β = −26.59%, 95% HDI = −37.10%,
comes from the empirically observed data or from the model simu- −17.24% per unit increase in γ).
lations. If the fixed-effects estimate of the indicator variable differed Additionally, we found that γ (gaze bias) estimates relate to par-
from 0, model predictions deviate meaningfully from observed data ticipants’ probabilities of choosing the best item (Fig. 6c; β = 12.65%,
across datasets. Overall, the full model accurately predicted partici- 95% HDI = [−3.19%, 28.84%] per unit increase in γ; 94.5% of the
pants’ RTs (Fig. 5a; β = −9 ms, 95% HDI = [−410 ms, 344 ms] differ- posterior density estimates were greater than 0). Thereby, stronger
ence between the observed and predicted data), the probability of gaze biases (smaller γ) were associated with more choices inconsis-
choosing the best item (Fig. 5b; β = −2.22%, 95% HDI = [−7.03%, tent with the value of the items. This relationship can be explained
2.30%] difference between the observed and predicted data) as well as follows: the gaze bias parameter lets the model bias the choice
as the strength of their gaze influence (Fig. 5c; β = −2.20%, 95% process according to the distribution of gaze between items. That
HDI = [−8.25%, 4.21%] difference between the observed and pre- is, with a strong gaze bias, the model’s predictions are strongly
dicted data). The full model also accurately recovered the observed dependent on the distribution of gaze, and a gaze distribution that
associations between the three behavioural metrics (for a compari- is random with respect to the value of the items then leads to more
son, see Fig. 2 and Supplementary Fig. 4). The no-gaze-bias variant random choices. Conversely, the model’s predictions are indepen-
predicted the participants’ individual mean RTs (Fig. 5d; β = 15 ms, dent of gaze when no gaze bias is present. The model then neglects
95% HDI = [−355 ms, 413 ms] difference between the observed and gaze and predicts choices solely driven by the values of the item.
predicted data) and the probability of choosing the best item (Fig. 5e; To further probe the robustness of this association between gaze
β = 0.13%, 95% HDI = [−4.43%, 4.83%] difference between the bias strength and probability of choosing the best item, we per-
observed and predicted data) similarly well. However, the restricted formed three additional tests. First, we tested whether the correla-
model by design cannot predict the influence of gaze on the par- tion of individual gaze bias estimates and individuals’ probability of
ticipants’ choices (Fig. 5f; β = −22.72%, 95% HDI = [−30.81%, choosing the best item was also present and statistically meaningful
stnapicitrap
fo
egatnecreP
saib
ezag
htiw
0
–20
–40
–60
–80 Krajbich 2010 Folke 2016
Krajbich 2011 Tavares 2017
–100
Krajbich
20 Kr1 a0
jbich
201 F1
olke
2 T0 a1 v6
ares
2017 Participant
– )saib
htiw(
CIAW
)saib
tuohtiw(
CIAW
a b
Fig. 4 | Individual relative model comparison between the full GLAM and a restricted no-gaze-bias GLAM variant. a, Across datasets, the response
behaviour of most individuals is better described by the full model with a gaze bias (given by the lowest score on the WAIC). b, Individual WAIC
differences between the full and restricted GLAM variant. Negative differences indicate better fits of the full model. Note that the y axis in b is truncated to
better show small differences. The lowest WAIC difference was −400.64.
NATuRe HuMAN BeHAvIouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NATuRe HumAN BeHAviouR Articles
1.0
0.8
8,000
0.6
0.8 6,000
0.4
4,000 0.6 0.2
2,000 0.0
0.4
–0.2
0 0
0 2,0004,0006,0008,000 0 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 –0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
Observed mean RT (ms) Observed P(choose best) Observed gaze influence
on P(choice ∣ value)
Observed mean RT (ms) Observed P(choose best) Observed gaze influence
on P(choice ∣ value)
within each of the four datasets. The relationship is present in individuals with a weak association. This effect would then dimin-
three out of the four included datasets (Krajbich 2010: Spearman’s ish, however, in the later stages of the trial (in which fixations are
ρ(38) = 0.15, P = 0.36; Krajbich 2011: Pearson’s r(29) = 0.62, driven more by item value). To establish whether this relationship
P < 0.001; Folke 2016: Pearson’s r(23) = 0.75, P < 0.001; Tavares 2017: also holds later in the trial, we repeated our analyses after discard-
Pearson’s r(24) = 0.41, P = 0.04). Second, we ascertained that this ing first fixations in each trial (and trials in which only one fixation
relationship is not determined by first trial fixations only. First trial was made). Note that this analysis did not include the Folke 2016
fixations have been shown to be less influenced by item value9,10 and dataset, which only contains trial-aggregated gaze data, and thus did
more driven by other factors, such as screen position (for example, not allow us to remove first fixation data. Importantly, the relation-
first fixations are often directed towards items in the upper left por- ship between individuals’ gaze bias strength and their probability of
tion of the screen, irrespective of the value of that item). One could choosing the best item was still present and statistically meaningful
therefore hypothesize that individuals with a strong association of (β = 8.78%, 95% HDI = [0.14%; 17.08%] increase in probability of
gaze and choice are more prone to choosing the first item seen in a choosing the best item per unit increase in γ; 97.3% of the poste-
trial (and thereby less likely to choose the best item) compared with rior density estimate was greater than 0). Third, to ensure that the
)tseb
esoohc(P
detciderP
)tseb
esoohc(P
detciderP
ecneulfni
ezag
detciderP
ecneulfni
ezag
detciderP
)eulav
∣ eciohc(P
no
)eulav
∣ eciohc(P
no
1.0
0.8
8,000
0.6
0.8 6,000
0.4
4,000 0.6 0.2
2,000 0.0
0.4
–0.2
0 0
0 2,0004,0006,0008,000 0 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 –0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
MALG
saib
oN
)sm(
TR
naem
detciderp
)sm(
TR
naem
detciderp
a b c
Krajbich 2010
Krajbich 2011
Folke 2016
Tavares 2017
d e f
Fig. 5 | Individual out-of-sample predictions of behavioural metrics for all odd-numbered trials. a–c, The full model with gaze-bias variant accurately
predicts individuals’ mean RT (a), probability of choosing the best item (b) and influence of gaze on choice probability (c). d–f, While the no-gaze-bias
variant also accurately predicts individuals’ mean RT (d) and probability of choosing the best item (e), it fails to accurately capture individuals’ influence
of gaze on choice probability (f). See the “Predicting individual choice behaviour” section for the corresponding statistical analysis. Model predictions are
simulated using parameter estimates obtained from individual fits on even-numbered trials (for more details on the simulation procedures, see the “Model
simulations” section).
9.0
8.5
8.0
7.5
7.0
6.5
0
–11 –10 –9
)sm(
TR
naem
gol
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2 Krajbich 2010
Krajbich 2011
Folke 2016 0.0
Tavares 2017
–1 0 1 –1 0 1
̭ ̭ γ γ
no
ecneulfni
ezaG
)eulav
∣
eciohc(P
)tseb
esoohc(P
a b c 1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0
log v̭
Fig. 6 | Associations between individuals’ response behaviour in the odd-numbered trials and the model parameters estimated from the even-
numbered trials. a, log-transformed mean RTs decrease with increasing log-transformed v estimates (β = −0.79 log(ms), 95% HDI = [−0.85 log(ms),
−0.71 log(ms)]). b, Behavioural gaze influence decreases with increasing γ estimates (β = −26.59%, 95% HDI = [−37.10%, −17.24%]). c, Individuals’
probability of choosing the best item increases with increasing γ estimates (β = 12.65%, 95% HDI = [−3.19%, 28.84%] per unit increase in γ; 94.5% of the
posterior density estimate were greater than 0).
NATuRe HuMAN BeHAvIouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NATuRe HumAN BeHAviouR
relationship between the estimated gaze bias strength (γ) and indi- cific predictions, which will have higher predictive accuracy owing
viduals’ probability of choosing the best item is not dependent on to the positive relationship between gaze and choice. Conversely, a
the specific formulation of the gaze bias mechanism in the GLAM, stochastic choice model without a gaze bias mechanism will make
we also established that this association remains statistically mean- probabilistic, but identical, predictions for two such trials. Previous
ingful when using γ estimates from the additive variant instead work has also shown a higher influence of gaze on choice in trials in
(β = −0.54%, 95% HDI = [−0.98%, −0.06%] per unit increase in which individuals did not have strong preferences among the alter-
γ ; 97.8% of the posterior density estimate were greater than 0). natives19, suggesting that decision models with a gaze bias mecha-
additive
nism will be particularly useful in these situations.
Discussion Our analyses also confirmed the need to account for individual
We investigated individual differences in the influence of gaze variability in model parameters, as we found substantial variability
allocation on choice behaviour by analysing four previously pub- across individuals in the influence of gaze on choice that was hid-
lished datasets6,9,10,21, in total including 118 individuals, two choice den in the group-level analyses. Given that the influence of gaze on
set sizes (two- and three-alternative) and two choice domains choice is variable among individuals, a single gaze bias parameter γ
(value-based and perceptual). Across datasets, we found an over- for the whole group would not fit all individuals well, and therefore
all positive behavioural relationship between gaze and choice (with result in inferior predictive performance of the model. On the one
a longer gaze increasing choice probability). The strength of this hand, individuals whose link between gaze allocation and choice
relationship, however, was highly variable across individuals. To behaviour is weaker than the group average would falsely be pre-
better understand the underlying computational mechanism, we dicted to make choices less consistent with item values, and driven
proposed a model called GLAM, which is inspired by the multial- more by looking behaviour. On the other hand, predictions for indi-
ternative aDDM9 and can be used to study gaze biases at the level viduals’ choices with a stronger link than the group average would
of the individual. The GLAM assumes that individuals accumulate not contain enough influence of gaze. Accounting for individual
evidence in favour of each available item and make a choice as soon differences in the link between gaze allocation and choice behav-
as the cumulative evidence for one item reaches a choice thresh- iour opens important avenues for future research that focus on the
old. Importantly, the accumulation process is biased by gaze behav- specific determinants of these differences. For example, are these
iour, with discounted accumulation rates for unattended items. differences best characterized as a trait (stable within a person, but
The model is statistically and computationally tractable, making variable between persons, as suggested in ref. 40), a state (variable
it readily extendable to novel choice tasks and research questions. within a person, between different situations or contexts) or both
Generally, the GLAM can be seen as a way to sidestep the complex (variable between persons and contexts)?
problem of simulating individual fixation trajectories. Although Despite a wealth of evidence exploring the computational
researchers have started to explore generative fixation models mechanisms underlying simple choice behaviour and its link to
in simple decision-making tasks (for example, see ref. 20), this is gaze allocation3,4,9–11,14,20,23, most of this work, and the associated
often not feasible or not of main interest to researchers trying to computational frameworks (for example, see ref. 26), is difficult to
understand the influence of gaze allocation on the decision-making extend to choice scenarios involving more than two choice alter-
process. Here, the GLAM provides a tractable, but simplified, alter- natives. For example, a previous study4 explored the link between
native to the aDDM that solely requires trial-level statistics, namely gaze behaviour and the choice mechanism underlying binary value-
overall gaze proportions (next to the RTs, choices and item values). based choices. To model the decision process, the authors used a
We then used the GLAM to perform three rigorous tests of gaze hierarchical variant of the DDM, combined with a trial-averaged
bias effects at the level of the individual. First, we formally tested gaze-weighting mechanism similar to the GLAM. This model is
whether individuals’ behaviour was better described by a model strictly limited to binary decisions, as it describes the decision-
with or without gaze bias. In this comparison, a large majority of making process as a single accumulator that diffuses between two
participants (109 out of 118) were better described by the full model decision bounds (each bound representing one of the two choice
with gaze bias than by a restricted variant without. Second, we estab- alternatives). Therefore, this model cannot be used to study choices
lished that the full model accurately predicts observed behavioural between more than two alternatives. Furthermore, their hierar-
differences between individuals, namely, in the RT, the probability chical estimation of the model’s parameters is solely focused on
of choosing the best item and the observed influence of gaze allo- obtaining better group-level estimates and not on better capturing
cation on choice behaviour. Third, we tested how individuals’ gaze individuals’ choice behaviour. As a result, they neither analyse nor
bias estimates relate to their response behaviour. The strength of report individual parameter estimates or any associations of such
individuals’ gaze biases was predictive of both the strength of indi- estimates with individuals’ response behaviour. Our work thereby
viduals’ association of gaze and choice and individuals’ probabil- expands on their findings in three meaningful ways. First, our mod-
ity of choosing the best item (stronger gaze biases were associated elling approach can be extended to an unlimited amount of choice
with more choices that were inconsistent with item values). This alternatives. Second, our analyses, decision modelling and findings
identifies another source of variability among individuals’ ability to focus explicitly on the individual level, leading to insights into the
choose the best item from a choice set. Previously, these differences association of individuals’ association of gaze allocation and choice
were mostly attributed to differences in generic accumulation noise behaviour. In particular, we found that individuals’ choice behav-
parameters38,39, obscuring further insight into the mechanisms driv- iour is better described by a model with a gaze bias compared with
ing these individual differences. one without, and that individuals’ gaze bias estimates predict their
Thereby, our approach goes beyond previous analyses of indi- behaviour on several measures (Fig. 6). Third, our analyses span
viduals’ gaze biases. For example, the Krajbich 2010 study10 reported both multiple choice set sizes and choice domains.
individual gaze bias estimates in supplementary figure 11 of their While we have shown that the GLAM accurately captures indi-
paper. These estimates, however, do not result from non-restricted viduals’ choice behaviour in choice situations with two and three
model fits and also leave open the possibility that individuals’ choice alternatives, it also extends to choices involving many more
behaviour might be better described by a model without gaze bias. options, scenarios that we mostly encounter in our everyday lives.
One reason for the superior performance of models with a gaze Vending machines, for example, can easily display up to 20 items.
bias is their use of individual trial gaze data, which allows them to We assume that in these multialternative choice situations, both gaze
make different predictions across otherwise identical choice sets. and individual differences will play a prominent role. That is, indi-
Leveraging a gaze bias mechanism lets these models make trial-spe- viduals when confronted with large choice sets do not always look at
NATuRe HuMAN BeHAvIouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NATuRe HumAN BeHAviouR Articles
all available items (for example, see ref. 41). A choice model that only trial: an unbiased state, when an item is currently looked at, and a biased state,
considers item values will therefore fail to accurately predict individ- when gaze is directed towards a different item. Therefore, on average, A i is a linear
combination of two terms weighted by relative gaze g according to equation (3):
uals’ choice behaviour. Conversely, a model that includes informa- i
tion about individuals’ gaze distribution during decision formation A i=g ir i+(1−g i)γr i (3)
will outperform such naive models, because it will better account
for the set of items that individuals actually consider for a choice. Here, γ (γ ≤ 1) is the gaze bias parameter that determines the strength of the
In addition, we assume behavioural differences between individu- downweighting during the biased state. If γ = 1, there is no difference between the
biased and unbiased state, producing no gaze bias. If γ < 1, the absolute evidence
als to increase with increasing choice set size. Some individuals, for
signal is discounted, resulting in a gaze bias. If γ < 0, the sign of the evidence signal
example, may look at only a few of the available items before mak- changes, thereby leaking evidence, when the item is not fixated on. This leakage
ing a choice, while others may spend a long time searching for the mechanism is supported by a recent empirical study22.
most highly valued option (as indicated in a previous study41). To Importantly, by computing an average absolute evidence signal over the two
states (equation (3)), each accumulator E has constant drift, allowing the use of
understand whether there is a common choice mechanism underly- i
an analytical solution for its first passage time density (equation (6)). Thereby, the
ing these different types of choice behaviour, it is necessary to test
GLAM is statistically and computationally tractable.
the ability of a model to capture individual choice patterns. Note that the range of possible R* (equation (2)) depends on the participants’
i
Recently, it was also shown that single-trial electroencepha- use of the item value scale. That is, if the item values r only cover a narrow range
i
lography components reflecting attention in simple perceptual of possible values on the given scale, relative evidence values R i* will likewise be
small, whereas they will be large if the participant utilizes the entire range of the
decision-making tasks explain the variance in single-trial evidence
value scale. The GLAM assumes an adaptive representation of the relative evidence
accumulation rates of the decision-making process42 and that vari-
signals that is compensating for the participants’ use of the value scale and thereby
ability in these components can explain behavioural differences sensitive to marginal differences in the relative evidence, particularly to values
between individuals43. Two recent studies also provided empiri- close to 0 (where the absolute evidence signal for one item is only marginally
cal evidence that value-driven activity in the orbitofrontal cortex different to the maximum of all others). To this end, a logistic transform s(x), with
scaling parameter τ is applied as follows:
of monkeys is modulated by fixation location when they viewed
reward-associated visual cues in a free-viewing paradigm44,45. 1
s(x)= (4)
Together, these studies provide neurobiological evidence of the 1+exp(−τx)
influence of visual fixations on the process of decision formation.
Ultimately, a better understanding of these computations will be
central to building holistic models of the choice process and for
R i=s(R i*) (5)
advancing existing choice frameworks. In addition, it might also The first passage time density f(t) of a single linear stochastic accumulator E,
i i
help us to better understand the origin of the behavioural variability with decision boundary b, is given by the inverse Gaussian distribution46 as follows:
that we observe within and between individuals as well as the spe-
cific functional form of the underlying computational mechanisms f(t)=  λ  1 2 exp −λ(t−μ)2  , withμ= b andλ=b2 (6)
linking gaze allocation and choice behaviour. i 2πt3   2μ2t   vR i σ2
However, this density does not take into account that there are multiple
Methods
accumulators in each trial racing towards the same boundary. As soon as any of
Datasets, tasks, procedure and preprocessing. We reanalysed four datasets these accumulators crosses the boundary, a choice is made and the trial ends. For
previously published by Krajbich and colleagues10, Krajbich and Rangel9, Folke and this reason, f(t) must be corrected for the probability that any other accumulator
i
colleagues6 and Tavares and colleagues21. An overview of the corresponding tasks crosses the boundary first. The probability that a single accumulator crosses the
and procedures is given in Fig. 1 and in the “Datasets and task overview” section. A boundary before t is given by its cumulative distribution function F(t) as follows:
i
more detailed description of the datasets can be found in Supplementary Methods 2
or in the original publications. F i(t)=Φ    tλ   t μ−1  +exp   2 μλ Φ   − λ t    μt +1   (7)
Additional processing. The original studies used different scales of item value
(that is, liking rating between −10 and +10, willingness-to-pay, angular distance
to target line segment). We linearly rescaled all values to a common scale from 1 to
where Φ(x) is the standard normal cumulative distribution function. Hence, the
joint probability p(t) that accumulator E crosses b at time t, and that no other
10 so that model parameters are comparable across datasets. For the Tavares 2017 i i
accumulator E has reached b first, is given by equation (8):
data, values were rescaled so that higher values indicate lower angular distance to i
the target. Furthermore, for each trial, we computed relative gaze g as the sum of
gazes towards this item, divided by the total sum of gazes to all
itemi
s in that trial
p i(t)=f i(t)∏(1−F i(t))
(8)
for each item. J
Importantly, all of the GLAM’s parameters could be recovered to a satisfying
GLAM details. The GLAM belongs to the class of linear stochastic race models32,33.
degree without bias (see Supplementary Methods 3 for detailed a procedure and
It assumes accumulation of noisy evidence in favour of each alternative i, and that
results).
choices are determined by the first accumulator that reaches a common boundary
b (which we set to 1). In particular, we define the accumulated relative evidence E
i GLAM parameter estimation. All models were implemented in a Bayesian
in favour of alternative i, as a stochastic process that changes at each time point t
framework using the Python library PyMC347. The full GLAM has four parameters
according to equation (1):
(v, γ, σ, τ). We placed uninformative, uniform priors between sensible limits on all
E i(t)=E i(t−1)+vR i+N(0,σ2), withE i(0)=0 (1) parameters as follows:
v~Uniform(1−10,0.01)
E consists of two separate components: a drift term R and zero-centred normally
dii
stributed noise with standard deviation σ. The
overai
ll speed of the accumulation
γ~Uniform(−10,1)
is governed by the velocity parameter v. The drift term R
i
describes the average σ~Uniform(1−10,0.02)
amount of relative evidence for item i that is accumulated at each time point t. τ~Uniform(0,5)
We define the relative evidence R* as the difference in the stationary absolute
i
evidence signal A i of item i and the maximum absolute evidence of all other items J The γ parameter has a natural upper bound at 1 (no gaze bias). The τ parameter
according to equation (2): has a natural lower bound at 0 (no sensitivity to differences in relative evidence R*).
i
The GLAM variant without gaze bias used the specification of the absolute
R i*=A i−max J(A J) (2)
evidence signal A i from the full variant (equation (3)) and fixed γ at a value of 1,
resulting in no influence of gaze on the drift term.
The gaze bias mechanism is implemented in the absolute evidence signal A. To reduce the influence of erroneous responses (for example, when the
i
Similar to the aDDM, absolute evidence signals are assumed to be proportional participant presses a button by accident or has a lapse of attention during the task)
to the item value r, and, crucially, switch between two different states during the on parameter estimation, we explicitly included a model of contaminant processes
i
NATuRe HuMAN BeHAvIouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NATuRe HumAN BeHAviouR
in all estimation procedures. In line with existing DDM modelling toolboxes48, we 4. Cavanagh, J. F., Wiecki, T. V., Kochar, A. & Frank, M. J. Eye tracking and
assumed a fixed 5% rate of erroneous responses, which we model as a participant- pupillometry are indicators of dissociable latent decision processes. J. Exp.
specific uniform likelihood distribution u(t). This contaminant likelihood Psychol. Gen. 143, 1476–1488 (2014).
s
describes the probability of a random choice for any of the N available choice items 5. Fiedler, S. & Glöckner, A. The dynamics of decision making in risky choice:
at a random time point in the interval of empirically observed RTs as follows (see an eye-tracking analysis. Front. Psychol. 3, 335 (2012).
also refs. 48,49): 6. Folke, T., Jacobsen, C., Fleming, S. M. & De Martino, B. Explicit
representation of confidence informs future value-based decisions. Nat. Hum.
1
u s(t)=
N(max(rt s)−min(rt s))
(9)
7.
GBe löha ckv.
n
1 e,
r
,0 A00
.
2
&
( H20 e1 r7 b) o.
ld, A.-K. An eye-tracking study on information
processing in risky decisions: evidence for compensatory strategies based on
The resulting choice likelihood is then given by the following: automatic processes. J. Behav. Decis. Mak. 24, 71–98 (2011).
8. Konovalov, A. & Krajbich, I. Gaze data reveal distinct choice processes
l i(t)=0.95⋅p i(t)+0.05⋅u s(t) (10) underlying model-based and model-free reinforcement learning. Nat.
Commun. 7, 12438 (2016).
Models were fit using Markov–Chain–Monte–Carlo sampling. We used the 9. Krajbich, I. & Rangel, A. Multialternative drift-diffusion model predicts the
default implementation of the No-U-Turn-Sampler (NUTS50) in PyMC 3.4.1. relationship between visual fixations and choice in value-based decisions.
We sampled two chains with 500 tuning samples that were discarded, and 2,000 Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 108, 13852–13857 (2011).
posterior samples to estimate the model parameters. If the sampler did not 10. Krajbich, I., Armel, C. & Rangel, A. Visual fixations and the computation
converge as indicated by the Gelman–Rubin statistic (|Rˆ – 1| < 0.05) or if the and comparison of value in simple choice. Nat. Neurosci. 13,
number of effective samples was low (<100), all of this participant’s models were 1292–1298 (2010).
re-estimated using more robust but less efficient Metropolis sampling (two chains, 11. Krajbich, I., Lu, D., Camerer, C. & Rangel, A. The attentional drift-diffusion
with 10,000 samples each). Again, convergence was diagnosed using the Gelman– model extends to simple purchasing decisions. Front. Pyschol. 3, 193 (2012).
Rubin statistic. Convergence was achieved for all models. Reported parameter 12. Pärnamets, P. et al. Biasing moral decisions by exploiting the dynamics of eye
estimates are maximum a posteriori estimates. gaze. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 112, 4170–4175 (2015).
13. Roe, R. M., Busemeyer, J. R. & Townsend, J. T. Multialternative decision field
Model simulations. Choice and RT data were simulated from the GLAM theory: a dynamic connectionist model of decision making. Psychol. Rev. 108,
according to the following procedures. Each trial in the left-out dataset (all 370 (2001).
odd-numbered trials) was repeated 50 times. For every trial, the model used the 14. Shimojo, S., Simion, C., Shimojo, E. & Scheier, C. Gaze bias both reflects and
observed item values and gaze distributions. With a fixed rate of 5% the simulation influences preference. Nat. Neurosci. 6, 1317–1322 (2003).
produced a random choice and RT between the participant’s minimum and 15. Stewart, N., Hermens, F. & Matthews, W. J. Eye movements in risky choice.
maximum observed RT (see equations (9) and (10)). With a rate of 95% the choice J. Behav. Decis. Mak. 29, 116–136 (2016).
and RT were simulated from the GLAM. 16. Stewart, N., Gächter, S., Noguchi, T. & Mullett, T. L. Eye movements in
strategic choice. J. Behav. Decis. Mak. 29, 137–156 (2016).
Parametric statistical tests. Assumptions of normality and homoscedasticity were 17. Vaidya, A. R. & Fellows, L. K. Testing necessary regional frontal contributions
tested for all reported parametric tests. If the normality assumption was violated, to value assessment and fixation-based updating. Nat. Commun. 6,
we report results from non-parametric tests (Spearman’s ρ, Mann–Whitney U). 10120 (2015).
We report rank-biserial correlations r as effect size measures for U-tests. If the 18. Tsetsos, K., Chater, N. & Usher, M. Salience driven value integration explains
homoscedasticity assumption was violated, we report results from the more robust decision biases and preference reversal. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 109,
Welch’s t-test. All tests were two-tailed. 9659–9664 (2012).
19. Milosavljevic, M., Navalpakkam, V., Koch, C. & Rangel, A. Relative visual
Mixed-effects modelling. All mixed-effects models reported in the manuscript saliency differences induce sizable bias in consumer choice. J. Consum.
across datasets were implemented and estimated using the bambi Python library51. Psychol. 22, 67–74 (2012).
Bambi automatically generates weakly informative priors for all model terms 20. Towal, R. B., Mormann, M. & Koch, C. Simultaneous modeling of visual
by default52. We sampled two chains, with 20,000 samples each, using NUTS.
saliency and value computation improves predictions of economic choice.
Convergence was diagnosed using the Gelman–Rubin criterion (|Rˆ – 1| < 0.05) for Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 110, E3858–E3867 (2013).
all analyses. We declare fixed effects as statistically meaningful either when the 95%
21. Tavares, G., Perona, P. & Rangel, A. The attentional drift diffusion model of
HDI excludes zero or when 95% of the posterior density is above (below) zero (see
simple perceptual decision-making. Front. Neurosci. 11, 468 (2017).
also ref. 4). In the latter case, we also report the proportion of the posterior mass
22. Ashby, N. J. S., Jekel, M., Dickert, S. & Glöckner, A. Finding the right fit: a
above (below) zero, directly indicating the posterior probability of the effect being
comparison of process assumptions underlying popular drift-diffusion
larger (smaller) than zero (see also ref. 53).
models. J. Exp. Psychol. Learn. Mem. Cogn. 42, 1982–1993 (2016).
23. Fisher, G. An attentional drift diffusion model over binary-attribute choice.
Software. All analyses were performed in Python, using the NumPy and SciPy54,
Cognition 168, 34–45 (2017).
Pandas55, Statsmodels56, PyMC347, bambi51 and Theano57 libraries. We used
24. Gluth, S., Spektor, M. S. & Rieskamp, J. Value-based attentional capture
Matplotlib58 for visualization.
affects multi-alternative decision making. eLife 7, e39659 (2018).
25. Ratcliff, R. A theory of memory retrieval. Psychol. Rev. 85, 59–108 (1978).
Reporting Summary. Further information on research design is available in the
26. Ratcliff, R., Smith, P. L., Brown, S. D. & McKoon, G. Diffusion decision
Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.
model: current issues and history. Trends Cogn. Sci. 20, 260–281 (2016).
27. Grandy, T. H., Lindenberger, U. & Werkle-Bergner, M. When group means
Data availability fail: can one size fit all? Preprint at biorXiv https://doi.org/10.1101/126490
All datasets are available at http://www.github.com/glamlab/gaze-bias-differences. (2017).
The Folke 2016 dataset59 is originally available at figshare: https://doi.org/10.6084/ 28. Lewandowsky, S. & Farrell, S. Computational Modeling in Cognition: Principles
m9.figshare.3756144.v2. and Practice (SAGE Publications, 2010).
29. Hayes, K. J. The backward curve: a method for the study of learning. Psychol.
Code availability Rev. 60, 269–275 (1953).
All analyses and figures can be reproduced using the datasets, scripts and GLAM 30. Itti, L. & Koch, C. A saliency-based search mechanism for overt and covert
resources that are available at http://www.github.com/glamlab/gaze-bias- shifts of visual attention. Vision Res. 40, 1489–1506 (2000).
differences. 31. Becker, G. M., DeGroot, M. H. & Marschak, J. Measuring utility by a
single-response sequential method. Behav. Sci. 9, 226–232 (1964).
32. Tillman, G. The racing diffusion model of speeded decision making. Preprint
Received: 4 December 2017; Accepted: 6 March 2019;
at PsyArXiv https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/xuwbk (2017).
Published: xx xx xxxx
33. Usher, M., Olami, Z. & McClelland, J. L. Hick’s Law in a stochastic race
model with speed–accuracy tradeoff. J. Math. Psychol. 46, 704–715 (2002).
References 34. Vehtari, A., Gelman, A. & Gabry, J. Practical Bayesian model evaluation using
1. Von Neumann, J. & Morgenstern, O. Theory of Games and Economic Behavior leave-one-out cross-validation and WAIC. Stat. Comput. 27, 1413–1432 (2017).
(Princeton Univ. Press, 1944). 35. Lopez-Persem, A., Domenech, P. & Pessiglione, M. How prior preferences
2. Luce, R. D. & Raiffa, H. Games and Decisions: Introduction and Critical determine decision-making frames and biases in the human brain. eLife 5,
Survey (Wiley, 1957). e20317 (2016).
3. Armel, K. C., Beaumel, A. & Rangel, A. Biasing simple choices by 36. Krajbich, I. Accounting for attention in sequential sampling models of
manipulating relative visual attention. Judgm. Decis. Mak. 3, 396–403 (2008). decision making. Curr. Opin. Psychol. 29, 6–11 (2019).
NATuRe HuMAN BeHAvIouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NATuRe HumAN BeHAviouR Articles
37. Smith, S. M. & Krajbich, I. Gaze amplifies value in decision making. Psychol. 56. Seabold, S. & Perktold, J. Statsmodels: econometric and statistical modeling
Sci. 30, 116–128 (2019). with Python. In Proc. 9th Python in Science Conference (Eds van der Walt, S.
38. Ratcliff, R., Thapar, A. & McKoon, G. Individual differences, aging, and IQ in & Millman, J.) 57–61 (SciPy, 2010).
two-choice tasks. Cognit. Psychol. 60, 127–157 (2010). 57. The Theano Development Team. Theano: a Python framework for fast
39. Ratcliff, R., Thapar, A. & McKoon, G. Aging and individual differences in computation of mathematical expressions. Preprint at arXiv https://arxiv.org/
rapid two-choice decisions. Psychon. Bull. Rev. 13, 626–635 (2006). abs/1605.02688 (2016).
40. Smith, S. M. & Krajbich, I. Attention and choice across domains. J. Exp. 58. Hunter, J. D. Matplotlib: a 2D graphics environment. Comput. Sci. Eng. 9,
Psychol. Gen. 147, 1810–1826 (2018). 90–95 (2007).
41. Reutskaja, E., Nagel, R., Camerer, C. F. & Rangel, A. Search dynamics in 59. Folke, T. Explicit representations of confidence informs future value-based
consumer choice under time pressure: an eye-tracking study. Am. Econ. Rev. decisions. Figshare https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.3756144.v2(2016).
101, 900–926 (2011).
42. Nunez, M. D., Srinivasan, R. & Vandekerckhove, J. Individual differences in Acknowledgements
attention influence perceptual decision making. Front. Psychol. 8, 18 (2015).
The Junior Professorship of P.N.C.M. as well as the associated Dahlem International
43. Nunez, M. D., Vandekerckhove, J. & Srinivasan, R. How attention influences
Network Junior Research Group Neuroeconomics is supported by Freie Universität
perceptual decision making: single-trial EEG correlates of drift-diffusion
Berlin within the Excellence Initiative of the German Research Foundation (DFG).
model parameters. J. Math. Psychol. 76, 117–130 (2017).
Further support for P.N.C.M. is provided by the WZB Berlin Social Science Center.
44. Hunt, L. T. et al. Triple dissociation of attention and decision computations
F.M. is supported by the International Max Planck Research School on the Life Course
across prefrontal cortex. Nat. Neurosci. 21, 1471 (2018).
(LIFE). I.K. is funded by the National Science Foundation Career Award 1554837. The
45. McGinty, V. B., Rangel, A. & Newsome, W. T. Orbitofrontal cortex value
funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish or
signals depend on fixation location during free viewing. Neuron 90,
preparation of the manuscript.
1299–1311 (2016).
46. Wald, A. Sequential Analysis (Courier Corp., 1973).
Author contributions
47. Salvatier, J., Wiecki, T. V. & Fonnesbeck, C. Probabilistic programming in
Python using PyMC3. PeerJ Comput. Sci. 2, e55 (2016). A.W.T. and F.M. contributed equally to the manuscript and share first authorship. A.W.T.
48. Wiecki, T. V., Sofer, I. & Frank, M. J. HDDM: hierarchical Bayesian and F.M. conceived of the GLAM, implemented all visualizations of the experimental
estimation of the drift-diffusion model in Python. Front. Neuroinform. 7, procedures and performed all formal data analyses. A.W.T. and F.M. also co-wrote all
14 (2013). software that was used in the data analyses that underlies the GLAM. A.W.T. and F.M.
49. Ratcliff, R. & Tuerlinckx, F. Estimating parameters of the diffusion model: wrote the original draft of the manuscript, and I.K., H.R.H. and P.N.C.M. reviewed and
Approaches to dealing with contaminant reaction times and parameter edited the manuscript. Funding for this work was acquired by P.N.C.M. The work was
variability. Psychon. Bull. Rev. 9, 438–481 (2002). supervised by H.R.H. and P.N.C.M.
50. Hoffman, M. D. & Gelman, A. The No-U-turn sampler: adaptively setting
path lengths in Hamiltonian Monte Carlo. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 15, 1593–1623 Competing interests
(2014). The authors declare no competing interests.
51. Yarkoni, T. & Westfall, J. Bambi: a simple interface for fitting Bayesian mixed
effects models. Preprint at OSF Preprints https://doi.org/10.31219/osf.io/rv7sn
Additional information
(2016).
52. Westfall, J. Statistical details of the default priors in the Bambi library. Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/
Preprint at arXiv https://arxiv.org/abs/1702.01201 (2017). s41562-019-0584-8.
53. Kruschke, J. Doing Bayesian Data Analysis: A Tutorial with R, JAGS, and Stan Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
(Academic Press, 2014). Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to P.N.C.M.
54. Oliphant, T. E. Python for scientific computing. Comput. Sci. Eng. 9,
Publisher’s note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
10–20 (2007).
published maps and institutional affiliations.
55. McKinney, W. Python for Data Analysis: Data Wrangling with Pandas,
NumPy, and IPython (O’Reilly Media, 2012). © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2019
NATuRe HuMAN BeHAvIouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
1
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
April
2018
Corresponding author(s): Peter N. C. Mohr
Reporting Summary
Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency
in reporting. For further information on Nature Research policies, see Authors & Referees and the Editorial Policy Checklist.
Statistical parameters
When statistical analyses are reported, confirm that the following items are present in the relevant location (e.g. figure legend, table legend, main
text, or Methods section).
n/a Confirmed
The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
An indication of whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided
Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.
A description of all covariates tested
A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
A full description of the statistics including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient) AND
variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)
For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted
Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.
For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated
Clearly defined error bars
State explicitly what error bars represent (e.g. SD, SE, CI)
Our web collection on statistics for biologists may be useful.
Software and code
Policy information about availability of computer code
Data collection No new data was collected in this study. Therefore, no software was used in the collection of the data.
Data analysis All analyses were performed in Python 3.5.2, using the NumPy 1.13 and SciPy 1.0 (Van der Walt, Colbert & Varoquaux, 2011), Pandas
0.21 (McKinney, 2010), Statsmodels 0.8 (Skipper & Perktold, 2010), PyMC 3.4.1 (Salvatier et al., 2016) and Theano 1.0.1 (Theano
Development Team, 2016) libraries. We used Matplotlib 2.1.1 (Hunter, 2007) for visualization. For our modeling we used a custom code
(http://www.github.com/glamlab/gaze-bias-differences).
For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors/reviewers
upon request. We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Research guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.
2
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
April
2018
Data
Policy information about availability of data
All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable:
- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets
- A list of figures that have associated raw data
- A description of any restrictions on data availability
All analyses and figures can be reproduced using the dataset, scripts and GLAM resources that are available at http://www.github.com/glamlab/gaze-bias-
differences. The dataset from Folke et al. (Nat Hum Beh, 2016) is licensed under CC BY 4.0 and originally available under https://doi.org/10.6084/
m9.figshare.3756144.v2.
Field-specific reporting
Please select the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.
Life sciences Behavioural & social sciences Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences
For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/authors/policies/ReportingSummary-flat.pdf
Behavioural & social sciences study design
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
Study description Our study includes choice, reaction time and eye tracking data collected from human participants in four previously published datasets.
Research sample The dataset from Krajbich et al. (2010) contains data from 39 Caltech students. Only participants who self-reportedly regularly ate the
snack foods used in the experiment and without food restrictions could participate. No information about participants' age or gender is
provided in the original study.
The dataset from Krajbich and Rangel (2011) includes data from 30 Caltech students. Only participants who self-reportedly regularly ate
the snack foods used in the participants and without food restrictions could participate. No information about participants' age or gender
is provided in the original study.
The dataset from Folke et al. (2016) includes data from 24 participants (17 females, age 21-38). Participants were required to fast for 4
hours before taking part in the experiment.
The dataset from Tavares et al. (2017) includes data from 25 participants (10 female, mean age 23) which included Caltech students and
staff as well as members of the surrounding community.
Sampling strategy We have no information about the sampling strategies used in the original studies.
Data collection The original studies recorded participants' choices and eye movements using a task presented on a computer. Eye movements were
recorded using an eye tracker. We do not have any information about the experimenters presence in the room or their blindness to the
research hypotheses.
Timing We do not have any information about start and end of data collection in the original datasets.
Data exclusions We did not exclude any data from the dataset that we obtained from the original authors.
Non-participation We do not have any information about drop-outs or declined participation in the original datasets.
Randomization We allocated data into separate groups once in our analysis, when performing an out of sample prediction exercise. Here, we split the
data into a training and test data set, respectively including the even and odd numbered experiment trials.
Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods
3
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
April
2018
Materials & experimental systems Methods
n/a Involved in the study n/a Involved in the study
Unique biological materials ChIP-seq
Antibodies Flow cytometry
Eukaryotic cell lines MRI-based neuroimaging
Palaeontology
Animals and other organisms
Human research participants
Human research participants
Policy information about studies involving human research participants
Population characteristics The dataset from Krajbich et al. (2010) contains data from 39 Caltech students. Only participants who self-reportedly regularly
ate the snack foods used in the experiment and without food restrictions could participate. No information about participants'
age or gender is provided in the original study.
The dataset from Krajbich and Rangel (2011) includes data from 30 Caltech students. Only participants who self-reportedly
regularly ate the snack foods used in the participants and without food restrictions could participate. No information about
participants' age or gender is provided in the original study.
The dataset from Folke et al. (2016) includes data from 24 participants (17 females, age 21-38). Participants were required to
fast for 4 hours before taking part in the experiment.
The dataset from Tavares et al. (2017) includes data from 25 participants (10 female, mean age 23) which included Caltech
students and staff as well as members of the surrounding community.
Recruitment We have no information about the recruitment process in the original studies.