Articles
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-020-0910-1
Intrinsic network architecture predicts the effects
elicited by intracranial electrical stimulation of the
human brain
Kieran C. R. Fox 1,2,6 ✉, Lin Shi 1,3,6, Sori Baek 1, Omri Raccah 1, Brett L. Foster 4, Srijani Saha1,
Daniel S. Margulies5, Aaron Kucyi 1 and Josef Parvizi 1 ✉
Intracranial electrical stimulation (iES) of the human brain has long been known to elicit a remarkable variety of perceptual,
motor and cognitive effects, but the functional–anatomical basis of this heterogeneity remains poorly understood. We con-
ducted a whole-brain mapping of iES-elicited effects, collecting first-person reports following iES at 1,537 cortical sites in 67
participants implanted with intracranial electrodes. We found that intrinsic network membership and the principal gradient of
functional connectivity strongly predicted the type and frequency of iES-elicited effects in a given brain region. While iES in
unimodal brain networks at the base of the cortical hierarchy elicited frequent and simple effects, effects became increasingly
rare, heterogeneous and complex in heteromodal and transmodal networks higher in the hierarchy. Our study provides a com-
prehensive exploration of the relationship between the hierarchical organization of intrinsic functional networks and the causal
modulation of human behaviour and experience with iES.
F
or more than a century, intracranial electrical stimulation (iES) knowledge of the relationship between network properties and the
of brain tissue in awake neurosurgical patients has been known electrophysiological effects of iES7–13 into the domain of human
to elicit a remarkable variety of perceptual, motor, affective and behaviour and subjective experience; and inform emerging clinical
cognitive effects, including somatosensations, visual hallucinations, interventions16.
emotions and memories1. Pioneering work by past investigators,
particularly the legendary Wilder Penfield, laid the foundation for Results
a high-level understanding of iES effects throughout the human Elicitation rate differs markedly across intrinsic brain networks.
brain2,3. We aimed to build on this work by creating a comprehen- First, we marshalled evidence from iES functional mapping proce-
sive, whole-brain mapping of iES responses, then integrating the dures conducted by a neurologist (J.P.) over the past 10 years at the
global pattern of iES effects with emerging models of the brain’s Stanford University Medical Center. Patients with intractable (that
large-scale cortical organization4. Non-invasive neuroimaging has is, medication-resistant) epilepsy are often implanted with intracra-
shown that the brain is organized as a complex mosaic of interlaced, nial electrodes to precisely determine the source of their seizures
intrinsic functional–anatomical networks5,6, and there is growing before neurosurgical resection of the pathological tissue. Sequential
awareness that iES leads to downstream electrophysiological effects stimulation of electrode contacts (so-called functional mapping)
that depend on the network connectivity profile of the region being with iES is a standard and safe19 procedure with great clinical utility,
stimulated7–13. However, it remains to be determined whether there resulting in marked improvements in patient outcomes following
is any systematic relationship between the intrinsic functional archi- neurosurgery20. The careful recording of any effects elicited by iES
tecture of the brain and the frequency or type of first-person reports is a routine part of the functional mapping procedure. Over time,
elicited by iES. Beyond addressing fundamental questions about the this yields rich datasets amenable to exploration of the functional
functional organization of the human cortex, further work bridg- characteristics of particular brain regions21,22 or testing of specific
ing iES, neuroimaging and first-person reports might also provide hypotheses, as in the present study.
relevant information that could help address the challenges facing Ultimately, we analysed information from 1,537 unique elec-
ongoing research using chronically implanted iES devices to modu- trode sites implanted in 67 patients with focal epilepsy undergoing
late mood in intractable neuropsychiatric conditions14–16. pre-surgical intracranial electroencephalography (iEEG) monitor-
Towards these aims, we sought to provide a comprehensive map ing. IES was performed by an experienced neurologist (J.P.) using
of iES effects across all human intrinsic brain networks, integrat- parameters typical in functional mapping sessions (macroelec-
ing first-person reports, invasive brain stimulation and existing trodes; 50 Hz; 2–10 mA current; 200–300 μs pulse width; admin-
atlases of non-invasive neuroimaging network data drawn from istered during task-free resting states; see Methods). Electrodes
large, representative samples5,17,18. Our goals were to: contribute rare showing pathological epileptiform activity were identified by the
causal data to higher-order models of cortical organization4; extend attending neurology team and were excluded from analysis; all
1Stanford Human Intracranial Cognitive Electrophysiology Program, Department of Neurology and Neurological Sciences, Stanford University, Stanford,
CA, USA. 2School of Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA. 3Department of Neurosurgery, Beijing Tiantan Hospital, Capital Medical University,
Beijing, China. 4Departments of Neurosurgery and Neuroscience, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA. 5Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique (CNRS), UMR 7225, Frontlab, Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle Épinière, Paris, France. 6These authors contributed equally: Kieran C. R. Fox,
Lin Shi. ✉e-mail: kcrfox@stanford.edu; jparvizi@stanford.edu
NAtuRe HuMAN BeHAvIOuR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTurE HumaN BEHavIOur
a b c d e f
1 2 n Responsive
Silent
Not
stimulated
Fig. 1 | experimental protocol: intracranial electrode implantation, ieS functional mapping, and data coding and aggregation. a, First, neurosurgeons
implanted intracranial electrode arrays (based strictly on clinical criteria), to precisely record from and stimulate the brains of patients with intractable
epilepsy. b, During so-called functional mapping sessions, as many electrodes as possible were sequentially stimulated using brief pulses of electrical
current. In an ideal session, all electrodes were stimulated, but in practice iES sessions were limited by both practical (for example, time constraints)
and clinical (for example, seizure onset) considerations. c, Following each stimulation, the patient reported on whether they detected any change
in either their body (for example, somatosensations or motor movements) or aspects of their subjective experience (for example, changes in visual
perception or emotions). If no change was noticed, the current amplitude was gradually increased (within safe limits32) over subsequent stimulations at
the same electrode. d, Based on patients’ reports, each electrode was classified as either responsive (some change was detected and reported), silent
(no change, even after repeated, higher-amplitude iES) or not stimulated (electrode not stimulated during functional mapping session due to one of the
aforementioned constraints). Responsive electrodes were further subcategorized by the type of effect elicited (for example, visual, emotional, etc.).
e, All electrodes were automatically assigned to a particular intrinsic brain network using a well-validated algorithm23, implemented at the level of patients’
individual neuroanatomy (that is, participant-specific space). f, Finally, data from all patients were aggregated in standard MNI space for group-level
analysis, and the ratio of responsive to silent electrodes was determined for each network.
of the results reported here are therefore from non-epileptic sites dataset. We found a small but significant difference in overall elici-
within the human brain. Following iES, each electrode site was tation rate between the left (34.6%) and right (43.4%) hemispheres
coded, using a binary scheme, as either silent or responsive. At silent of the brain (t(1,535) = 3.279; P = 0.001; d = 0.18; 95% confidence
sites, iES elicited no noticeable effect, even at high current ampli- interval (95% CI) = 0.07–0.29). Post-hoc t-tests showed that this
tude (importantly, in our clinical practice, if stimulation does not difference was driven by higher elicitation rates in the somatomotor
yield any effect, we increase the current until the maximum safe and salience networks, as well as a lower elicitation rate in the visual
limits are reached; Fig. 1). At responsive sites, iES led to a reportable network, of the right hemisphere. While interhemispheric differ-
change in experience according to the patient (including objectively ences between other networks were not statistically significant, elic-
verifiable effects, such as motor movements, as well as subjective itation rates were consistently higher in the right hemisphere (full
experiences such as changes in perception or emotion). results in Extended Data Fig. 1).
To control for demand characteristics and false positive reports, To ensure the reliability of our central finding of differential rates
a total of 116 sham stimulations were also delivered (M = 1.73 per across networks, we conducted several supplemental estimations of
patient). Only 11 led to false positive reports (the remaining 105 networks’ elicitation rates, using: (1) only electrodes on the lateral
shams yielding true negatives)—an overall false positive rate of just surface of the brain; (2) only electrodes from the medial surface; (3)
9.5%. Notably, false positives were restricted to just seven patients discovery versus replication samples each including a random half
(~10% of our sample), and a single patient contributed nearly half of of participants based on a 50/50 split; and (4) a randomly selected
all false positive reports identified (patient 66 committed five type I half of all electrodes, averaged over 100 iterations (see Methods). All
errors). No other patient committed more than a single type I error, supplemental estimates of network elicitation rates correlated highly
even after numerous sham stimulations. with our full dataset (seven-network parcellation: all r values ≥ 0.79;
After excluding false positives, we determined the network Supplementary Table 1; 17-network parcellation: all r values ≥ 0.74;
membership of each stimulation site. Each electrode was auto- Supplementary Table 2), indicating that our estimated elicitation
matically assigned to the nearest intrinsic brain network using a rates were highly reliable.
population-level atlas23 implemented in subject-specific (native)
brain space. The ratio of silent to responsive sites across all patients Elicitation rate closely tracks the principal gradient in intrin-
was aggregated to derive an overall elicitation rate for each network sic network functional connectivity. Next, we asked whether this
(Fig. 1 and Methods). We found marked differences throughout pattern showed a relationship with large-scale cortical gradients
the brain, with high elicitation rates in somatomotor (55%) and across these networks. Neuroscientists have long proposed that the
visual networks (52%), intermediate rates in the salience (50%), cerebral cortex is organized along a functional–anatomical gradi-
dorsal attention (39%) and frontoparietal networks (32%), and ent, with concrete, unimodal sensory processing at one end of the
low rates in the limbic (24%) and default networks (21%) (Fig. 2, hierarchy and more abstract, transmodal cognition at the other25–
Supplementary Fig. 1 and Table 1). We observed equivalent trends 28. Patterns of variance in the functional connectivity within and
using a 17-network parcellation (Fig. 3 and Table 2). Network mem- between intrinsic brain networks exhibit such a gradient, anchored
bership is already known to be an important factor in predicting at one end by unimodal visual and somatomotor networks with low
the downstream electrophysiological sequelae of iES8–12; our find- variability, and at the other by highly variable, transmodal default
ings provide detailed evidence that network membership is also a and limbic networks17. Hierarchical gradients provide a unifying
major determinant of the effects that iES has on human behaviour framework that promises to shed considerable light on the global
and experience. Moreover, far from being merely an emergent, aver- relationship between the anatomical organization and functional
age pattern, these trends were evident even at the individual level properties of the cerebral cortex4, but the effects elicited by iES have
in patients with electrodes spanning multiple networks (Fig. 4; all yet to be integrated with these models. Noticing the correspon-
participants in Supplementary Information). dence between our findings and the global hierarchy previously
Because previous research has shown differences in the effects described by the principal gradient in functional connectivity17, we
elicited by iES in the left versus right hemispheres21,24, we also correlated elicitation rates with the mean principal gradient value
explored whether any hemispheric asymmetries were present in our of each network as estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity
NAtuRe HuMAN BeHAvIOuR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTurE HumaN BEHavIOur Articles
a
Somatomotor Visual Dorsal attention Salience Frontoparietal Limbic Default
b
Mean response rate
0% 55%
Fig. 2 | elicitation rate of ieS varies markedly across intrinsic networks (seven-network parcellation). a,b, Aggregated data from all 67 patients in
standard brain space overlaid on a seven-network parcellation of the cerebral cortex. In a, red circles indicate responsive electrodes, where stimulation
elicited an effect, and black circles indicate null electrodes, where no effects were elicited even with repeated high-amplitude stimulation. In b, averaging
of the response rate for each network shows that the mean elicitation rate varies markedly but gradually (that is, linearly) across networks: somatomotor
and visual networks show the highest response rates; default and limbic networks show the lowest; and other networks show intermediate rates (Table 1).
Nearly identical trends were observed using a finer 17-network parcellation (Fig. 3 and Table 2).
Table 1 | elicitation rates and current thresholds for the seven-network parcellation
electrodes Current thresholds (mA)
Network total Responsive Silent Mean minimum elicitation Mean maximum quiescence
threshold (±s.d.) threshold (±s.d.)
Somatomotor 291 159 (54.6%) 132 (45.4%) 4.72 (1.80) 6.67 (2.15)
visual 182 94 (51.7%) 88 (48.3%) 4.16 (2.16) 6.72 (1.45)
Dorsal attention 71 28 (39.4%) 43 (60.6%) 5.50 (2.38) 7.95 (2.24)
Salience 210 104 (49.5%) 106 (50.5%) 4.97 (1.76) 6.32 (1.92)
Frontoparietal 169 54 (32.0%) 115 (68.0%) 4.41 (1.89) 6.62 (1.99)
Limbic 195 47 (24.1%) 148 (75.9%) 4.41 (1.40) 5.82 (2.11)
Default 419 87 (20.8%) 332 (79.2%) 4.88 (2.09) 6.61 (2.02)
totals and means 1,537 573 (37.3%) 964 (62.7%) 4.68 (1.94) 6.54 (2.04)
variance in the functional MRI (fMRI) blood oxygen level-dependent with unimodal networks showing the highest elicitation rates and
signal (see Methods). We found striking evidence that elicita- transmodal networks the lowest. This relationship also held for all
tion rate closely tracks principal gradient values (seven-network of our supplemental estimates of network elicitation rate (Extended
parcellation: r(5) = 0.96; P < 0.001; 95% CI = 0.75–0.99; Fig. 5a Data Figs. 2 and 3).
and Extended Data Fig. 2; 17-network parcellation: r(15) = 0.82; To confirm this relationship independent of network parcella-
P < 0.001; 95% CI = 0.56–0.93; Fig. 5c and Extended Data Fig. 3), tions, and across the gradient’s full range, we extracted principal
NAtuRe HuMAN BeHAvIOuR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTurE HumaN BEHavIOur
a
01
02
03
04
05
06
Intrinsic 07
08
network
09
10
11
b 12
13
14
15
16
17
Mean response rate
0% 67%
Fig. 3 | elicitation rate of ieS varies markedly across intrinsic networks (17-network parcellation). a,b, Aggregated data from all 67 patients in standard
brain space overlaid on a 17-network parcellation of the cerebral cortex. a, Electrodes are colour coded as in Fig. 2. b, As in the seven-network parcellation
of the brain (Fig. 2), average response rates for each network vary linearly across a finer-scale 17-network parcellation of the cortical surface.
Table 2 | elicitation rates and current thresholds for the 17-network parcellation
electrodes Current thresholds (mA)
Network total Responsive Silent Mean minimum elicitation Mean maximum quiescence
threshold (±s.d.) threshold (±s.d.)
01 52 35 (67.3%) 17 (32.7%) 4.21 (2.42) 6.44 (1.42)
02 102 44 (43.1%) 58 (56.9%) 3.83 (2.15) 6.61 (1.37)
03 175 103 (58.9%) 72 (41.1%) 4.39 (1.75) 6.31 (2.16)
04 78 42 (53.9%) 36 (46.1%) 5.34 (1.78) 7.22 (1.88)
05 47 21 (44.7%) 26 (55.3%) 5.05 (2.20) 8.41 (1.59)
06 40 16 (40.0%) 24 (60.0%) 5.69 (1.25) 7.17 (2.41)
07 156 85 (54.5%) 71 (45.5%) 5.07 (1.77) 6.34 (1.81)
08 97 37 (38.1%) 60 (61.9%) 4.61 (2.08) 6.11 (1.72)
09 49 24 (49.0%) 25 (51.0%) 4.25 (1.15) 6.00 (1.98)
10 149 24 (16.1%) 125 (83.9%) 4.81 (1.78) 5.71 (2.14)
11 54 21 (38.9%) 33 (61.1%) 4.86 (1.88) 6.54 (2.64)
12 59 23 (39.0%) 36 (61.0%) 4.14 (1.55) 7.06 (2.15)
13 71 14 (19.7%) 57 (80.3%) 5.69 (2.59) 6.63 (1.93)
14 40 9 (22.5%) 31 (77.5%) 6.11 (2.20) 7.96 (2.13)
15 35 12 (34.3%) 23 (65.7%) 4.38 (0.87) 6.76 (1.89)
16 173 36 (20.8%) 137 (79.2%) 4.38 (1.95) 6.37 (2.12)
17 160 27 (16.9%) 133 (83.1%) 4.88 (2.31) 6.78 (1.87)
totals and means 1,537 573 (37.3%) 964 (62.7%) 4.68 (1.94) 6.54 (2.04)
NAtuRe HuMAN BeHAvIOuR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTurE HumaN BEHavIOur Articles
Patient 06
Patient 106 Patient 38
Patient 27
Patient 38
gradient values at each vertex in cortical surface space where iES where iES elicited some change. Ultimately, eight categories were
had been administered. We used mixed-effects logistic regression employed: (1) somatomotor; (2) visual; (3) olfactory; (4) vestibu-
to relate principal gradient value (fixed effect) to our binary cod- lar; (5) emotional; (6) language; (7) memory; and (8) physiological.
ing of electrode sites (silent/responsive) as the dependent vari- Importantly, no type of effect was excluded a priori: the absence of
able, modelling patient as a random effect (see Methods). We certain categories of effects reported in previous research29 prob-
found that vertex-level principal gradient values showed a signifi- ably reflects the rarity of certain types of effects, which were not
cant relationship with our coding of iES effects (χ2(55) = 394.565; observed even in our comparatively large sample (for further
P < 0.0001; Supplementary Tables 3 and 4), with silent electrode details, see Methods). Classified results were then pooled to yield an
sites associated, as expected, with higher principal gradient values. estimate of the prevalence of each effect type for each brain network
Together, these data indicate that the fMRI intrinsic functional con- (Extended Data Figs. 4 and 5).
nectivity profile of a given brain region is a powerful predictor of We found that the network membership of a stimulated
whether or not effects will be induced with iES—an entirely inde- electrode significantly predicted the category of elicited effect
pendent modality. (seven-network parcellation: λ = 0.312; P < 0.001; 17-network
parcellation: λ = 0.364; P < 0.001), indicating that, as expected29,
Elicited effects become more heterogeneous ascending the cor- stimulation of different networks yields widely divergent effects.
tical hierarchy. We then undertook a detailed investigation of the However, we also found evidence that the heterogeneity of effect
specific quality of the effects elicited throughout the brain. In line categories elicited within a given network correlated with the
with our previous work21, we employed broad, data-driven cat- network’s principal gradient value (seven-network parcellation:
egories to classify patients’ reports at every responsive electrode r(5) = 0.77; P = 0.044; 95% CI = 0.04–0.96; Fig. 5b; 17-network
)%(
etar
noitaticilE
a b
100
80
60
40
20
0
)%(
etar
noitaticilE
100
80
60
40
20
0
)%(
etar
noitaticilE
SM V DA S FP L D
Network
Patient 27 Patient 78
SM V DA S FP L D
Network
100
80
60
40
Patient 06 Patient 06 20
0
SM V DA S FP L D
Network
Fig. 4 | Network-specific elicitation patterns are present at the level of individual patients. a, Responsive (red) and silent (black) sites in the brains of six
patients with electrodes spanning multiple networks. Even at the level of individual patients’ neuroanatomy, iES in unimodal networks was clearly more likely
to elicit effects. White circles indicate electrodes where iES was not administered. Networks are colour coded as in Fig. 2. b, Network-specific elicitation rates
from three patients where iES was administered at a large number of electrodes (spanning at least six of the seven intrinsic networks). Despite heterogeneity
at the individual level, the general trend in elicitation rates was apparent in patients with many stimulated electrodes. Network elicitation rates were derived
from 41, 45 and 50 electrodes, respectively, for the top, middle and bottom panels. Absence of a histogram bar indicates that no data were available for this
network for a given patient. D, default; DA, dorsal attention; FP, frontoparietal; L, limbic; S, salience; SM, somatomotor; V, visual.
NAtuRe HuMAN BeHAvIOuR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTurE HumaN BEHavIOur
a b
100
80
c d
)%(
etar
lluN
60
40
20
0
100 6
5
80
4
3
2
1
0
)%(
etar
lluN
60
40
20
0
–6 –3 0 3 6 3 4 2 1 6 7 5 14 8 111215 9 10131617
Principal gradient Network
seirogetac
tceffe
fo
rebmuN
seirogetac
tceffe
fo
rebmuN
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
–6 –3 0 3 6 SM V DA S FP L D
Principal gradient Network
Fig. 5 | Relationships between network elicitation rates, position in the principal gradient hierarchy and the diversity of elicited effects. a,c, The
principal gradient of functional connectivity17 predicts the rate of effects elicited by iES in both seven-network (a) (r = 0.96) and 17-network (c) (r = 0.82)
parcellations of human cerebral cortex. b,d, Despite fewer effects elicited overall, ascending along the cortical hierarchy, a greater diversity of effects is
elicited for both seven-network (b) and 17-network (d) parcellations. Network data in all panels are arranged in order of increasing principal gradient value.
Error bars indicate s.e.m.
NAtuRe HuMAN BeHAvIOuR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTurE HumaN BEHavIOur Articles
parcellation: r(15) = 0.51; P = 0.035; 95% CI = 0.04–0.80; Fig. 5d). reported. For all networks, we found that this threshold exceeded
These significant relationships were observed despite the fact that the mean current required to elicit an effect in the same network
under the null hypothesis (that is, diversity of effects is equal across (that is, null effects were still observed despite higher mean current
all networks) networks with a larger number of responsive elec- delivery than at electrodes where iES did elicit effects in the same
trodes have a higher probability of exhibiting greater effect diver- network) (Tables 1 and 2). Low rates of effect elicitation in transmo-
sity (or, equivalently, as the number of responsive electrodes in a dal networks therefore cannot be explained by either higher elicita-
given network approaches zero, the probability of observing effects tion thresholds or inadequate current delivery in our study: even at
from all eight of our categories diminishes correspondingly). As high current magnitudes (6–10 mA) that were well above the typical
anticipated, then, when the small number of effects in transmodal threshold for eliciting effects (4–5 mA) but still within established
networks was accounted for by controlling for the total number of safe limits32, transmodal networks were far less likely to yield effects.
responsive electrodes in each network, the observed associations Research suggests that intrinsic connectivity heterogeneity
were amplified (seven-network parcellation: partial r(4) = 0.84; covaries with regional myelin content33, providing a plausible ana-
P = 0.035; 95% CI = 0.09–0.98; 17-network parcellation: partial tomical basis for the functional correlations in the fMRI blood oxy-
r(14) = 0.58; P = 0.020; 95% CI = 0.12–0.84). In other words, net- gen level-dependent signal. Therefore, we next explored whether
works lower in the hierarchy were dominated by unimodal effects regional myelination might also be associated with differential
of a single type; for instance, 87.2% of all effects elicited in the visual elicitation rates across networks. Using publicly available data from
network were visual in nature and 89.3% of effects elicited in the the Human Connectome Project18, we estimated regional white
somatomotor network involved somatosensation or motor output matter density in each network using the ratio of T1-weighted
(Extended Data Fig. 4). In contrast, despite showing relatively few to T2-weighted MRI signal. However, we found that a network’s
effects overall, networks at the top of the hierarchy generally exhib- average white matter density showed no significant relationship
ited a wider variety of more complex effects that were rarely, if ever, with its elicitation rate (seven-network parcellation: r(5) = 0.13;
observed in unimodal networks—including emotions and memory P = 0.784; 95% CI = −0.69–0.80; BF = 3.56; 17-network parcella-
01
recall (Extended Data Fig. 4; equivalent results using a 17-network tion: r(15) = 0.31; P = 0.230; 95% CI = −0.20–0.69; BF = 2.65), with
01
parcellation are provided in Extended Data Fig. 5). In summary, Bayes factors supporting the null hypothesis.
our results indicate that both the diversity and complexity of effects Together with our assessment of networks’ elicitation and qui-
scales linearly with the principal gradient. escence thresholds, these additional null findings provide crucial
control analyses that reaffirm the specific importance of the prin-
Network differences in tissue excitability and white matter den- cipal gradient in explaining differential elicitation rates. Although
sity do not explain differential elicitation rates. Finally, we asked differences in tissue excitability or white matter density are logical
whether variable elicitation rates might be explained by variations explanations for the large differences we observed in elicitation rate,
in either neurophysiological (tissue excitability) or structural– our data show that neither offers a statistically significant explana-
anatomical (white matter density) features that are also thought tion for our findings, while in both cases Bayesian inference sup-
to vary across intrinsic networks. The biophysical ramifications ports the null hypothesis.
of artificially administered electrical currents in human brain tis-
sue remain poorly understood1,30,31, so first we asked whether dif- Discussion
ferential elicitation rates might be explained by differential tissue Despite more than a century of iES research on the human brain,
excitability across networks. For each responsive electrode, we theoretical understanding of the nature and pattern of elicited
identified the minimum current (mA) required to elicit an effect. effects has remained limited. Our data provide compelling evidence
We then calculated a mean elicitation threshold for each network that the effects elicited by iES closely track a functional hierarchi-
by averaging these minimum currents for all electrodes within a cal gradient characterized in human cerebral cortex with an entirely
given network. Although the mean minimum elicitation threshold independent methodology (fMRI). Although the strength of this
differed significantly across networks (seven-network parcella- relationship might seem surprising, our results are consistent with
tion: F(6,530) = 2.753; P = 0.012; partial η2 = 0.030; 90% CI = 0.003– recent research showing that iEEG intrinsic functional connectiv-
0.047; 17-network parcellation: F(16,520) = 2.473; P = 0.001; partial ity is powerfully predicted even by Euclidean distance or simple
η2 = 0.071; 90% CI = 0.015–0.080; Tables 1 and 2), effect sizes were measures of white matter connectivity13. Here, however, we showed
small and statistical significance was clearly driven by the large sam- that simpler neurophysiological or neuroanatomical attributes of
ple. Moreover, variations in network elicitation threshold showed no brain tissue, such as electrical excitability or myelin concentration,
significant relationship with either elicitation rate (seven-network were unable to explain our findings, which were specific to the
parcellation: r(5) = 0.01; P = 0.986; 95% CI = −0.75–0.76; Bayes fac- functional, rather than anatomical, aspects of intrinsic networks.
tor (BF ) = 3.70; 17-network parcellation: r(15) = 0.33; P = 0.201; Building on the growing understanding that functional–anatomical
01
95% CI = −0.18–0.70; BF = 2.40) or principal gradient value network architecture influences the electrophysiological dynamics
01
(seven-network parcellation: r(5) = 0.14; P = 0.770; 95% CI = −0.69– of iEEG7–13, we have extended these investigations into the domain
0.81; BF = 3.54; 17-network parcellation: r(15) = 0.01; P = 0.964; of the motor, perceptual, affective and cognitive effects elicited with
01
95% CI = −0.47–0.49; BF = 5.44). These data comprise evidence iES (Fig. 6).
01
that there are small variations in tissue excitability across intrinsic To summarize, we demonstrated that network membership—
brain networks (Tables 1 and 2). However, we found no evidence more specifically, each network’s position along the principal
that these modest variations explain the large differences in effect gradient—is a potent predictor of whether or not iES will elicit an
elicitation; rather, Bayes factors showed moderate evidence in sup- effect (Fig. 2); what type of effect will be elicited (Extended Data
port of the null hypothesis. Figs. 4 and 5); and how heterogeneous the elicited effects will be
Nonetheless, we further sought to ensure that the high rate of null (Fig. 5). In unimodal brain networks, effects were up to fourfold
effects in transmodal networks was not due simply to inadequate more frequent (Table 2) and were largely homogenous (Extended
current delivery. To this end, the maximum delivered current (mA) Data Figs. 4 and 5). Conversely, effects were relatively rare in
yielding no effect for every silent electrode was also tabulated, then transmodal networks but much more diverse. These findings are
averaged for each network (see Methods). This mean maximum consistent with extensive previous research. Past work has found
quiescence threshold provided a measure, for each network, of the that stimulation of networks at the base of the hierarchy yields
average current delivered at electrodes where no effects were ever frequent, homogenous and simple effects such as phosphenes and
NAtuRe HuMAN BeHAvIOuR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTurE HumaN BEHavIOur
“That was intense. “I just had the “Pulsating “My vision shifted a little bit. I “My left foot shifted “Whoa, that was pretty
I can still feel it; urge to squeeze feeling, mostly started to get a little nauseous to the right and the intense. The foot was
(my fingers) are my fingers. in the left chest from it, like a bad rollercoaster sensation went all pushing down. It was
still tingling, like They just closed but also in the ride. It was pretty intense. the way up my calf.” probably involving the
little needles.” by themselves.” left arm.” Ev he or ry izth oi nn wtg a a lm s b no a ’v tc e wkd aa. v nI yt d .w ”foa rs t hm . o Itre tho ath t’e sr wm hu es rc el e I s fe, lb t u itt .” laughP sa atie nn dt says
“I feel tingling they “felt well
in my leg.” internally.”
“I felt like my arms
t( h“ mJ eu y ms ft i onr tge ioea nrll sy . ) T c t hoo eou l hd m an u n’t c dm h ; fo elov lte s at w sw ie fde lr oere e a mn tm i’ noto . gv v I e ii f nn me g l tet h b ns eu i t d s at e , it rh - l .it k ”e o ey - “ wFe al st l fi lk oe a tm iny g b uo pd .”y loP n f ceea aegt li ile a zin en ti gv dt ,e d is ne e e s m te hc mr o eib t ii cnoe hgns el a ya sl t.
little tight, but the thumb
was out of commission.’’
“Aroused, “That felt good;
calm… sexually quite erotic. I can’t
“Very small flickers; excited.” even, um, I felt
Speech arrest Patient cannot Patient thra ei n ub po pw fe ier c ll do e .l fo t r vs is” uin al “ II tt os wpe sa e ir ls viga eah rs t bt sa c l tue ar en rin . t ”ar t e nh . de wt“ hI at e sl o T vo V ibk e s racd tr iel nik e ge n .” g i eto . m o U bd m. a ,I r ryc aea san sh’ it n ,e gyx o mp ul ea ’r !i e ”n d fe eP s e fca elr it n aii be g ren . ost fa
repeat “If she describes seeing Patient
comes, I will go.” “firecrackers” in says she
the right visual felt dizzy.
field.
“Feels like I’m going Patient describes
in a circle. seeing a “white-silver
ME aa kv n ee d sr y I m’t mh ei n m fg eo ei vs li n ss g it ci .l kl .” f cla es nh trin ag l vli ig suh at” l i fn ie t lh de . “I Nt s em gae tl il vs e f ,u ln ikn ey.
nail polish.”
“I saw something on your
Patient describes right eye, on your glasses. “Ah! That
a feeling of Something appeared, like “Smell. It felt was a tickling
ann tie cr iv po au tis on. coua l dg r h mid a avo yef b s b eo e m le igne h f tk l sii c .n ”kd e. rI it ng; r Ie t yda poll ey n , ’ d t h i k os n nta o es w st te lt yf hu .e ”l. lt ite“ tF lm eo p mr e b ore a rei tn u sg re e i , nn j s ut ih ts ii vts ea . feeling.”
Almost as if I was in a
“You just turned into colder temperature.”
somebody else. Your
face metamorphosed.
Your nose got saggy;
went to the left. Not
pretty.”
Fig. 6 | Representative patient reports following ieS throughout the brain. A selection of first-person reports provided by patients following iES
throughout all intrinsic networks and brain regions. Text boxes are colour coded to the network in which stimulation yielded the effect, and arrows from
text boxes point to the approximate location of each stimulating electrode. While the reports have been accurately linked to the associated network and
brain region of the stimulating electrode, the placements are intended to be illustrative; locations are not exact. Text in quotation marks indicates verbatim
transcripts of patients’ reports. Detailed discussions of some of the more striking effects are available in our published case studies21,22,24,34,92.
muscle twitches29. Higher in the hierarchy, iES yields rare but diverse individual neuroanatomy would probably reveal that transmodal
and complex effects—often, multimodal experiences tinged with networks are even more quiescent than we report here (with numer-
affect21,22,34. However, we are mindful that our observations did not ous somatomotor and visual effects, for instance, being assigned
replicate every type of effect reported in past research (for instance, instead to other networks).
refs. 35,36). Moreover, our finding of higher overall elicitation rates in What explains such marked inter-network differences and the
the right hemisphere (Extended Data Fig. 1) is not readily explained, relative quiescence of transmodal regions? Probably one crucial fac-
although it is consistent with recent research showing hemispheric tor is that, although the effects of iES are strongest nearest to the
asymmetries in the quality of iES-elicited effects, including differ- stimulating electrode31, they are not contained locally: injected cur-
ential patterns of emotional valence following orbitofrontal cortex rent propagates through local circuitry and via active signal trans-
stimulation21 and asymmetric changes in face perception following mission along existing connections with other distant areas, and
stimulation of the fusiform gyrus24,37. We believe that our observa- interacts with ongoing electrical activity1,39,40. Recent work suggests
tions should be replicated before being inducted into an already vast that iES of functional network hubs (for example, frontoparietal and
and contentious literature on functional–anatomical hemispheric default regions) leads to rapid attenuation of the delivered current
asymmetry38. through a hub’s many long-distance connections, whereas stimula-
In addition to the finding that transmodal networks yielded tion of low-degree network nodes (for example, unimodal regions)
fewer and more diverse effects, it is notable that many effects elicited leads to targeted, more localized activity8. Several features specific
in transmodal networks were preferentially located near boundaries to unimodal brain regions are also potentially relevant; for instance,
with other networks. For instance, in the default network, effects in unimodal networks tend to contain neurons that are finely tuned
the core of the medial prefrontal cortex were almost entirely absent, to specific perceptual features41. Finely tuned neurons in unimodal
but in the dorsomedial prefrontal cortex, some somatomotor effects regions are also typically embedded in cortical columns nested
were apparent along the network’s posterior boundary, bordering within topographic organizational plans, such that nearby neurons,
the frontoparietal and salience networks (Fig. 2a). Transforming in both the perpendicular and parallel planes of the cortex, share
electrode locations from individual neuroanatomical space to an similar (and similarly specific) tuning properties42,43. Prima facie,
averaged intrinsic network template evidently creates some amount it seems plausible that localized electrical excitation in tissue with
of error, especially given that regions at the boundaries of intrinsic such properties could readily elicit specific perceptual or motoric
networks are less confidently assigned to a given network (that is, effects. Furthermore, unimodal neurons and cortical columns are
in reliability analyses, border regions are less confidently assigned both embedded in hierarchical processing streams with strong
to a given network) (see Figs. 8 and 10 in ref. 5). This suggests that feed-forward projections that convey incoming sensory information
the comparatively low elicitation rates we observed in transmodal to higher brain regions for further processing44. Such a hierarchical
networks might nonetheless actually be overestimates: an improved pattern of circuitry seems ideal to amplify the comparatively local-
mapping of network boundaries and better integration with ized electrical effects exerted by iES. The endogenous amplification
NAtuRe HuMAN BeHAvIOuR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTurE HumaN BEHavIOur Articles
of exogenously induced activity in unimodal cortical sites known to experiences elicited directly by iES. Combined with the demon-
preferentially encode specific and concrete elements of perception strated ability of patients to describe unusual experiences21,22,34–36
and action45–49 provides a parsimonious explanation for the many and accurately identify iES-elicited memories70, the likelihood
simple visual and somatomotor effects we observed. In contrast, seems low that false negatives alone can explain low elicitation
virtually all of the aforementioned features are absent or attenuated rates in transmodal networks.
in transmodal networks43. Single neurons in transmodal regions Despite considerably lower elicitation rates, iES of transmodal
tend to exhibit much more complex patterns of tuning tied to mul- regions did sometimes elicit effects (especially in the orbitofrontal
tiple aspects of perception, action and intention. Such non-specific cortex and anterior cingulate; Fig. 2a). These findings are perhaps
neural coding has been demonstrated in multiple regions that fall rooted in the variable functional coupling between transmodal and
within the boundaries of the default and limbic networks, including unimodal networks71; that is, the specifics of spontaneous network
prefrontal50–52, orbitofrontal52–54, medial temporal52,55,56 and poste- coupling at the precise moment of stimulation could impact whether
rior cingulate57 cortices. As others have recently pointed out58, elic- or not iES perturbs experience—a hypothesis that can be further
iting a noticeable change in conscious experience would probably tested in future work72. Importantly, the almost total quiescence in
require perturbation of a large proportion and broad selection of some regions (especially the anterior prefrontal cortex) does not
neurons characterized by such high-dimensional and non-specific necessarily mean that stimulation there has no consequences. We
neural representations. The relatively localized31 (directly influenc- administered iES in a task-free resting state, but stimulation dur-
ing ~500,000 cells59) and brief pulses of iES are unlikely to meet ing demanding executive tasks, for instance, might have measurable
these demands, and additionally, transmodal areas themselves are effects on performance73, if not on subjective experience. Further
probably poorly placed to directly perturb (or give rise to) expe- research exploring iES effects in quiescent regions would be a wel-
rience. Their preferential phylogenetic expansion60, complex den- come addition to the ongoing debate on the role of higher-order,
dritic arborization61, highly variable intrinsic connectivity17, high transmodal cortical regions in conscious experience58,74.
synaptic plasticity62, non-specific neuronal tuning50–57 and abstract Why was the elicitation rate so low overall? The global rate
functional roles17,63 all suggest that, instead, they are specialized for throughout the brain was ~37%, and even in unimodal networks,
the interpretation, manipulation and regulation of more concrete iES only elicited effects about half the time. Probably the most plau-
information originating at the base of the cortical hierarchy. Given sible and parsimonious explanation is that over the many decades
all of the above considerations, higher elicitation rates in unimodal that iES has been employed in neurosurgical settings, stimulation
networks and lower rates in heteromodal and transmodal networks parameters have gradually been optimized for patient safety and
are reasonable, although the specific basis of these inter-network clinical utility, not for effect elicitation. Contemporary stimulation
differences remains an open question. falls within an empirically derived safe window specifying upper
One well-founded concern is that iES effects on transmodal limits for charge density32, and stimulation within these parameters
networks could be: (1) more amorphous and therefore harder is evidently adequate to elicit motor effects and trigger seizures at
for patients to describe; or (2) more easily confused with ongo- epileptic foci (serving the dual clinical aims of identifying tissue that
ing spontaneous cognition than the relatively simple and concrete should be spared or resected, respectively). However, the maximum
perceptual effects elicited in unimodal networks. Both scenarios delivered electrical charge might be too low to guarantee that the
would result in under-reporting by patients (that is, increased perturbation of the brain’s ongoing neuroelectrical activity is of suf-
false negatives, or type II errors) and subsequent underestimates ficient magnitude to always result in reportable or observable effects.
of true elicitation rates, and neither possibility should be entirely This supposition is supported by the fact that higher current ampli-
discounted. However, the first concern is mitigated by the fact that tudes and frequencies tend to result in both a greater number and
patients are often eloquent and persistent in reporting nuanced greater intensity of both subjective and motor effects22,30,75–77. These
and unusual experiences, as demonstrated by many case reports psychological and behavioural findings are consistent with neuro-
of complex, singular iES effects21,22,34–36. Although under-reporting physiological data showing that increasing charge density results in
of some subtle effects remains a possibility, such a scenario seems increases in the area of cortical tissue affected by stimulation30,31.
unlikely to explain the very large (greater than fourfold) differ- Chronically implanted iES neuromodulation devices are
ences in elicitation rate between networks at the base and apex increasingly being used to treat the subjective symptoms and
of the cortical hierarchy. As for the second concern, transmodal network abnormalities of neuropsychiatric diseases16. The suc-
networks (particularly the default network) are intimately involved cess of these interventions ultimately depends on a sophisticated
in the generation of the spontaneous mind wandering that occurs understanding of where stimulation should be administered in
during the resting state64,65. In principle, then, iES might elicit individual patients’ brains to best modulate both subjective experi-
effects in these networks that are indistinguishable from the ongo- ence and network functioning. Here, we have shown that network
ing thoughts, imagery and memories generated spontaneously at membership and connectivity profile are powerful predictors of
rest66, leading to false negative reports. Again, while this possibility the frequency, category and diversity of effects elicited with iES,
should not be ignored, several factors mitigate the likelihood that it even though intrinsic networks are interlaced throughout the
either explains or biases our findings. First, mind wandering is most brain in non-intuitive ways, traversing and transcending tradi-
prevalent during the most minimally demanding and task-free tional neuroanatomical landmarks and arbitrary anatomical gyral
states, and in environments with minimal sensory stimulation67–69. divisions. This finding has potentially important clinical impli-
Although our patients were given no task during iES, sessions cations, especially given that these relationships hold even at the
typically involved dozens to hundreds of sequential stimulations level of individual neuroanatomy (Fig. 4). Our results offer further
each followed by first-person reports, and all undertaken in a busy evidence in support of the emerging understanding that network
in-patient hospital setting with multiple researchers present— membership (not just classic anatomical coordinates or gyral iden-
far-from-ideal conditions for the facilitation of spontaneous tity) needs to be considered when determining therapeutic targets
thought. Second, although the nature of iES does not permit a for iES neuromodulation8,13,72,78. In closing, although first-person
precise estimation of the probability of false negative reports (type reports combined with iES have long played a seminal role in the
II errors), our quantitative assessment of false positive reports understanding of local functional properties of the human brain1,
found that patients were highly resilient to type I errors follow- our study goes beyond previous work by revealing relationships
ing sham stimulation. This indicates that, in general, patients dis- between global patterns of brain organization and iES-elicited
criminate extremely well between background mental activity and effects on human behaviour.
NAtuRe HuMAN BeHAvIOuR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTurE HumaN BEHavIOur
Methods frontal lobe were manually identified and included, to improve the sparse coverage
Patient characteristics. Data were drawn from a pool of 119 patients admitted of these transmodal regions and to provide a comprehensive map of the entire
to the Stanford Hospital for iEEG monitoring of medically refractory epilepsy cortex. To identify depth electrode contacts near the cortical surfaces, two authors
between 2008 and 2018. We considered all patients who underwent iES sessions (K.C.R.F. and L.S.) manually delineated the extent of the first gyrus along either the
and also had computed tomography scans and high-resolution T1-weighted MRI medial or ventral surface for each electrode and for each patient individually (that
scans available for precise reconstruction of electrode locations for inclusion in is, depth electrodes were visualized on coronal brain sections for each patient and
the present study. We made every effort to include as many patients as possible in only electrode contacts that fell within the grey matter of the gyri along the medial
order to ensure complete coverage of the cortical mantle; however, many patients or ventral surface were included in our analyses). Typically, this included only the
could not be included because of: (1) the lack of iES sessions conducted; (2) the deepest one or two contacts for each depth electrode; white matter sites were never
lack of high-quality computed tomography scans for the determination of precise included in our analysis.
electrode locations; (3) the lack of patient-specific anatomical MRI scans for the
reconstruction of precise electrode locations in the patient’s native brain space; and Excluded brain regions. Commonly employed intrinsic brain network maps
(4) the lack of electrodes covering the cortical grey matter (for example, in patients include only the cortical surface5; therefore, all subcortical brain regions were
implanted solely with depth electrode arrays). Patients were never excluded based excluded using this standard anatomical atlas5. Although the hippocampus and
on iES elicitation rates, iES effect types or any of our other dependent measures insula are considered cortical structures, depth electrode contacts situated in
(indeed, these measures were not coded, classified or analysed until after the initial these regions were also not included in the present study, for several reasons.
patient pool had been assembled). Patients were only excluded based on the purely First, transforming deep-depth electrode contacts onto surface (vertex) space is
practical considerations detailed above. Ultimately our sample comprised 67 problematic23; the error involved in forcing deep-depth electrode contacts into
patients (28 female (42%); mean age (±s.d.) = 35.4 ± 12.7 years). surface space entails a corresponding inaccuracy in assigning these electrodes to
It should be noted that most patients who are implanted with intracranial a particular intrinsic brain network. Second, the majority of epileptic seizures are
electrodes have been assessed previously with several lines of diagnostic tests and known to originate in or near medial temporal lobe structures85—a pattern we
have been deemed to be suffering from focal seizures. These patients most often do observed in our pool of patients as well22: iES in these areas in our patients typically
not have diffuse brain disease and are implanted because a single seizure focus has leads to pathological after-discharges and/or induction of seizures. We therefore
been strongly suggested by pre-operative tests (for example, scalp EEG and seizure opted to exclude electrodes from these deep cortical structures in our study.
semiology). As we have discussed at length recently59, in patients with focal disease,
only the epileptic tissue shows pathological electrophysiological activity (and Intracranial electrical stimulation. Patients underwent iES as part of a routine
even this pathological activity is largely time limited79), while electrodes outside clinical mapping procedure to determine localization of function and seizure
the epileptic tissue show normal responses to perceptual stimuli during cognitive focus29,59. In an ideal session, iES was systematically delivered to every electrode
tasks. Each patient is implanted with a large number of electrodes (100–200), and contact in a pseudo-random order to which the patient was blind, but time
typically only a minority of electrodes exhibit epileptic activity, while the majority constraints and other clinical considerations (for example, seizure occurrence)
of electrodes show no signs of epileptic discharges. sometimes precluded stimulation of every contact in every patient. The specifics of
stimulation were at the discretion of the neurologist administering the iES session
Ethics and patient privacy. All patients provided informed consent in accordance (J.P.). Typically, bipolar stimulation was delivered using an alternating square
with the Stanford Institutional Review Board for human experiments. Approval wave current applied across two adjacent electrodes at 50 Hz, 2–10 mA current
for conducting the proposed research was obtained through the Stanford and a pulse width of 200–300 μs. If we noticed after-discharges, we reduced the
University Institutional Review Board. To ensure confidentiality of the participants’ stimulation current immediately. Safe after-discharge limits were never superseded.
information, all data were de-identified and arbitrary codes were assigned to Further details of stimulation methods and parameters are described extensively in
each patient’s data. our previous work30,86.
Occasional sham stimulations were also delivered to control for demand
Physical parameters, placement and localization of intracranial electrodes. characteristics, particularly when unusual or intense effects were reported.
Patients were implanted with either subdural grid/strip electrode arrays (n = 53 During sham stimulation, the experimenter behaved exactly as during veridical
patients), depth electrodes (stereo-EEG; n = 11 patients) or a mix of both (n = 3 stimulation, adjusting settings on the stimulator and pressing the same buttons,
patients), made by Ad-Tech Medical. Subdural electrode arrays are flexible followed by the same standardized questions about any changes in the patient’s
silicon sheets with circular, disc-shaped electrical contacts 2.3 mm in diameter experience, the only difference being that no current was actually delivered.
interspersed 10 mm apart. For depth electrodes, each probe consisted of 8–10 Following each iES pulse or sham stimulation, patients were asked standardized,
electrode contacts spaced 5 mm apart. Contacts were cylindrically shaped open-ended questions about any experiences evoked (for example, “Did you notice
(length: 2.4 mm; diameter: 1.3 mm; approximate total surface area: 12 mm2). The anything?” or “Any change?”), with occasional follow-up questions, as needed, to
impedance of electrodes was <1,000 Ω, and both depth and subdural electrodes further clarify the character of effects. Specific iES parameters and elicited effects
had the same hardware impedance. However, the impedance of each contact (or lack thereof) were logged for each stimulation.
may have differed depending on the characteristics of the cortical or subcortical
tissue it had been implanted over or within. Despite this, our electrical stimulator Safety of iES. The electrical brain stimulation used in this study is routinely
was designed to adjust the voltage depending on the measured impedance of the employed in clinical practice with an excellent safety profile19,32. The amount of
electrode and, by doing so, keep the delivered current constant. These co-called electrical charge delivery per pulse was always kept within established safe limits
constant-current electrical stimulation devices ensured that the delivered (below 30 µC cm−2 pulse−1)87,88.
current was the intended amount regardless of any minor fluctuations of the
local impedance. Controlling for ictal phenomena and other potential confounds. To preclude the
Across all patients, we ultimately gathered data from 1,476 subdural grid/strip confounding effects of any ictal phenomena, we ensured that none of the patients
electrodes and 61 depth electrodes. The placement of all electrodes was determined had an epileptic focus within, or required resection of, the regions included in the
strictly according to clinical criteria. To precisely determine electrode locations present dataset. Some patients had electrode grids placed over the ventral surface
for each patient, electrodes localized in a postoperative computed tomography of the orbitofrontal cortex; any smell-related effects elicited by stimulation of
scan were linearly projected onto the cortical surface reconstructed from a electrodes along the midline of the ventral surface were excluded from all analyses
pre-operative T1-weighted MRI scan using the iELVis toolbox23. First, the T1 scan as potentially confounded by stimulation of the olfactory nerve, as detailed in our
was processed and automatically segmented using FreeSurfer version 6.0 (using the previous work21.
recon-all command) to reconstruct the pial, leptomeningeal and inflated cortical
surfaces80,81. A post-implant computed tomography image was spatially registered Evaluating and classifying the effects of stimulation. We considered an effect
to the space of the higher-resolution T1 scan using a rigid transformation (six of stimulation valid only if: (1) the tissue stimulated was not later determined
degrees of freedom; affine mapping). Using BioImage Suite82, we manually labelled to be pathological or resected; (2) stimulation at a given site did not result in
the electrode locations on the T1-registered computed tomography image. seizure(s) or after-discharges; (3) repeated stimulation (one or more repetitions)
The electrode locations were then projected onto the leptomeningeal surface at the same site in the same patient produced the same or a very similar effect;
to correct for possible post-implant brain shift, using an iterative optimization and (4) sham stimulation at a given site did not result in any false positive reports.
algorithm83. The resulting individual surface and volume coordinates were used Assuming these conditions were met, a patient’s report of any change or experience
for visualization. To pool all of the results, electrodes in patient-specific space were (whether objectively verifiable, as with motor effects, or entirely subjective, as
normalized to Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) space and displayed on the with emotional changes) was considered valid and the stimulating electrode was
fsaverage6 template MNI brain in the FreeSurfer software package84. classified as responsive. Repeated stimulations at sites yielding positive effects were
conducted whenever possible, but time and other clinical considerations precluded
Inclusion of depth electrodes. A limited number of depth electrode contacts were the replication of every observed effect. Silent electrode sites where iES did not
included, to increase the coverage of brain areas where the use of subdural strips elicit an effect were also generally stimulated multiple times, with increasing
and grids is rare (for example, the medial prefrontal cortex). Specifically, depth current magnitude, to confirm the null effect. As discussed in the text, this ensured
electrode contacts near either the brain’s medial walls or the ventral surface of the that the null effects we observed were not due to inadequate current delivery
NAtuRe HuMAN BeHAvIOuR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTurE HumaN BEHavIOur Articles
(within safe limits); indeed, the mean current at which null effects were observed depth electrode coordinates to the nearest surface vertex coordinate, and network
exceeded the mean current required to elicit an effect for every brain network we assignment was then based on this vertex coordinate. The most commonly used
investigated. Therefore, far from being the result merely of inadequate current intrinsic brain network atlases include seven-network and 17-network parcellations
delivery, our null findings in fact persisted even following the administration of of the cerebral cortex5; we employed both parcellation schemes. Details of the
considerably greater current magnitude than was typically required to elicit a number of electrodes assigned to each network are given in Table 1 (seven-network
response (see Tables 1 and 2). parcellation) and Table 2 (17-network parcellation).
Stimulation of motor and premotor areas in the superior parietal and frontal
lobes often resulted in observable motor effects, from small muscle twitches to Estimating elicitation rate for brain networks. We first pooled data on responsive
larger limb movements, in line with extensive previous research89,90. Even though and silent electrodes from all patients for every given network (Fig. 1). We then
the effects for these trials were readily observable, they were coded based not just divided the number of responsive electrodes by the total number of electrodes in
on observed behaviour but also the patient’s first-person report of their experience each network to estimate network-specific elicitation rates for both seven-network
of motor movement (for specific, verbatim examples, see Fig. 6). (Table 1) and 17-network (Table 2) parcellations of the cerebral cortex. All details
Three raters (K.C.R.F., L.S. and S.B.), who were blind to both the location and of the data are available in Tables 1 and 2.
network assignment of each electrode, viewed and coded digitized iES reports and
video-EEG recordings to confirm the results. As the first aim of the present study Reliability of elicitation rate. To ensure that our estimates of elicitation rate
was to further investigate our recent observations of apparent silence following for each network were stable and replicable, we conducted a series of reliability
iES to transmodal brain regions21,86, initially a simple binary coding scheme was analyses by splitting our large dataset (1,537 unique electrodes) in three different,
employed: (1) responsive (that is, any reportable effect on subjective experience independent ways. We estimated network-specific elicitation rates using these
or observable effect on motor output); or (2) silent (that is, null; no discernible subsamples and compared them with the elicitation rates based on the full dataset
effect on body or subjective experience, even with repeated stimulation at high (which included all electrodes). First, we calculated elicitation rates separately for
current levels (within safe limits)). Details of the number of responsive versus electrodes on the medial wall versus the lateral surface (including ventral surfaces)
silent electrodes are given in Table 1 (seven-network parcellation) and Table 2 of the cerebral cortex. Second, we randomly divided our pool of 67 patients into
(17-network parcellation). discovery (N = 33 patients; n = 777 electrodes) and replication (N = 34 patients;
As noted above, iES was delivered using bipolar stimulation (that is, current n = 760 electrodes) samples and calculated global (medial + lateral) network
was delivered to brain tissue by creating a voltage difference across two adjacent elicitation rates for each group. Finally, we used an algorithm to randomly select
electrode contacts). All effects (and null results) were therefore observed across half of our electrodes and calculate elicitation rates for each network based on this
pairs of electrodes; for purposes of visualization and statistical analysis of the subset of all electrodes; this process was repeated over 100 iterations, and average
data, each electrode was coded individually as either responsive or silent (Fig. elicitation rates for each network from all iterations were employed.
1). Occasionally, a given electrode was paired with more than one other partner In all cases, the reliability sample estimates correlated extremely well with
electrode during subsequent stimulations. Typically, the same effect (or lack the elicitation rates derived from our full dataset, for both seven-network
thereof) was observed, but in rare instances, a given electrode might show (Supplementary Table 1) and 17-network (Supplementary Table 2) parcellations
differential effects with different electrode pairings (for example, responsive with of the cerebral cortex. Elicitation rates based on our reliability samples also closely
one pairing and null with another). In such cases, a conservative approach was mirrored our central finding of the relationship between elicitation rate and
taken (as per our Methods above): the null hypothesis was always assumed, and principal gradient hierarchy values (Extended Data Figs. 2 and 3).
an effect had to be reproducible upon repeated stimulation at the same site to be
counted as valid and included in subsequent analyses. Therefore, given a set of Principal gradient hierarchy values. The principal gradient hierarchy values
three adjacent electrodes (a, b, c), if pairing b–c resulted in an effect, but pairing were derived from a nonlinear embedding of functional connectivity patterns.
a–b did not, electrodes a and b would be coded as silent and only electrode c would The principal gradient represents the first latent dimension of this embedding
be coded as responsive. The conservative assumption being employed is that brain space, which captures the largest variance in functional connectivity patterns, and
tissue surrounding electrode c is the primary driver of the reported effect reflects a spatial gradient of increasingly abstract and integrated processing from
following stimulation of the b–c electrode pair, since stimulation of the a–b pair primary sensory/motor cortices to transmodal regions. The specific methodology
yields no effect. employed to derive the principal gradient is described in detail in the original
For each electrode coded as responsive, two raters (K.C.R.F. and L.S.) then empirical report17. For the present study, vertex-level principal gradient hierarchy
classified the specific qualities of the effects using broad, data-driven categories, values were averaged for standardized seven-network and 17-network parcellations
as in our previous work21. Ultimately, eight categories were employed: (1) of the cerebral cortex5, and these averaged, network-level principal gradient values
somatomotor effects, including somatosensations and any observable motor were correlated with our network-level elicitation rates. Vertex-level (as opposed
effects, such as muscle twitches or limb movements; (2) visual effects, from simple to network-averaged) principal gradient values were also employed in additional
phosphenes to more complex perturbations of visual perception such as distortion analyses (see next section).
of faces; (3) olfactory effects, described in detail in our recent work21; (4) vestibular
effects, such as feelings of rotation, flotation and acceleration; (5) emotional Mixed-effects binary logistic regression. Our central analyses showed a
effects of either positive or negative valence, also described in more detail in our strong relationship between mean network elicitation rates and mean network
recent research22; (6) language effects, including arrest or alteration (for example, principal gradient values. However, such an approach restricts the full range of
slurring) of speech; (7) memory recall; and (8) physiological and interoceptive principal gradient values, and also relies on somewhat arbitrary intrinsic network
effects, such as perceived changes in body temperature or heart rate. Classified boundaries (in that multiple intrinsic network parcellations are equally valid; see
results were then pooled to yield an estimate of the prevalence of each effect type Fig. 6 in ref. 5). Therefore, to further confirm our findings independent of network
for each brain network (Extended Data Figs. 4 and 5). To clarify further, no type parcellations, and across the gradient’s full range, we extracted principal gradient
of effect was excluded a priori: our categorizations were entirely data driven and values at each vertex in cortical surface space where iES had been administered.
included all valid effects elicited by electrodes in healthy brain tissue. Notably, we Because of inaccuracies in assigning specific vertex (and hence principal gradient)
never observed some striking iES effects reported by other researchers, such as values to depth electrodes, these electrodes were excluded from this analysis.
out-of-body experiences35 or elicitation of the intention to move36. Conversely, we Several more electrodes could also not be assigned specific principal gradient
observed rare but replicable effects (such as the will to persevere34) not yet reported values due to errors in alignment of the two datasets. Together, these excluded
by other researchers in nearly a century of iES studies. There are many potential electrodes (n = 103) represented a very small proportion of the overall dataset,
reasons for such discrepancies; however, we suspect that the major reason is simply and the final logistic regression included 93.3% of our original sample (n = 1,434
the relatively small number of researchers and studies exploring the effects of iES. electrode sites). We implemented binary logistic regression to explore the
In any event, we wish to reiterate that no effect type was excluded, but rather that association between principal gradient value (fixed effect) and our binary coding
even in our comparatively large sample of iES patients, not every possible type of of electrode sites (silent/responsive) as the dependent variable. Further details are
effect was found to be elicited. provided in Supplementary Tables 3 and 4.
Assigning electrodes to intrinsic brain networks. We aggregated information Estimating the prevalence and heterogeneity of different effect types across
from 1,537 unique electrode sites at which iES had been applied in 67 patients networks and their relationship with the principal gradient. As described
(Fig. 1). Electrodes were assigned to a given intrinsic network using an algorithm above, we classified the effects at all responsive electrodes into one of eight broad,
implemented in the iELVis software package23. Briefly, an electrode’s vertex data-driven categories. The prevalence of each effect type was tabulated for all
location in cortical surface space was compared with standardized maps of networks for both the seven-network (Extended Data Fig. 4) and 17-network
intrinsic brain network parcellations based on resting-state fMRI data from 1,000 (Extended Data Fig. 5) parcellations of the cerebral cortex. To assess the
healthy participants5, and the electrode was assigned to the nearest network23. relationship between network membership and the categorized type of effect, we
Network assignments were made in individual patients’ neuroanatomical space, estimated the λ coefficient—a measure of association appropriate for nominal (that
after which data were collated in standard space for visualization purposes (Fig. 1). is, categorical) variables. To provide a simple measure of the diversity of effect
For the carefully selected (see above) depth electrode contacts near the medial types elicited in each network, we summed the number of categories of different
cortical surfaces, the algorithm was modified slightly to assign the volume-based effect types elicited in each network (Fig. 5b,d). This diversity measure was related
NAtuRe HuMAN BeHAvIOuR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTurE HumaN BEHavIOur
to the principal gradient value using a Pearson correlation to assess whether a 9. Keller, C. J. et al. Induction and quantification of excitability changes in
network’s position in the hierarchy was related to the diversity of effects elicited human cortical networks. J. Neurosci. 38, 5384–5398 (2018).
within a given network. Partial correlations were also conducted controlling for the 10. Shine, J. M. et al. Distinct patterns of temporal and directional connectivity
total number of responsive electrodes in each network, to account for the fact that among intrinsic networks in the human brain. J. Neurosci. 37,
transmodal networks higher in the hierarchy tended to exhibit far fewer responsive 9667–9674 (2017).
electrodes overall. 11. Solomon, E. et al. Medial temporal lobe functional connectivity predicts
stimulation-induced theta power. Nat. Commun. 9, 4437 (2018).
Mean current elicitation and quiescence thresholds. The factors contributing 12. Keller, C. J. et al. Intrinsic functional architecture predicts electrically
to the excitability of cortical tissue following iES remain poorly understood1,30. evoked responses in the human brain. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 108,
To explore whether differential elicitation rates might be explained by variance 10308–10313 (2011).
in tissue excitability across networks, the amount of current delivered (mA) 13. Betzel, R. F. et al. Structural, geometric and genetic factors predict
was logged for each instance of stimulation. For each responsive electrode, we interregional brain connectivity patterns probed by electrocorticography.
identified the minimum current required to elicit an effect. We then calculated a Nat. Biomed. Eng. 3, 902–916 (2019).
mean elicitation threshold for each network by averaging these minimum required 14. Mayberg, H. S., Riva-Posse, P. & Crowell, A. L. Deep brain stimulation for
currents for all electrodes within a given network. The mean minimum elicitation depression: keeping an eye on a moving target. JAMA Psychiatry 73,
thresholds for each network are presented in Table 1 (seven-network parcellation) 439–440 (2016).
and Table 2 (17-network parcellation). 15. Morishita, T., Fayad, S. M., Higuchi, M.-A., Nestor, K. A. & Foote, K. D.
Furthermore, to ensure that the high rate of null effects in transmodal networks Deep brain stimulation for treatment-resistant depression: systematic review
was not due simply to inadequate current delivery, the maximum delivered current of clinical outcomes. Neurotherapeutics 11, 475–484 (2014).
yielding no effect for every silent electrode was also tabulated, then averaged 16. Famm, K., Litt, B., Tracey, K. J., Boyden, E. S. & Slaoui, M. A jump-start for
for each network. For all networks, this mean maximum quiescence threshold electroceuticals. Nature 496, 159–161 (2013).
exceeded the mean current required to elicit an effect in the same network (that 17. Margulies, D. S. et al. Situating the default-mode network along a principal
is, null effects were still observed despite higher mean current delivery than at gradient of macroscale cortical organization. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 113,
electrodes where iES elicited effects in the same network (see also main text)). The 12574–12579 (2016).
mean maximum quiescence thresholds for each network are presented in Table 1 18. Glasser, M. F. & Van Essen, D. C. Mapping human cortical areas in vivo
(seven-network parcellation) and Table 2 (17-network parcellation). based on myelin content as revealed by T1-and T2-weighted MRI. J. Neurosci.
31, 11597–11616 (2011).
Intracortical myelin content. Intracortical myelin content (sometimes referred 19. Goldstein, H. E. et al. Risk of seizures induced by intracranial research
to as myelin density) is known to vary across intrinsic brain networks, with stimulation: analysis of 770 stimulation sessions. J. Neural Eng. 16,
heavier myelination in unimodal networks and lighter myelination in transmodal 066039 (2019).
networks4,33. To explore whether regional differences in myelination might be 20. Awad, I. A., Rosenfeld, J., Ahl, J., Hahn, J. F. & Lüders, H. Intractable epilepsy
associated with differential elicitation rates across networks, we accessed publicly and structural lesions of the brain: mapping, resection strategies, and seizure
available data from the Human Connectome Project18 that estimated regional white outcome. Epilepsia 32, 179–186 (1991).
matter density throughout the brain using the ratio of T1-weighted to T2-weighted 21. Fox, K. C. R. et al. Changes in subjective experience elicited by direct
MRI signal. We averaged these data for each network, using both seven-network stimulation of the human orbitofrontal cortex. Neurology 91,
and 17-network parcellations, to obtain mean myelin density measures for each e1519–e1527 (2018).
network, and then compared these with elicitation rates for each network as 22. Yih, J., Beam, D. E., Fox, K. C. R. & Parvizi, J. Intensity of affective
determined in our iES sessions. experience is modulated by magnitude of electrical stimulation in human
orbitofrontal, cingulate, and insular cortices. Soc. Cogn. Affect. Neurosci. 14,
Statistical analyses. Most statistical tests were conducted using SPSS 20 (IBM), 339–351 (2019).
with a significance threshold of α = 0.05 (two tailed). For null findings, Jeffreys– 23. Groppe, D. M. et al. iELVis: an open source MATLAB toolbox for localizing
Zellner–Siow Bayes factors91 were used to estimate the likelihood of the null versus and visualizing human intracranial electrode data. J. Neurosci. Methods 281,
alternative hypotheses; these analyses were implemented in SPSS 26 (IBM). 40–48 (2017).
24. Rangarajan, V. et al. Electrical stimulation of the left and right human
Reporting Summary. Further information on research design is available in the
fusiform gyrus causes different effects in conscious face perception.
Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.
J. Neurosci. 34, 12828–12836 (2014).
25. Goldberg, E. Gradiental approach to neocortical functional organization.
Data availability J. Clin. Exp. Neuropsychol. 11, 489–517 (1989).
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the 26. Mesulam, M.-M. From sensation to cognition. Brain 121, 1013–1052 (1998).
corresponding authors upon request. 27. Damasio, A. R. & Damasio, H. in Large-Scale Neuronal Theories of the Brain
(eds Koch, C. & Davis, J. L.) 61–74 (MIT Press, 1994).
Code availability 28. Jones, E. & Powell, T. An anatomical study of converging sensory
pathways within the cerebral cortex of the monkey. Brain 93,
Custom code that supports the findings of this study is available from the
793–820 (1970).
corresponding authors upon request.
29. Selimbeyoglu, A. & Parvizi, J. Electrical stimulation of the human brain:
perceptual and behavioral phenomena reported in the old and new literature.
Received: 21 June 2019; Accepted: 4 June 2020;
Front. Hum. Neurosci. 4, 46 (2010).
Published: xx xx xxxx
30. Winawer, J. & Parvizi, J. Linking electrical stimulation of human primary
visual cortex, size of affected cortical area, neuronal responses, and subjective
References experience. Neuron 92, 1213–1219 (2016).
1. Borchers, S., Himmelbach, M., Logothetis, N. & Karnath, H.-O. Direct 31. Mohan, U. R. et al. The effects of direct brain stimulation in humans depend
electrical stimulation of human cortex—the gold standard for mapping brain on frequency, amplitude, and white-matter proximity. Brain Stim. 13,
functions? Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 13, 63–70 (2012). 1183–1195 (2020).
2. Penfield, W. & Perot, P. The brain’s record of auditory and visual experience: a 32. Gordon, B. et al. Parameters for direct cortical electrical stimulation in the
final summary and discussion. Brain 86, 595–696 (1963). human: histopathologic confirmation. Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol.
3. Penfield, W. & Rasmussen, T. The Cerebral cortex of Man: a Clinical Study of 75, 371–377 (1990).
Localization of Function (Macmillan, 1950). 33. Huntenburg, J. M. et al. A systematic relationship between functional
4. Huntenburg, J. M., Bazin, P.-L. & Margulies, D. S. Large-scale gradients in connectivity and intracortical myelin in the human cerebral cortex. Cereb.
human cortical organization. Trends Cogn. Sci. 22, 21–31 (2018). Cortex 27, 981–997 (2017).
5. Yeo, B. T. T. et al. The organization of the human cerebral cortex 34. Parvizi, J., Rangarajan, V., Shirer, W. R., Desai, N. & Greicius, M. D. The will
estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity. J. Neurophysiol. 106, to persevere induced by electrical stimulation of the human cingulate gyrus.
1125–1165 (2011). Neuron 80, 1359–1367 (2013).
6. Power, J. D. et al. Functional network organization of the human brain. 35. Blanke, O., Ortigue, S., Landis, T. & Seeck, M. Stimulating illusory own-body
Neuron 72, 665–678 (2011). perceptions. Nature 419, 269–270 (2002).
7. Alhourani, A. et al. Network effects of deep brain stimulation. J. Neurophysiol. 36. Desmurget, M. et al. Movement intention after parietal cortex stimulation in
114, 2105–2117 (2015). humans. Science 324, 811–813 (2009).
8. Khambhati, A. N. et al. Functional control of electrophysiological network 37. Rangarajan, V. & Parvizi, J. Functional asymmetry between the left and right
architecture using direct neurostimulation in humans. Netw. Neurosci. 3, human fusiform gyrus explored through electrical brain stimulation.
848–877 (2019). Neuropsychologia 83, 29–36 (2016).
NAtuRe HuMAN BeHAvIOuR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTurE HumaN BEHavIOur Articles
38. Toga, A. W. & Thompson, P. M. Mapping brain asymmetry. Nat. Rev. 70. Curot, J. et al. Memory scrutinized through electrical brain stimulation: a
Neurosci. 4, 37–48 (2003). review of 80 years of experiential phenomena. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 78,
39. Histed, M. H., Ni, A. M. & Maunsell, J. H. Insights into cortical mechanisms 161–177 (2017).
of behavior from microstimulation experiments. Prog. Neurobiol. 103, 71. Cole, M. W. et al. Multi-task connectivity reveals flexible hubs for adaptive
115–130 (2013). task control. Nat. Neurosci. 16, 1348–1355 (2013).
40. Desmurget, M., Song, Z., Mottolese, C. & Sirigu, A. Re-establishing the 72. Ezzyat, Y. et al. Direct brain stimulation modulates encoding states and
merits of electrical brain stimulation. Trends Cogn. Sci. 17, 442–449 (2013). memory performance in humans. Curr. Biol. 27, 1251–1258 (2017).
41. Azarfar, A., Calcini, N., Huang, C., Zeldenrust, F. & Celikel, T. Neural coding: 73. Ezzyat, Y. et al. Closed-loop stimulation of temporal cortex rescues functional
a single neuron’s perspective. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 94, 238–247 (2018). networks and improves memory. Nat. Commun. 9, 365 (2018).
42. Horton, J. C. & Adams, D. L. The cortical column: a structure without a 74. Boly, M. et al. Are the neural correlates of consciousness in the front or in
function. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 360, 837–862 (2005). the back of the cerebral cortex? Clinical and neuroimaging evidence.
43. Patel, G. H., Kaplan, D. M. & Snyder, L. H. Topographic organization in the J. Neurosci. 37, 9603–9613 (2017).
brain: searching for general principles. Trends Cogn. Sci. 18, 351–363 (2014). 75. Fried, I., Wilson, C. L., MacDonald, K. A. & Behnke, E. J. Electric current
44. Grill-Spector, K. & Malach, R. The human visual cortex. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. stimulates laughter. Nature 391, 650 (1998).
27, 649–677 (2004). 76. Inman, C. S. et al. Human amygdala stimulation effects on emotion
45. Bendor, D. & Wang, X. The neuronal representation of pitch in primate physiology and emotional experience. Neuropsychologia https://doi.
auditory cortex. Nature 436, 1161–1165 (2005). org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2018.03.019 (2018).
46. Anzai, A., Peng, X. & Van Essen, D. C. Neurons in monkey visual area V2 77. Bosking, W. H. et al. Saturation in phosphene size with increasing
encode combinations of orientations. Nat. Neurosci. 10, 1313–1321 (2007). current levels delivered to human visual cortex. J. Neurosci. 37,
47. Hegdé, J. & Van Essen, D. C. Selectivity for complex shapes in primate visual 7188–7197 (2017).
area V2. J. Neurosci. 20, RC61–RC61 (2000). 78. McIntyre, C. C. & Hahn, P. J. Network perspectives on the mechanisms of
48. Dobbins, A., Zucker, S. W. & Cynader, M. S. Endstopped neurons in the deep brain stimulation. Neurobiol. Dis. 38, 329–337 (2010).
visual cortex as a substrate for calculating curvature. Nature 329, 79. Liu, S. & Parvizi, J. Cognitive refractory state caused by spontaneous epileptic
438–441 (1987). high frequency oscillations in the human brain. Sci. Transl. Med. 11,
49. Andermann, M. L. & Moore, C. I. A somatotopic map of vibrissa motion eaax7830 (2019).
direction within a barrel column. Nat. Neurosci. 9, 543–551 (2006). 80. Fischl, B., Sereno, M. I. & Dale, A. M. Cortical surface-based analysis: II:
50. Mante, V., Sussillo, D., Shenoy, K. V. & Newsome, W. T. Context-dependent inflation, flattening, and a surface-based coordinate system. NeuroImage 9,
computation by recurrent dynamics in prefrontal cortex. Nature 503, 195–207 (1999).
78–84 (2013). 81. Fischl, B., Sereno, M. I., Tootell, R. B. & Dale, A. M. High‐resolution
51. Rigotti, M. et al. The importance of mixed selectivity in complex cognitive intersubject averaging and a coordinate system for the cortical surface.
tasks. Nature 497, 585–590 (2013). Hum. Brain Mapp. 8, 272–284 (1999).
52. Ekstrom, A. D. et al. Cellular networks underlying human spatial navigation. 82. Papademetris, X. et al. BioImage Suite: an integrated medical image analysis
Nature 425, 184–188 (2003). suite: an update. Insight J. 2006, 209 (2006).
53. Rolls, E. T. & Baylis, L. L. Gustatory, olfactory, and visual convergence within 83. Dykstra, A. R. et al. Individualized localization and cortical surface-based
the primate orbitofrontal cortex. J. Neurosci. 14, 5437–5452 (1994). registration of intracranial electrodes. NeuroImage 59, 3563–3570 (2012).
54. Schultz, W., Tremblay, L. & Hollerman, J. R. Reward processing in primate 84. Fischl, B. FreeSurfer. NeuroImage 62, 774–781 (2012).
orbitofrontal cortex and basal ganglia. Cereb. Cortex 10, 272–283 (2000). 85. Semah, F. et al. Is the underlying cause of epilepsy a major prognostic factor
55. Quiroga, R. Q., Reddy, L., Kreiman, G., Koch, C. & Fried, I. Invariant for recurrence? Neurology 51, 1256–1262 (1998).
visual representation by single neurons in the human brain. Nature 435, 86. Foster, B. L. & Parvizi, J. Direct cortical stimulation of human posteromedial
1102–1107 (2005). cortex. Neurology 88, 685–691 (2017).
56. Gelbard-Sagiv, H., Mukamel, R., Harel, M., Malach, R. & Fried, I. Internally 87. Agnew, W. F., Yuen, T. G. & McCreery, D. B. Morphologic changes after
generated reactivation of single neurons in human hippocampus during free prolonged electrical stimulation of the cat’s cortex at defined charge densities.
recall. Science 322, 96–101 (2008). Exp. Neurol. 79, 397–411 (1983).
57. McCoy, A. N. & Platt, M. L. Risk-sensitive neurons in macaque posterior 88. Babb, T. L. & Kupfer, W. Phagocytic and metabolic reactions to intracerebral
cingulate cortex. Nat. Neurosci. 8, 1220–1227 (2005). electrical stimulation of rat brain. Exp. Neurol. 86, 183–197 (1984).
58. Odegaard, B., Knight, R. T. & Lau, H. Should a few null findings falsify 89. Penfield, W. & Boldrey, E. Somatic motor and sensory representation in the
prefrontal theories of conscious perception? J. Neurosci. 37, cerebral cortex of man as studied by electrical stimulation. Brain 60,
9593–9602 (2017). 389–443 (1937).
59. Parvizi, J. & Kastner, S. Promises and limitations of human intracranial 90. Fried, I. et al. Functional organization of human supplementary motor cortex
electroencephalography. Nat. Neurosci. 21, 474–483 (2018). studied by electrical stimulation. J. Neurosci. 11, 3656–3666 (1991).
60. Hill, J. et al. Similar patterns of cortical expansion during human 91. Jarosz, A. F. & Wiley, J. What are the odds? A practical guide to computing
development and evolution. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 107, and reporting Bayes factors. J. Problem Solving 7, 2 (2014).
13135–13140 (2010). 92. Parvizi, J. et al. Electrical stimulation of human fusiform face-selective
61. Jacobs, B. et al. Regional dendritic and spine variation in human cerebral regions distorts face perception. J. Neurosci. 32, 14915–14920 (2012).
cortex: a quantitative golgi study. Cereb. Cortex 11, 558–571 (2001).
62. García‐Cabezas, M. Á., Joyce, M. K. P., John, Y. J., Zikopoulos, B. & Barbas, Acknowledgements
H. Mirror trends of plasticity and stability indicators in primate prefrontal The authors are grateful to the many patients who participated, without whom this
cortex. Eur. J. Neurosci. 46, 2392–2405 (2017). research would have been impossible, as well as numerous funding agencies for
63. Fox, K. C. R., Foster, B. L., Kucyi, A., Daitch, A. L. & Parvizi, J. Intracranial generous support. K.C.R.F. was supported by a Postdoctoral Fellowship from the
electrophysiology of the human default network. Trends Cogn. Sci. 22, Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC) of Canada, and is
307–324 (2018). currently supported by a Medical Scholars Research Fellowship from the Stanford
64. Fox, K. C. R., Spreng, R. N., Ellamil, M., Andrews-Hanna, J. R. & Christoff, University School of Medicine. L.S. is supported by the China Scholarship Council
K. The wandering brain: meta-analysis of functional neuroimaging studies of (201708110057) and National Natural Science Foundation of China (81701268). B.L.F.
mind-wandering and related spontaneous thought processes. NeuroImage is supported by the National Institutes of Health (R00MH103479). A.K. was supported
111, 611–621 (2015). by a Banting Postdoctoral Fellowship from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research
65. Christoff, K., Irving, Z. C., Fox, K. C. R., Spreng, R. N. & Andrews-Hanna, J. (CIHR). J.P. is supported by the National Institutes of Health (1P50MH109429). The
R. Mind-wandering as spontaneous thought: a dynamic framework. Nat. Rev. funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish or
Neurosci. 17, 718–731 (2016). preparation of the manuscript.
66. Fox, K. C. R., Andrews-Hanna, J. R. & Christoff, K. The neurobiology of
self-generated thought from cells to systems: integrating evidence from lesion Author contributions
studies, human intracranial electrophysiology, neurochemistry, and
K.C.R.F., O.R. and J.P. conceived of the study. K.C.R.F., L.S., D.S.M., A.K. and J.P.
neuroendocrinology. Neuroscience 335, 134–150 (2016).
designed the study. K.C.R.F. and J.P. collected the data. K.C.R.F., L.S., S.B., O.R., B.L.F.,
67. Antrobus, J. S., Singer, J. L. & Greenberg, S. Studies in the stream of
S.S., D.S.M. and A.K. analysed the data. K.C.R.F., L.S., S.B. and O.R. created the figures.
consciousness: experimental enhancement and suppression of spontaneous
K.C.R.F. and J.P. wrote the initial draft of the manuscript. All authors participated in
cognitive processes. Percept. Mot. Skills 23, 399–417 (1966).
writing the final draft.
68. Mason, M. F. et al. Wandering minds: the default network and
stimulus-independent thought. Science 315, 393–395 (2007).
69. Lilly, J. C. Mental effects of reduction of ordinary levels of physical stimuli on Competing interests
intact, healthy persons. Psychiatric Res. Rep. 5, 1–9 (1956). The authors declare no competing interests.
NAtuRe HuMAN BeHAvIOuR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTurE HumaN BEHavIOur
Additional information Peer review information Primary Handling Editor: Marike Schiffer.
Extended data is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-020-0910-1. Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/ Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
s41562-020-0910-1. published maps and institutional affiliations.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to K.C.R.F. or J.P. © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2020
NAtuRe HuMAN BeHAvIOuR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NNaaTTuurrEE HHuummaaNN BBEEHHaavvIIOOuurr AArrttiicclleess
Extended Data Fig. 1 | Hemispheric asymmetries in elicitation rate. For post-hoc individual network comparisons, statistical significance was set
at p < .007 (α = .05 Bonferroni-corrected for seven multiple comparisons).
NAtuRe HuMAN BeHAvIOuR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
AArrttiicclleess NNaaTTuurrEE HHuummaaNN BBEEHHaavvIIOOuurr
Extended Data Fig. 2 | Reliability analyses for 7-network elicitation rates. Seven-network parcellation: correlations between elicitation rate and principal
gradient value across all reliability samples (Pearson’s r, [95% CIs]).
NAtuRe HuMAN BeHAvIOuR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NNaaTTuurrEE HHuummaaNN BBEEHHaavvIIOOuurr AArrttiicclleess
Extended Data Fig. 3 | Reliability analyses for 17-network elicitation rates. 17-network parcellation: correlations between elicitation rate and principal
gradient value across all reliability samples (Pearson’s r, [95% CIs]).
NAtuRe HuMAN BeHAvIOuR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
AArrttiicclleess NNaaTTuurrEE HHuummaaNN BBEEHHaavvIIOOuurr
Extended Data Fig. 4 | effect categories elicited in the 7-network parcellation. Frequency of effect types within each network.
NAtuRe HuMAN BeHAvIOuR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NNaaTTuurrEE HHuummaaNN BBEEHHaavvIIOOuurr AArrttiicclleess
Extended Data Fig. 5 | effect categories elicited in the 17-network parcellation. Frequency of effect types within each network.
NAtuRe HuMAN BeHAvIOuR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
1
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Corresponding author(s): Fox, K.C.R., Parvizi, J.
Last updated by author(s): Feb 12, 2020
Reporting Summary
Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency
in reporting. For further information on Nature Research policies, see Authors & Referees and the Editorial Policy Checklist.
Statistics
For all statistical analyses, confirm that the following items are present in the figure legend, table legend, main text, or Methods section.
n/a Confirmed
The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
A statement on whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided
Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.
A description of all covariates tested
A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
A full description of the statistical parameters including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient)
AND variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)
For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted
Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.
For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated
Our web collection on statistics for biologists contains articles on many of the points above.
Software and code
Policy information about availability of computer code
Data collection Data were matched to intrinsic brain networks and visualized using the freely-available iELVis software package and Matlab R2017b.
Data analysis Data were matched to intrinsic brain networks and visualized using the freely-available iELVis software package and Matlab R2017b.
For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors/reviewers.
We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Research guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.
Data
Policy information about availability of data
All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable:
- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets
- A list of figures that have associated raw data
- A description of any restrictions on data availability
The data supporting the results of this study are available from the corresponding authors upon reasonable request.
Field-specific reporting
Please select the one below that is the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.
Life sciences Behavioural & social sciences Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences
For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/documents/nr-reporting-summary-flat.pdf
2
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Behavioural & social sciences study design
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
Study description The data are a mix of quantitative network and intracranial stimulation parameters and first-person reports following brain stimulation.
Research sample The sample comprised 67 neurosurgical patients at the Stanford Hospital tested between 2008 and 2018.
Sampling strategy The sample was a 'convenience' sample of inpatients being treated at the Stanford Hospital. Every effort was made to include data from
any relevant patients over the past 10 years, including consideration of 119 patients. Ultimately 67 patients were included as having data
relevant to the present study, with >1500 unique intracranial electrodes.
Data collection Data were collected using intracranial EEG as well as simultaneous video recordings and supplemental handwritten notes of effects
elicited with stimulation. Typically only the participant and researcher(s) were present, although nursing staff occasionally entered the
room for necessary procedures. Both experimenter and patient were blind to the aims of the study, as the study is a retrospective
assessment of a decade of data and was not envisioned beforehand.
Timing Patients were investigated between 2008 and 2018.
Data exclusions The main relevant exclusions were of pathological electrode channels showing epileptiform activity, which were never considered for
analysis. Additionally, electrodes that fell outside brain network templates used in our analysis were not included in our analysis. Patients
were excluded based only on practical considerations (lacking stimulation sessions, lacking MRI brain scans, etc.).
Non-participation No participants dropped out/declined participation.
Randomization Patients were not assigned to groups, but rather data from all patients was pooled, and global trends across all patients were
investigated.
Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods
We require information from authors about some types of materials, experimental systems and methods used in many studies. Here, indicate whether each material,
system or method listed is relevant to your study. If you are not sure if a list item applies to your research, read the appropriate section before selecting a response.
Materials & experimental systems Methods
n/a Involved in the study n/a Involved in the study
Antibodies ChIP-seq
Eukaryotic cell lines Flow cytometry
Palaeontology MRI-based neuroimaging
Animals and other organisms
Human research participants
Clinical data
Human research participants
Policy information about studies involving human research participants
Population characteristics See above. Epilepsy affects sexes and races roughly equally and our sample was consistent with this.
Recruitment See above. Data were gathered as part of a routine clinical mapping electrical stimulation procedure conducted with all epilepsy
patients in the neurosurgical inpatient unit.
Ethics oversight The study was approved by the Stanford Institutional Review Board for human participants research.
Note that full information on the approval of the study protocol must also be provided in the manuscript.
Magnetic resonance imaging
Experimental design
Design type Only morphometric (structural/anatomical) scans were used in this study.
Design specifications n/a
3
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Behavioral performance measures n/a
Acquisition
Imaging type(s) Structural
Field strength 3.0 Tesla
Sequence & imaging parameters T1-weighted scan: 256 x 256 matrix, 186 slices, 0.90 x 0.90 x 0.90 mm voxels, 240 mm field-of-view, 7.60 ms TR; SPGR
sequence.
Area of acquisition Whole-brain scan
Diffusion MRI Used Not used
Preprocessing
Preprocessing software Segmentation of T1 scans and cortical surface reconstructions using Freesurfer v6.0.
Normalization Data were normalized to MNI space for global analyses using a non-linear transform.
Normalization template The 'fsaverage6' template in Freesurfer v6.0.
Noise and artifact removal n/a as our scans were not functional MRI.
Volume censoring n/a as our scans were not functional MRI.
Statistical modeling & inference
Model type and settings n/a
Effect(s) tested n/a
Specify type of analysis: Whole brain ROI-based Both
Statistic type for inference Correlation coefficients and regression coefficients (not used directly with MRI data; individual patient MRI scans were
(See Eklund et al. 2016) instead used to assign electrodes to specific brain regions and intrinsic networks in subject-specific space).
Correction n/a to our analyses
Models & analysis
n/a Involved in the study
Functional and/or effective connectivity
Graph analysis
Multivariate modeling or predictive analysis