Articles
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-020-00953-1
Discrete confidence levels revealed by sequential
decisions
Matteo Lisi 1 ✉, Gianluigi Mongillo 2,3, Georgia Milne 4, Tessa Dekker4,5 and Andrei Gorea 6,7
Humans can meaningfully express their confidence about uncertain events. Normatively, these beliefs should correspond to
Bayesian probabilities. However, it is unclear whether the normative theory provides an accurate description of the human
sense of confidence, partly because the self-report measures used in most studies hinder quantitative comparison with norma-
tive predictions. To measure confidence objectively, we developed a dual-decision task in which the correctness of a first deci-
sion determines the correct answer of a second decision, thus mimicking real-life situations in which confidence guides future
choices. While participants were able to use confidence to improve performance, they fell short of the ideal Bayesian strategy.
Instead, behaviour was better explained by a model with a few discrete confidence levels. These findings question the descrip-
tive validity of normative accounts, and suggest that confidence judgments might be based on point estimates of the relevant
variables, rather than on their full probability distributions.
D
ecision-making is faced with uncertainty for every organ- More frequently used methods that require explicit confidence rat-
ism. A growing amount of evidence indicates that humans ings suffer from miscalibrations and response biases2,8,9 that hinder
use estimates about the uncertainty of sensory data to guide a rigorous, quantitative comparison of human behaviour with the
their behaviour, for example, when combining information from predictions of the Bayesian account. Yet another approach involves
multiple sources1. Moreover, other studies have shown that humans confidence forced-choice paradigms10, in which observers engag-
can judge the accuracy of their perceptual decisions (an ability that ing in perceptual discrimination can improve their performance by
belongs to the domain of metacognition) and report degrees of choosing the less uncertain among a pair of stimuli. While this tech-
confidence that correlate with their objective performance2. This nique allows quantitatively accurate measurement of the ability to
sense of confidence is an essential component of decision-making discriminate different levels of uncertainty across stimuli and tasks,
(for example, the decision to undertake a risky operation depends it cannot detect global biases in confidence: observers may make
on the confidence in a correct diagnosis), but the underlying com- accurate comparative judgments while overestimating or underesti-
putations are unclear. According to one popular view, confidence mating by a large amount their probability of being correct.
is Bayesian: it should coincide with the posterior probability that Here, we present an approach for studying subjective probabili-
a choice was correct, computed following the rules of Bayesian ties that allows us to detect confidence biases and directly compare
inference. Although human confidence judgments tend to be human behaviour with the ideal Bayesian strategy and alternative
qualitatively consistent with statistical principles3, such qualitative models. In our experiments, human observers were presented with
agreement is neither necessary nor sufficient to conclude that the two consecutive signals and asked to decide whether they were above
underlying computations are indeed Bayesian4—in the sense that or below a reference value. The key innovation was that the statistics
they explicitly use probability distributions to quantify uncertainty. of the second signal were made contingent upon the decision-maker
Indeed, other studies have shown deviations from Bayesian opti- making a correct decision about the first signal. More specifically,
mality5, which suggest that confidence judgments could instead be correct/incorrect first decisions resulted in signals above/below the
based on simpler or approximated strategies. reference value for the second decision. An implementation of this
One major issue for testing the Bayesian account of human con- experimental protocol is shown in Fig. 1a: participants first indicate
fidence is methodological, and lies in the difficulty of measuring whether the orientation of the random array of lines is tilted left or
subjective probabilities, that is, the degrees of belief that a human right from vertical (first decision). After this response, they are pre-
observer assigns to events. Subjective probability can be formally sented with a dynamic random-dot motion stimulus, and asked to
defined as the marginal rate of substitution6,7: our subjective prob- report its direction (second decision). Crucially, the direction of the
ability about the event E occurring or having occurred would be random-dot stimulus depends deterministically on the correctness
p(E) if we are indifferent to gaining one unit of utility contingent on of the first decision: if the first decision was correct, then the motion
E against gaining p(E) units of utility for sure. Methods that measure will be to the right in the second decision; otherwise it will be to the
subjective probabilities in perceptual decisions using opt-out or left. Participants were informed about this rule, and were requested
post-decision wagering techniques are straightforward operational- to use it to maximize their accuracy. It was impossible to know with
izations of this definition. A well-known problem with these meth- certainty whether the first decision was correct and what the sec-
ods, however, is that they rely on unverifiable assumptions about ond response should be, as the difficulty of both stimuli was varied
the utility function of the participant7—such methods cannot disen- randomly from trial to trial, independently of whether the correct
tangle subjective probability from factors such as opportunity costs. response was left or right. However, participants could assess their
1Department of Psychology, University of Essex, Colchester, UK. 2Institut de la Vision, Sorbonne Université, Paris, France. 3Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique, Paris, France. 4Institute of Ophtalmology, University College London, London, UK. 5Division of Psychology and Language Sciences, University
College London, London, UK. 6Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France. 7Deceased 7 January 2019. ✉e-mail: m.lisi@essex.ac.uk
NATure HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTurE HumaN BEHavIour
Motion Orientation
confidence in being correct on the first decision and use it to update greater than one: 1.51 (95% CI [1.28, 1.61], t(28) = 6.03,
prior expectations in the second decision and improve their per- P = 1.66 × 10−6). The effect was significant when tested separately in
formance. This paradigm mimics realistic situations in which con- dataset 1 (mean odds ratio 1.48, 95% CI [1.24, 1.64], t(13) = 4.78,
fidence in past decisions, in the absence of immediate feedback, is P = 7.19 × 10−4) as well as in dataset 2 (mean odds ratio 1.55, 95%
used to guide behaviour and inform future decisions, rather than CI [1.21, 1.74], t(14) = 3.88, P = 3.33 × 10−3) (Bonferroni-corrected
being reported onto a rating scale without real consequences. P values). There was no statistically significant effect of decision
order in the control condition: 1.07, 95% CI [0.96, 1.19], t(28) =
results 1.21, P = 0.23; the estimated Bayes factor (null/alternative) indicated
Confidence as a prior in sequential decisions: the dual-decision that the data were 3.46 times more likely under the null hypothesis,
task. The paradigm used in the experiments is illustrated in Fig. 1a indicating moderate support for the null hypothesis. We obtained
with an example of the orientation–motion discrimination task similar results when analysing the control condition separately for
(experiment 1, see Methods for details). Participants made a first each dataset: dataset 1, mean odds ratio 0.97, 95% CI [0.84, 1.15],
decision about the mean tilt of the array of lines, followed by a deci- t(13) = 0.33, P = 1.00; dataset 2, mean odds ratio 1.17, 95% CI
sion about the direction of a random-dot motion stimulus. Correct/ [1.00, 1.33], t(14) = 2.39, P = 0.06 (Bonferroni-corrected P values).
incorrect first decisions determined whether the direction of the In sum, these analyses show that participants were able to exploit
random-dot motion pattern was rightward/leftward, respectively, the structure of the task and use their confidence to improve their
and this rule was known to participants. All participants also ran performance in the second decision. Subsequent analyses focused
a version of the experiment with the two discrimination tasks on the dual-decision condition and were conducted on the aggre-
presented in the reverse order (first motion then orientation); see gated data; importantly the size of the effect of decision order in
Methods for details. To control for sequential effects on responses the dual-decision condition did not differ across the two datasets:
between first and second decisions, we included a control condition mean difference in odds ratio 0.07, 95% CI [−0.28, 0.41], t(27) =
in which the second stimulus was independent of the first decision. 0.18, P = 0.85; the Bayes factor (null/alternative) was 3.70, indicat-
We collected two independent datasets (with dataset 2 being a rep- ing moderate support for the null hypothesis.
lication run on a different cohort of participants; see Methods). For
completeness here, we present statistical tests conducted both on Ideal Bayesian observer. We considered how a Bayesian observer
the aggregated data as well as on the two datasets separately. Overall, would solve this task (Fig. 2a). The observer’s task is to decide
we found a significant effect of decision order in the dual-decision whether the stimulus value (for example, the mean tilt from ver-
condition (Fig. 1b): the mean odds ratio of participants respond- tical in the orientation task) is greater or smaller than a reference
ing correctly in the second decision relative to the first one was level, call it zero. However, the observer has access only to a noisy
Control
Dual
decision
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
Discriminability (σ)
)tcerroc(p
a b
1
First decision
Wrong Correct
2 2
Decision
First
Second
Second decision Second decision
Fig. 1 | Dual-decision paradigm and results. a, Dual-decision paradigm: in this example, the first decision is about the average tilt of an array of lines, and
is followed by a second decision about the predominant direction of a random-dot motion pattern. The central area of the screen where the stimulus was
presented was flanked by two dots, which were white for the first decision but turned red and green for the second one, to remind participants which
directions were to be expected in case of an incorrect and correct first response, respectively. The difficulty of both decisions (the opposite of the evidence
discriminability, for example, mean tilt from vertical or motion coherence, quantified as standard deviation of internal noise, σ) is drawn from the same
uniform distribution (and therefore is, on average, equal), but the direction of the signal in the second decision (left versus right) was made dependent on
the accuracy of the first response. Each participant ran the task in both ways (that is orientation–motion and motion–orientation) in both the dual-decision
task and in a control condition where the direction of the signal was randomly drawn regardless of their responses. b, Performance plotted as a function
of discriminability in the control conditions (top) and in the dual-decision conditions (bottom). In the dual-decision task, the performance at either of
the two visual tasks was higher in the second decision, especially for trials where the discriminability was small and, in the absence of prior information,
performance near chance. Note that the data are grouped according to the perceptual task (motion or orientation) to highlight the effect of the decision
order within a single perceptual task. Thus, the panels displaying performance in motion and orientation judgments contain data from two different
sessions with alternated task order. Error bars represents s.e.m. across participants; the curves show probit fits to the aggregated data.
NATure HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTurE HumaN BEHavIour Articles
Observed
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0
1.0
1.0
0.9 0.9
0.8 0.8
0.7 0.7
0.6
0.6
0.5
∣S∣ (σ) 1
estimate of the stimulus value. To decide whether the stimulus is will be positive (for example, corresponding to a ‘right’ tilt), and
greater or smaller than zero, the Bayesian observer would integrate the complement of this probability to the alternative possibility.
the posterior probability of the stimulus over the corresponding Updating the prior amounts to shifting the criterion used for the sec-
semi-interval and choose the most likely alternative. The probabil- ond decision by an amount that increases with confidence (Fig. 2b
ity of the chosen alternative also corresponds to their confidence in and Supplementary Information). Trials with higher confidence in
the decision (the posterior probability that the choice was correct). the first decision then result in a larger prior probability for ‘posi-
The confidence is then used to update prior expectations about the tive’ stimuli and, hence, a stronger bias for responding ‘right’ in the
second signal: the Bayesian observer assigns a prior probability second decision (Fig. 2b). This bias can be quantified by examining
equal to their confidence to the possibility that the second signal how choice probabilities in the second decision vary as a function
)tcerroc(p
a c
First decision Second decision
Confidence
–2 –2
Stimulus level, s (σ) Stimulus level, s (σ)
1 2
b
0
–0.5
–1.0
–1.5
–2.0
0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
Confidence (posterior probability that
first decision was correct)
d e
0.25
0.20 0.15
0.15 0.10
0.10
0.05
0.05
0 0
,noiretirC
noisiced
dnoces
Posterior
p(s 1∣r 1) p(s 2∣r 2)
Prior p(s 1) p(s 2)
Internal response r 1 = s 1 + n r 2 = s 2 + n
Likelihood p(r 1∣s 1) p(r 2∣s 2) s s Stimulus 1 2
Baseline
(symmetric prior) 1.0 p(s > 0)= p(s < 0)
2 2
0.5
0.0
–2 –1
,)noitpo
’thgir‘
esoohc(p
noisiced
dnoces
,)noitpo
’thgir‘
esoohc(p
noisiced
dnoces
Optimal
2.5
2.0
1.5
0.9
1.0 0.8 00..9955
p(correct) 0.5 0.7 second
decision
0 –1 0 1 2 –1 0 1 2
0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5
00..9955
0.8 0.9
0.6 0.7
0 1 2 0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5
Stimulus level, s (σ) 2
0 0.5 1 1.5 2
)σ(
∣s∣ ,ytilibanimircsid
ecnedivE
2
Optimal ∣S∣ = 0.75 ∣S∣ = 1.75
After wrong After correct 1 1
first decision first decision Observed
Baseline
Observed
Optimal
0 1 2 0 1 2
Baseline Baseline Evidence discriminability, ∣S 2∣ (σ)
,)noitpo
’thgir‘
esoohc(p
enilesab
morf
ecnereffid
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6 0.5
∣S∣ (σ) 1
0 0.51.01.52.0 0 0.51.01.52.0
∣S∣ (σ) 1
Fig. 2 | ideal Bayesian model and comparison with human behaviour. a, Representation of probability density function and belief updating in the Bayesian
observer, with the first and second decision represented from left to right. The physical stimulus evokes an internal estimate or response corrupted by
Gaussian noise, η ~ N(0, σ2). The ideal observer knows about the variability of its perceptual system and computes a posterior distribution over possible
stimulus values. After having made the first decision, the ideal observer integrates the posterior distribution over the chosen semi-axis to evaluate
its confidence, that is, the subjective probability that the decision was correct, given the evidence. The confidence is then used to update its prior for
the second decision: a prior probability equal to the confidence is assigned to the possibility that the stimulus values will be drawn from the positive
(rightward) semi-axis. b, It can be shown (Supplementary Information) that updating the prior amounts to shifting the decision criterion: here we show
the optimal criterion shift as a function of the confidence level (left) and the psychometric functions which describe choice probabilities for several
confidence levels (right), ranging from 0.5 (grey) to 0.975 (yellow). c, Optimal and observed performance in the second decision, plotted as a function
of both first and second stimuli discriminabilities (the 2D surface showing the observed performance was computed by smoothing the accuracy in
individual trials, pooled from all observers, with a Gaussian kernel with standard deviation of 0.2). Although participants were able to use the structure
of the task to improve their performance in the second decision (see also Fig. 1b), their performance did not reach the ideal benchmark provided by the
ideal Bayesian observer, as shown also by the two-example cross-section at the bottom. d,e, Choice probability in the second decision was influenced
by the discriminability of the first stimulus (d). This pattern is better appreciated when data are plotted as a difference from the baseline (e), that is, a
psychometric function that describes what would be the choice probabilities in the absence of prior information (corresponding to a confidence level of
0.5, illustrated by the grey dot and lines in b). All error bars indicate bootstrapped standard errors.
NATure HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTurE HumaN BEHavIour
of the discriminability of the first stimulus. Note that, because the can account well for the underconfidence following correct first
signal sign in the second decision depends on the accuracy of the decisions (and therefore improve the overall fit compared with the
first decision, an increase in the discriminability of the first stimulus unbiased Bayesian model, since correct first decisions were more
will result in an increased rate of responding ‘right’ to the second frequent). However, overestimating the internal noise reduces the
stimulus regardless of the observer’s use of confidence information bias toward responding ‘right’ after both correct and incorrect first
(Fig. 2d). Thus, we examined differences in choice probabilities decisions, thus degrading the model’s ability to predict performance
relative to baseline probabilities that would be obtained given after incorrect decisions (Fig. 3b). This indicates that not only were
completely independent responses to the two stimuli. When aver- participants biased toward underconfidence (relative to the ideal)
aged over all trials, the observed pattern of choices displays a trend but also that confidence bias varied depending on the discrim-
similar to that predicted by the Bayesian model (Fig. 2d), which inability of the stimulus.
is remarkable considering that this model is fully constrained by
the data. To provide a more stringent comparison between human Non-Bayesian models with discrete confidence levels best
behaviour and the Bayesian model, we next split data according describe human behaviour. The systematic deviations from
to the accuracy of the first decision: confidence should decrease Bayesian confidence exposed above could result from observers
with greater signal discriminability after an incorrect decision, and that are underconfident at large and small discriminability, but
increase after a correct one3. However, while human participants overconfident at intermediate discriminability. In other words, the
closely match the ideal after incorrect first decisions (Fig. 2e, left), function linking evidence to confidence must have a slope much
they systematically chose ‘right’ less frequently than the Bayesian larger than the one of the Bayesian observer in a small range of
observer after correct first decisions (Fig. 2e, right). This pattern can discriminabilities (going from small to intermediate). The simplest
be interpreted as an underconfidence bias and suggests deviations function with these characteristics is a step function (Fig. 3c). We
from the Bayesian strategy. Moreover, the finding of an undercon- note that a step function would result naturally if observers make
fidence bias is inconsistent with sampling-based approximations of decisions using a point estimate of the stimulus. In this case, con-
the Bayesian strategy, as these would predict an opposite overconfi- fidence assessments must be obtained by comparing the estimate
dence pattern (Supplementary Information). with fixed, possibly learned, criteria. If the observer has only one
confidence criterion, then the resulting evidence–confidence func-
Human performance is not explained by a fixed bias. One pos- tion would have two confidence levels (low and high). In this case
sible explanation for the observed sub-optimality of behaviour is the observer would shift their decision criterion to increase the
that participants did not monitor their confidence after each deci- probability of responding ‘right’ only when in the high-confidence
sion, but rather adopted a fixed bias towards responding ‘right’ in state (Supplementary Information). We estimated the parameters of
the second decision. Indeed, since they performed above chance the discrete-confidence model and compared it against the alterna-
in the first decision (mean proportion of correct first decision: tive models described above. We compared the goodness of fit of
0.80), a fixed bias would improve their performance in the second. models using the Akaike information criterion11 (AIC), which takes
We estimated the best-fitting fixed bias for each participant and into account model complexity. An analysis of simulated data con-
compared the predictions with the observed behaviour. As shown firmed that the models were distinguishable and correctly recov-
in Fig. 3a, the fixed-bias model fails to explain how choice prob- ered (Extended Data Fig. 3). The smallest AIC, indicating better fit,
abilities in the second decision vary with the discriminability of the was attained by the discrete-confidence model. The AIC difference
first stimulus. As a further test, we fit logistic regressions for each between the discrete-confidence model and other models (summed
participant to measure the influence of the accuracy of the first over subjects) revealed little or no support12 for the remaining mod-
decision on the probability of choosing ‘right’ on the second deci- els: the difference was 151 for the biased-Bayesian model, 95% CI
sion. The results of this analysis indicate that, even after controlling [67, 253]; 343 for the fixed-bias model, 95% CI [163, 597]; and 1,591
for stimulus values, participants were significantly more likely to for the ideal Bayesian model, 95% CI [1,020, 2,240]. Additionally, we
choose ‘right’ in the second decision after a correct first decision compared the models using a random-effects approach13,14, which
than after an incorrect one: odds ratio 2.61, 95% CI [1.84, 3.55], assumes that different participants could have used different strate-
t(28) = 5.71, P = 3.99 × 10−6, indicating that they monitored their gies, corresponding to different models, to generate their behaviour
confidence on a trial-by-trial basis rather than used a fixed strategy. (Supplementary Information). The protected exceedance probabil-
Moreover, when adding the discriminability of the first stimulus as ity of the discrete model (the second-order probability that partici-
a predictor, we found that it modulates the probability of choos- pants were more likely to use this model to generate behaviour) was
ing ‘right’ in the second decision: for each unitary increase in dis- >0.99, and the Bayesian omnibus risk (the posterior probability
criminability, the odds ratio increases multiplicatively by a factor that all models have the same frequencies) was 1.70 × 10−4. The dis-
of 1.95, 95% CI [1.42, 3.36], t(28) = 2.95, P = 0.006, after a cor- crete model thus provides a better fit than the alternatives and can
rect response and decreases by a factor of 0.68, 95% CI [0.49, 0.95], explain better the pattern of underconfidence following correct first
t(28) = 2.18, P = 0.037, after an incorrect response. Taken together decisions combined with the relatively high confidence following
these results allow us to reject the hypothesis that the bias toward incorrect decisions (Fig. 3c). These high-confidence errors would
responding ‘right’ in the second decision was constant across trials occur whenever the internal signal not only has the opposite sign to
and instead conclude that participants adjusted their criterion on a the physical stimulus (due to random noise fluctuations) but is also
trial-by-trial basis. large enough to exceed the confidence criterion.
A biased-Bayesian model does not fully account for sub-optimal Discussion
choice behaviour. An alternative explanation for the undercon- We present an approach to study confidence in perceptual decisions
fidence pattern (Fig. 2d) is that participants might systematically objectively. Our protocol involves a sequential decision task in which
overestimate their sensory noise (Supplementary Information). To participants may improve their performance in a second decision by
test for this possibility, we computed for each participant how much using their confidence in the first. This experimental protocol allows
the estimate of the noise should have deviated from the true value for the investigation of not only metacognitive monitoring but also
to explain the underconfidence pattern. We found that on aver- metacognitive control of behaviour15. It can therefore be regarded
age participants should have overestimated their sensory noise by as a laboratory proxy of real-life situations where current decisions
a factor of 2.94, 95% CI [1.99, 4.03]. This biased Bayesian model might depend on the pending outcomes of previous choices. One
NATure HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTurE HumaN BEHavIour Articles
After wrong After correct first decision first decision
∣S∣ (σ) 1
advantage of our experimental protocol is that it permits quanti- found in our data could instead be accounted for by an alternative,
tative testing of hypotheses about the human sense of confidence non-Bayesian model with only two discrete levels of confidence.
without requiring arbitrary assumptions, for example, about how This model posits that confidence is discretized in a few distinct
participants map their subjective confidence onto an external rating levels, as also suggested by previous work17. More specifically, in
scale in the case of self-report measures. Additionally, the current our discrete model there would be two distinct confidence states:
approach has the advantage that the decision strategy depends only confident, that is, more likely that the response was correct, versus
on internal sources of uncertainty, as opposed to external ones, such non-confident, that is, equally likely that the response was correct
as stochasticities in the environment, that typically elicit conserva- or incorrect (Fig. 3c). This one confidence criterion variant of our
tive and sub-optimal placements of decision criteria16. model provided the best and most parsimonious description of the
Taken together, our results revealed that participants perform- empirical data.
ing the dual-decision task can meaningfully use confidence in a In the discrete model, sensory evidence is transformed to con-
prior choice to inform subsequent decisions. However participants fidence via a discrete step function. This suggests that human
also exhibited specific and systematic deviations from the predic- observers do not assign numerically precise subjective probabilities
tions of the ideal Bayesian model. Our analysis revealed that the to perceptual interpretations and implies that confidence in a per-
relationship between the internal signals (the sensory evidence) and ceptual decision may be based on only a single point estimate of the
the confidence does not have the shape that would be expected if most likely stimulus, rather than on a full probability distribution
subjective confidence were computed as if by a Bayesian observer, over all possible stimuli5. While this algorithmic description of the
by integrating a posterior probability distribution over the values of mechanisms underlying subjective confidence valuation may seem
the stimulus that are consistent with the choice made. The pattern simplistic, it could be the natural consequence of a limit on how
ecnereffid
CIA
demmuS
1.00 Protected p exc > 0.99 BOR ≈ 1.7 × 10−4
0.25
0.75 0.20 0.15
0.15 0.10 0.50
0.10
0.05 0.25
0.05
Baseline Baseline
0 0 0
0.25
0.20 0.15
0.15 0.10
0.10
0.05 0.05
0 0
0.25
0.20 0.15
0.15 0.10
0.10
0.05
0.05
0 0
)ledom(p
a d
1.0 Ideal Bayesian
0.9
0.8
0.7 Fixed bias
0.6
0.5
Evidence (σ) 1,900
b 1,800
1,700
1,600
1,500
1,400
1,300
500
c
400
300
200
100
0
BiaDi ss
ecr
d
et Be ayesi Fia xn
ed
bia Bs ayesian
ecnedifnoC
1.0
0.9
Ideal
0.8 Bayesian
0.7
0.6
Discrete
0.5
ecnedifnoC
0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 0 0.51.01.52.0 0 0.51.01.52.0
1.0 Ideal Bayesian
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6 Biased Bayesian
0.5
0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 0 0.51.01.52.0 0 0.51.01.52.0
Evidence (σ) ∣S∣ (σ) 1
0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 0 0.51.01.52.0 0 0.51.01.52.0
Evidence (σ) ∣S∣ (σ)
1
ecnedifnoC
,)noitpo
’thgir‘
esoohc(p
,)noitpo
’thgir‘
esoohc(p
,)noitpo
’thgir‘
esoohc(p
enilesab
morf
ecnereffid
enilesab
morf
ecnereffid
enilesab
morf
ecnereffid
Fig. 3 | Alternative sub-optimal models. a, Fixed-bias model. b, Biased-Bayesian model. c, Discrete confidence model. In a, b and c the left panels show
the functions linking confidence to evidence in each of the models (for comparison each panel also includes the function of the ideal Bayesian observer);
these functions were generated using the median of the estimated parameters across observers. Right panels show data and model predictions. Note in
particular that the biased-Bayesian model, while providing an overall good fit to the data, tends to underestimate the probability of choosing ‘right’ after
a wrong decision more than the discrete model. This pattern is evident also in individual data (Extended Data Fig. 1). d, Model comparison: the top panel
represents model frequencies estimates using a random-effects approach that allows heterogeneity in the models that participants used to generate
behaviour13; the annotation reports the (protected) exceedance probability (p ) of the winning discrete-confidence model, together with the Bayesian
exc
omnibus risk (BOR), that is, the probability that observed differences in model frequencies are due to chance. The bottom panel represents differences in
the Akaike information criterion, relative to the winning model, summed over subjects (see Extended Data Fig. 2 for a plot of individual AIC values). All
error bars and bands indicate bootstrapped standard errors.
NATure HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTurE HumaN BEHavIour
much information can be accessed and used for meta-perceptual Methods
judgments. In fact the discrete model effectively compresses (in the Participants. All experiments were performed in accordance with the
information-theoretical sense) the amount of information that is requirements of the Declaration of Helsinki. The experimental protocols were
approved by the Research Ethics Committee of the School of Health Sciences of
encoded from the first decision and remembered for later use in
City University of London and by the UCL Research Ethics Committee. A total of
the second decision (it compresses this information to only 1 bit). 31 subjects participated in the experiments (mean age 31 years, standard deviation
One intriguing possibility, therefore, is that the critical constraint 11 years; 12 females). The first 16 participants (dataset 1) ran the experiment
preventing subjects from accurately assigning probabilities and at City University (London, UK). The remaining 15 participants (dataset 2)
achieving optimality is a capacity limit on the information that were tested in a replication of the experiment ran at Division of Psychology and
Language Science, University College London (London, UK), using the same
is encoded for later use. This constraint could be formulated as a
procedure and an equivalent experimental setup. Two participants displayed a
maximum limit on the mutual information between the internal very large response bias in one of the two tasks (see Analysis) and were excluded
evidence used in the decision and the internal variable represent- from the analysis. No statistical methods were used to pre-determine sample size;
ing the degree of confidence. This idea fits well with ‘second-order’ sample size was chosen to be similar to those reported in previous studies29,30. All
participants had normal or corrected-to-normal vision and gave their informed
models of metacognition, which postulate a separation (in space
consent in written form prior to participation. All participants were naïve to the
and/or time) of the internal states supporting decision and con-
specific purpose of the experiment. Naïve participants were compensated with £10
fidence18 and assume that the samples of sensory evidence guid- for each hour of experiment.
ing decisions and confidence are distinct, although coupled. Our
results suggest an extension of this framework where the nature Behavioural tasks. Behavioural protocols required participants to make a sequence
of two perceptual decisions in each trial. There was no maximum time limit to
of this coupling emerges from the loss of information during con-
give the response, and in all tasks participants were explicitly asked to prioritize
fidence valuation. According to this idea, the internal states sup-
accuracy over speed (nevertheless response times covaried with confidence; see
porting decisions and confidence could be viewed as the input “Analysis of response times” in Supplementary Results). Experimental protocols
and output of an information channel with limited capacity (that were implemented using MATLAB (The MathWorks Inc.) and the Psychophysics
is, with an upper bound on the rate at which information can be Toolbox31,32.
Participants were asked in each decision to discriminate either the mean
transmitted reliably). Our results thus provide additional support
orientation (left or right from vertical) of an array of lines, or the direction of
for the idea that any rational account of confidence needs to incor-
motion (left or right) of a dynamic, random-dot motion stimulus. All trials always
porate implementational constraints and resource limitations19 to included both discrimination tasks (for example, first orientation then motion, as
be descriptively accurate. in Fig. 1, or vice versa), but the order differed across sessions. The lines were 150
It is interesting to note that this pattern, in which subjective black and white segments (0.7 degrees of visual angle or dva long, anti-aliased),
presented on a grey background and randomly placed using a uniform distribution
probabilities both overestimate and underestimate the objective
over a circular area (diameter 8 dva) placed at the centre of the screen. The
probability in distinct sub-domains of the same task, resembles
orientation of the lines were sampled from a Gaussian distribution with varying
the distortions of subjective probability that have been found also mean and standard deviation fixed at 15°. The random-dot stimulus was made of
in non-perceptual tasks, such as those involving decisions from 200 black and white dots (diameter 0.1 dva), presented within the same circular
experience20, suggesting that there may be common limitations in area, moving at a speed of 4 dva s−1, with a lifetime of four refresh cycles (~67 ms).
Both lines and dots were presented for 300 ms. A number (1 or 2) was presented
the internal representation of subjective probabilities across dif-
at the top of the display to remind the participants whether the current decision
ferent tasks. Additionally, the finding that confidence can be used was the first or the second of each trial, together with two dots on the left and
to improve performance in our dual-decision task across different right side of the stimulus, which were both white for the first decision but red and
perceptual tasks (here motion and orientation) is, in principle, con- green for the second, indicating the expected alternative in case of an incorrect
sistent with previous claims that confidence may be represented on and correct first decision, respectively. Stimuli were presented on an LCD monitor,
51.5 cm wide, placed at a viewing distance of 77 cm (the distance was kept constant
a common scale and act as a ‘common currency’ between differ-
by means of a chin rest), in a quiet, dimly lit room. The monitor resolution was
ent perceptual judgments21,22. Indeed, in an additional ‘within-task’ 1920 × 1200.
experiment that involved the same type of perceptual judgment in The experiment was split into three sessions run on separate days; participants
both decisions, we found a pattern of deviation from optimality that were compensated with £10 for each hour of experiment. In the first session,
was qualitatively similar to that observed in our main experiment. participants completed 300 trials of the control task in which the first and second
decisions were independent. Each trial comprised two perceptual decisions. In one
However, quantitative modelling of the within-task experiment
block (150 trials) the first decision was about the orientation of the lines while the
failed to provide decisive evidence in favour of either the discrete second was about motion direction. This order was reversed in the second block.
or biased-Bayesian models, leaving open the possibility that par- An auditory beep after the second decision indicated whether subjects responded
ticipants might be able to make slightly more efficient use of infor- incorrectly in either of the two decisions.
In each of the following two sessions, participants completed 300 trials of the
mation when both decisions involve the same perceptual judgment
dual-decision task, where the correctness of the first response was predictive of
(see Supplementary Results for details and a discussion of caveats in
the direction of the second stimulus. The order of the two discrimination tasks
the interpretation of within-task experiments). varied across sessions with order counter-balanced across participants. Before each
Finally, our results have implications for the current investigation session of the dual-decision task, participants were reminded of the conditional
of the neural substrate of confidence and metacognition, because rule and ran a short practice session. The practice continued until participants
confirmed they understood the structure of the experiment and were comfortable
many of these studies assume, more or less explicitly, that subjective
to continue to the experiment. In the dual-decision trials, an auditory beep after
confidence corresponds to the Bayesian posterior probability23,24.
each trial indicated if participants responded correctly to the second decision.
However, the evidence supporting the hypothesis that Bayesian Stimulus discriminability (mean tilt of the lines or motion coherence) were
inference is algorithmically implemented in the brain is debated5,25,26, sampled randomly from a uniform distribution, spanning from 0° to a maximum
leaving open the possibility that the algorithms implemented by the tilt of 12° or 80% coherence in the initial control task. The maximum values in the
brain may involve heuristic shortcuts26. Distinguishing these pos-
subsequent two sessions were set to 2 standard deviations of internal noise (σ, as
estimated from control trials; see Analysis for details).
sibilities requires novel experimental and theoretical approaches to
test the validity of Bayesian inference as a process model27 for the
Analysis. Choices in the second decision (coded either as left versus right or
human sense of confidence. In the present study we have not only correct versus incorrect) were analysed by means of logistic regressions fitted at
found further evidence that brain processes that subtend confidence the individual level (for details of logistic regression models see the Supplementary
judgments do not conform to the ideal benchmark represented by Information: Model-agnostic analyses). Effects were tested at the group level either
the Bayesian models, but also provided a new experimental protocol by computing bootstrapped confidence interval on the estimated odds ratios, or
by means of t tests on the coefficients of the logistic regression (which corresponds
that we believe will be a valuable tool for future investigations of
to the logarithm of the estimated odds ratios and whose distribution could be
confidence and metacognition and for translating advances in this assumed normal, as indicated by Shapiro–Wilk tests). Bootstrapped confidence
field into concrete, theory-driven applications28. intervals were computed using the bias-corrected and accelerated method33.
NATure HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTurE HumaN BEHavIour Articles
All tests were two tailed and were run with an alpha level of 0.05. In the case of m = 1 the biased-Bayesian model is equivalent to the ideal Bayesian, whereas it will
non-significant t-tests, evidence for the null hypothesis was estimated by means of display systematic global biases for values different from 1. Values of m > 1 indicate
Bayes factors (null/alternative), computed using the JZS prior34 (which consists of overestimation of the internal variability, and will lead to global underconfidence
a Cauchy prior on the standardized effect size and uninformative Jeffreys prior on biases, whereas values 0 < m < 1 indicate underestimation of internal variability
variances). All analyses were performed using open-source software R35. and will lead to overconfidence.
Estimation of internal noise. For each participant we estimated the standard Discrete confidence. This model does not assume any knowledge about the nature
deviation of the internal noise (σ) by considering only first decisions and control of the internal stochastic processes linking the stimulus to the internal response.
trials, in which the prior probability of the stimulus was identical between left Therefore the only information available to monitor the uncertainty of the decision
and right alternatives. To account for the possibility that participants might have is the distance of the internal response (which can be considered a point estimate)
made attention lapses (for example stimulus-independent errors) or be biased, we to the decision criterion; specifically, it assesses confidence by comparing the
fitted four different psychometric functions, ranging from the simplest function internal response with an additional confidence criterion. This model’s confidence
with only one free parameter (that is, the noise parameter σ), to a most complex can therefore be described as a set of discrete ‘states’: a ‘confident’ state that is
function that had three free parameters, including a lapse rate parameter and a obtained when the internal response exceed the confidence criterion, and a
bias term (a non-zero location parameter). In all four psychometric functions, complementary ‘uncertain’ state. Only when in the ‘confident’ state will it shift
the parametric form was a cumulative Gaussian (Supplementary Information), so the criterion used for the second decision. It has two free parameters: one first
each function included the same noise parameter (σ). Each psychometric function parameter determining the location of the confidence criterion, and a second
provided a slightly different estimate of the internal noise σ. For analyses, we parameter indicating by how much it will shift the decision criterion (for the
combined the four estimates by weighting them according to the Akaike weight12 second decision) when ‘confident’ about the first.
of each psychometric function. This results in a more robust estimate of the noise
that is not conditioned on any of the specific psychometric functions considered Fixed-bias model. This is the model of an observer that does not monitor uncertainty
but instead permits all scenarios while reducing the chance of overfitting. The on a trial-by-trial basis, and instead adopts a simple fixed bias that increases the
model-averaged estimates were used to transform the values of the stimulus from probability of choosing the ‘right’ option in the second decision. It has one free
raw units (degrees or coherence) to units of internal noise (σ). Two participants parameter, which corresponds to the decision criterion used in the second decision.
were excluded from subsequent analyses because their first decisions in one of the
two task displayed a large systematic bias (more than 2 standard deviations of the Reporting Summary. Further information on research design is available in the
average bias of all participants). Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Computational modelling. To model performance in our task we considered that Data availability
observers can have access only to noisy estimates of the stimulus levels, corrupted
The data that support the findings of this study are available at https://osf.io/
by Gaussian noise (that is, the internal response as defined in signal detection
w74cn/.
theory). We then developed alternative computational models implementing
different strategies and compared their ability to account for performance in the
Code availability
second decision. We fitted models to individual data by numerically finding the
values of the free parameters that maximized the (log) likelihood of choices in The code for models and analyses that support the findings of this study is available
the second decision. Only second decisions were used in the model comparison at https://osf.io/w74cn/.
since all the models make similar predictions for the first decision, but differ in
how they use information from the first choice to inform the second decision. We Received: 3 May 2018; Accepted: 19 August 2020;
performed two types of model comparisons, both based on the Akaike information Published: xx xx xxxx
criterion11 (AIC) as a measure of fit quality. First we compared the AIC values
of each model, summed across subjects. However, this analysis assumes that all
participants used the same strategy (corresponding to a given model) to generate references
their behaviour. Therefore we also performed a more conservative analysis, which 1. Ernst, M. O. & Banks, M. S. Humans integrate visual and haptic information
takes into account the possibility that different subjects may have used different in a statistically optimal fashion. Nature 415, 429–433 (2002).
models to generate their behaviour and aims at inferring the probability of each 2. Mamassian, P. Visual confidence. Annu. Rev. Vis. Sci. 2, 459–481 (2016).
model13 (Supplementary Information). Additionally, to ensure that the models are 3. Sanders, J. I., Hangya, B. & Kepecs, A. Signatures of a statistical computation
distinguishable, we generated synthetic data and verified that the generative models in the human sense of confidence. Neuron 90, 499–506 (2016).
could be correctly recovered based on their AIC values (Extended Data Fig. 3). 4. Adler, W. & Ma, W. J. Limitations of proposed signatures of Bayesian
In the following we summarize the main features of the computational models confidence. Preprint at bioRxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/218222 (2018).
tested; the mathematical details are provided in the Supplementary Information. 5. Rahnev, D. & Denison, R. N. Suboptimality in perceptual decision making.
Behav. Brain Sci. 41, 1–66 (2018).
Ideal Bayesian observer. The ideal Bayesian observer has full knowledge of the 6. De Finetti, B. La prévision: ses lois logiques, ses sources subjectives. Annales
statistics of the internal noise and can use this knowledge to accurately compute de l’institut Henri Poincaré 7, 1–68 (1937).
the posterior probability of having responded correctly (that is, its confidence). The 7. Savage, L. J. Elicitation of personal probabilities and expectations. J. Am. Stat.
confidence is then used to update prior expectations for the second stimulus; in Assoc. 66, 783–801 (1971).
the Supplementary Information we show that updating prior expectations amounts 8. Drugowitsch, J., Moreno-Bote, R. R. & Pouget, A. Relation between belief and
to shifting the decision criterion and provide a derivation of the optimal shift in performance in perceptual decision making. PLoS ONE 9, e96511 (2014).
decision criterion, given the internal response and the level of internal noise. The 9. Fleming, S. M. & Lau, H. C. How to measure metacognition. Front. Hum.
only parameter of the ideal model is the internal noise standard deviation (σ), Neurosci. 8, 1–9 (2014).
but since this is estimated only from first decisions, this model can be regarded as 10. Barthelmé, S. & Mamassian, P. Evaluation of objective uncertainty in the
having no free parameters. visual system. PLoS Comput. Biol. 5, e1000504 (2009).
11. Akaike, H. A new look at the statistical model identification. IEEE Trans.
Bayesian sampler. This class of models represents a sampling-based approximation Autom. Control 19, 716–723 (1974).
of the ideal Bayesian model. According to this model the observer does not 12. Burnham, K. P. & Anderson, D. R. Model Selection and Multimodel Inference:
have access to the full probability distribution of their internal response, but can a Practical Information-Theoretic Approach. (Springer New York, 2002).
approximate it based on a finite number of samples. The performance of this model 13. Stephan, K. E., Penny, W. D., Daunizeau, J., Moran, R. J. & Friston, K. J.
will approach the ideal Bayesian model as the number of samples grow to infinity, Bayesian model selection for group studies. NeuroImage 46, 1004–1017 (2009).
however it is expected to display systematic biases for a small number of samples. 14. Rigoux, L., Stephan, K. E., Friston, K. J. & Daunizeau, J. Bayesian model
In the Supplementary Information we show that these biases are characterized by selection for group studies - revisited. NeuroImage 84, 971–985 (2014).
overconfidence, that is, in the opposite direction with respect to what we found for 15. Nelson, T. O. Metamemory: a theoretical framework and new findings in
most of our subjects. These sampling-based approximations of the ideal Bayesian Psychology of Learning and Motivation. 26, 125–173 (Elsevier, 1990).
model are thus inconsistent with our behavioural results. 16. Ulehla, Z. J. Optimality of perceptual decision criteria. J. Exp. Psychol. 71,
564–569 (1966).
Biased-Bayesian observer. This model performs a Bayesian computation, but 17. Zhang, H., Daw, N. D. & Maloney, L. T. Human representation of
is sub-optimal because it uses an incorrect estimate of its own internal noise. visuo-motor uncertainty as mixtures of orthogonal basis distributions.
Specifically, while the variability of its internal response is described by a Nat. Neurosci. 18, 1152–1158 (2015).
Gaussian distribution with standard deviation σ, to assess its confidence the 18. Fleming, S. M. & Daw, N. D. Self-evaluation of decision performance: a
biased-Bayesian observer uses mσ (with m > 0). The only free parameter is the general Bayesian framework for metacognitive computation. Psychol. Rev.
factor m characterizing the extent by which the internal noise is mis-estimated. If 124, 1–59 (2016).
NATure HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTurE HumaN BEHavIour
19. Adler, W. T. & Ma, W. J. Comparing Bayesian and non-Bayesian accounts of 34. Rouder, J. N., Speckman, P. L., Sun, D., Morey, R. D. & Iverson, G. Bayesian t
human confidence reports. PLoS Comput. Biol. 14, e1006572 (2018). tests for accepting and rejecting the null hypothesis. Psychon. Bull. Rev. 16,
20. Zhang, H. & Maloney, L. T. Ubiquitous log odds: a common representation of 225–237 (2009).
probability and frequency distortion in perception, action, and cognition. 35. R Core Team R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing (R
Front. Neurosci. 6, 1–14 (2012). Foundation for Statistical Computing, 2020).
21. De Gardelle, V., Le Corre, F. & Mamassian, P. Confidence as a common
currency between vision and audition. PLoS ONE 11, e0147901 (2016). Acknowledgements
22. de Gardelle, V. & Mamassian, P. Does confidence use a common currency
This work was partially supported by funding from the French National Research
across two visual tasks? Psychol. Sci. 25, 1286–1288 (2014).
Agency (grant ANR-12-BSH2-0005 to A.G.). The funders had no role in study design,
23. Meyniel, F. & Dehaene, S. Brain networks for confidence weighting and
data collection and analysis, decision to publish or preparation of the manuscript. We
hierarchical inference during probabilistic learning. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA
thank J. A. Solomon and M. J. Morgan for providing facilities. This paper is dedicated to
114, E3859–E3868 (2017).
the memory of Andrei Gorea, whose creative, untameable and questioning mind inspired
24. Bang, D. & Fleming, S. M. Distinct encoding of decision confidence
this project and made it possible.
in human medial prefrontal cortex. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 115,
6082–6087 (2018).
Author contributions
25. Laquitaine, S. & Gardner, J. L. A switching observer for human perceptual
estimation. Neuron 97, 462–474.e6 (2018). M.L., A.G. and G. Mongillo conceived the study. M.L. and G. Mongillo developed the
26. Gardner, J. L. Optimality and heuristics in perceptual neuroscience. Nat. computational models. M.L. programmed the experiments. M.L. and G. Milne collected
Neurosci. 22, 514–523 (2019). the data. M.L analysed the data. M.L, G. Mongillo and T.D. interpreted the results. M.L.
27. Maloney, L. T. & Mamassian, P. Bayesian decision theory as a model wrote the paper with feedback from all authors.
of human visual perception: testing Bayesian transfer. Vis. Neurosci. 26,
147 (2009). Competing interests
28. Huys, Q. J. M., Maia, T. V. & Frank, M. J. Computational psychiatry as a The authors declare no competing interests.
bridge from neuroscience to clinical applications. Nat. Neurosci. 19,
404–413 (2016).
29. Meyniel, F., Schlunegger, D. & Dehaene, S. The sense of confidence Additional information
during probabilistic learning: a normative account. PLoS Comput. Biol. 11, Extended data is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-020-00953-1.
1–25 (2015).
Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/
30. Aitchison, L., Bang, D., Bahrami, B. & Latham, P. E. Doubly Bayesian
s41562-020-00953-1.
analysis of confidence in perceptual decision-making. PLoS Comput. Biol. 11,
1–23 (2015). Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to M.L.
31. Kleiner, M., Brainard, D. & Pelli, D. What’s new in psychtoolbox-3? Peer review information Primary Handling Editor: Marike Schiffer
Perception 36, ECVP Abstract Supplement (2007).
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
32. Pelli, D. G. The VideoToolbox software for visual psychophysics: transforming
numbers into movies. Spat. Vis. 10, 437–442 (1997). Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
33. Efron, B. Better bootstrap confidence intervals. J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 82, published maps and institutional affiliations.
171–185 (1987). © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2020
NATure HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NNaaTTuurrEE HHuummaaNN BBEEHHaavvIIoouurr AArrttiicclleess
Extended Data Fig. 1 | Differences between observed and predicted choice probabilities. These plots represent for each participant, the difference
between the observed and predicted probability of choosing ‘right’ in the second decision, expressed as standardized Pearson residuals. Positive values
indicate that the model underestimates the probability, and negative values indicate overestimation. Panel a shows the average residuals after a wrong first
decision and panel b after a correct first decision. Blue bars represent the the discrete model (with 2 confidence levels) and the orange bars represent the
biased-Bayesian model. Error bands represent bootstrapped standard errors. To facilitate interpretation, blue dots on the bottom denote participants for
which the average residuals of the discrete model are smaller than that of the biased-Bayesian model, indicating that the discrete model made predictions
that were on average closer to the observed probability. Note that individual data display the same pattern seen in the group data (Fig. 2, Main text), in
which the biased-Bayesian model provides a poorer fit to the data, because it tends to more severely underestimate the probability of choosing ‘right’ after
a wrong response.
NATure HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
AArrttiicclleess NNaaTTuurrEE HHuummaaNN BBEEHHaavvIIoouurr
Extended Data Fig. 2 | individual AiC values. AIC differences (alternative model minus discrete model) are plotted for each participant. In all panels
positive values (coloured in blue) indicate that the discrete model with two confidence levels provide a better fit to the data.
NATure HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NNaaTTuurrEE HHuummaaNN BBEEHHaavvIIoouurr AArrttiicclleess
Extended Data Fig. 3 | Model recovery analysis. In order to ensure that the models were distinguishable we performed a model recovery analysis for our
three main computational models: ideal Bayesian, biased-Bayesian and discrete. We generated synthetic data (20 simulated observers, for 600 trials
each), with parameters randomly sampled from the (multivariate) Gaussian distribution of the parameters fitted to our empirical data. Each panel indicate
a different generative model, while different lines represent the mean and standard error of the models fit to the synthetic dataset. In each case the model
with the highest relative likelihood (computed by transforming the AIC onto a likelihood scale) is the one that generated the data, indicating that the
model was correctly recovered and confirming that they are distinguishable.
NATure HuMAN BeHAviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
1
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
April
2020
Corresponding author(s): Matteo Lisi
Last updated by author(s): Aug 17, 2020
Reporting Summary
Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency
in reporting. For further information on Nature Research policies, see our Editorial Policies and the Editorial Policy Checklist.
Statistics
For all statistical analyses, confirm that the following items are present in the figure legend, table legend, main text, or Methods section.
n/a Confirmed
The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
A statement on whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided
Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.
A description of all covariates tested
A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
A full description of the statistical parameters including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient)
AND variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)
For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted
Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.
For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated
Our web collection on statistics for biologists contains articles on many of the points above.
Software and code
Policy information about availability of computer code
Data collection All data was collected with computer-based experiments, using Matlab and the Psychtoolbox 3.0.16
Data analysis The data was analyzed using custom developed code written in R 3.6.3
For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors and
reviewers. We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Research guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.
Data
Policy information about availability of data
All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable:
- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets
- A list of figures that have associated raw data
- A description of any restrictions on data availability
The data supporting the findings of this study are available as an OSF repository available at this link https://osf.io/w74cn/
2
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
April
2020
Field-specific reporting
Please select the one below that is the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.
Life sciences Behavioural & social sciences Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences
For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/documents/nr-reporting-summary-flat.pdf
Behavioural & social sciences study design
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
Study description This is a quantitative experimental study.
Research sample A total of 31 subjects participated in the experiment (mean age 31, standard deviation 11; 12 females). No specific measures were
taken to ensure that the sample is representative of the general population.
Sampling strategy No statistical methods were used to pre-determine sample sizes but our samples similar to those reported in previous studies.
Additionally, model recovery simulations indicated that the sample size was sufficient to discriminate between the set of model
considered.
Data collection The data was collected via a computer-based experiment and keyboard responses. During the experimental session only the
researcher and the participant were present in the experimental room. The experimenter was not blind to the hypotheses during
data collection.
Timing The data collection was conducted between December 2018 and January 2019
Data exclusions The data from two participants were excluded because they displayed a large response bias in one of the task, resulting in very poor
performance. This criterion was pre-established since our analyses assumed small or no bias and above-chance performance.
Non-participation No participants dropped out.
Randomization Participant were not allocated in experimental groups since we used a within-subject design.
Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods
We require information from authors about some types of materials, experimental systems and methods used in many studies. Here, indicate whether each material,
system or method listed is relevant to your study. If you are not sure if a list item applies to your research, read the appropriate section before selecting a response.
Materials & experimental systems Methods
n/a Involved in the study n/a Involved in the study
Antibodies ChIP-seq
Eukaryotic cell lines Flow cytometry
Palaeontology and archaeology MRI-based neuroimaging
Animals and other organisms
Human research participants
Clinical data
Dual use research of concern
Human research participants
Policy information about studies involving human research participants
Population characteristics See 'Research sample' above.
Recruitment Participants were recruited via the online sign-up system of City University of London and University College London (UCL).
Ethics oversight The protocol of the experiments was approved by the Research Ethics Committee of the School of Health Sciences of City,
University of London and by the UCL Research Ethics Committee
Note that full information on the approval of the study protocol must also be provided in the manuscript.