Articles
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-020-0822-0
Value-based attention but not divisive
normalization influences decisions with
multiple alternatives
Sebastian Gluth *, Nadja Kern, Maria Kortmann and Cécile L. Vitali
Violations of economic rationality principles in choices between three or more options are critical for understanding the neural
and cognitive mechanisms of decision-making. A recent study reported that the relative choice accuracy between two options
decreases as the value of a third (distractor) option increases and attributed this effect to divisive normalization of neural value
representations. In two preregistered experiments, a direct replication and an eye-tracking experiment, we assessed the rep-
licability of this effect and tested an alternative account that assumes value-based attention to mediate the distractor effect.
Surprisingly, we could not replicate the distractor effect in our experiments. However, we found a dynamic influence of distrac-
tor value on fixations to distractors as predicted by the value-based attention theory. Computationally, we show that extend-
ing an established sequential sampling decision-making model by a value-based attention mechanism offers a comprehensive
account of the interplay between value, attention, response times and decisions.
A
c entral tenet of neuroeconomics is to exploit knowledge of axiom7, which are usually found in decisions between options that
the neural and cognitive principles of decision-making to are characterized by multiple and distinct attributes, such as price
provide explanations and predictions of seemingly irratio- and quality of consumer goods8 or magnitude and delay of rewards9.
nal choice behaviour1. A prominent example of this research agenda Moreover, the lack of direct replications has been identified as a cen-
is the concept of divisive normalization of neural value representa- tral weakness of current research practices10.
tions. According to divisive normalization, the firing rates of single The second goal of this study was to test an alternative account
neurons are normalized by the summed firing rates of a pool of of the distractor effect, which proposes that the distractor effect is
neurons2. This property allows the brain to maintain efficient cod- mediated by value-based attention11,12. Notably, the idea that viola-
ing of information in changing environments. Importantly, divisive tions of IIA in multi-alternative choice are caused by interactions
normalization appears also to influence the encoding of subjective between value and attention has been entertained in previous work,
values, in the sense that the neural value signal of a choice option is including the selective-integration model13–15. Our specific hypoth-
normalized by the sum of the value signals of all options3. Based on esis was that the amount of overt attention (gaze time) spent on a
this finding, Louie and colleagues4 predicted a new choice phenom- choice option is a function of the option’s subjective value. As a con-
enon: when deciding between three options of different subjective sequence, low-value distractors are quickly identified as unattract-
values (V1 > V2 > V3), the relative choice accuracy between the two ive candidates and receive little attention during the choice process.
targets (that is, the probability of choosing the best option relative to This could reserve cognitive capacity for making more accurate
that of choosing the second-best option) should depend negatively decisions between the two target options. Thus, the value-based
on the value of the third (distractor) option. This is because higher attention account could in principle incorporate a distractor effect
distractor values lead to higher summed values and thus to stronger (though it does not need to predict it12). Importantly, the account
normalization, which in turn implies reduced neural discriminabil- also makes specific predictions about the allocation of attention
ity of the target values. Louie and colleagues4 confirmed their pre- during decision-making and how this allocation interacts with the
diction in a behavioural experiment in which human participants distractor effect: the distractor effect emerges, because the amount
made ternary decisions between food snacks (they also conducted of gaze time spent on the distractor is a function of its value and
an experiment with two monkeys, but our study is concerned because more attentional distraction reduces relative choice accu-
only with the human experiment). Notably, this finding has strong racy. This mediation of the distractor effect by eye movements is
implications for economics because it constitutes a violation of the not predicted by divisive normalization. Therefore, we conducted
axiom of independence of irrelevant alternatives (IIA), according a second study in which we recorded participants’ eye movements
to which the choice ratio between two options must not depend on in the ternary choice task. We preregistered both experiments at the
any third option5,6. Open Science Framework (https://osf.io/qrv2e/registrations) before
The purpose of the current study was twofold. First, we assessed data acquisition.
the replicability of the distractor effect reported by Louie and col- Unexpectedly, neither the direct replication nor the eye-tracking
leagues4 by conducting a direct replication that followed the original experiment replicated the distractor effect on choice reported in the
experimental procedures as closely as possible (with the exception original study4. In fact, we obtained very strong evidence in favour
that we tested more than 2.5 times as many participants). This of the null hypothesis of no distractor effect. As predicted by the
attempt was motivated by the fact that the reported IIA violation value-based attention account, on the other hand, the influence of
in the ternary food-choice task differs from other violations of this distractor value on the amount of gaze time spent on distractors was
Department of Psychology, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland. *e-mail: sebastian.gluth@unibas.ch
Nature HuMaN BeHaViour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NATure HumAN BeHAVIour
a
CHF 3.67
b
Mag ich gar nicht Mag ich sehr gerne
Fig. 1 | Valuation and choice task in the two experiments. a, Trial designs in the direct replication experiment. As in the original study4, subjective values
for all snacks were assessed via a willingness-to-pay auction (left), and options in the choice task were arranged horizontally (right). b, Trial designs
in the eye-tracking experiment. Subjective values were assessed via incentivized ratings (left); options in the choice task were arranged in a triangular
format (right). A grey background was used. Rather than the snack icons shown here, photographs of the actual food products were presented in both
experiments. Credit: icons designed by Freepik and Vector Market from Flaticon.
confirmed by the data (that is, low-value distractors were fixated less this experiment (see Methods). Table 1 summarizes the essential
often than high-value distractors). In addition, we found that high- descriptive statistics.
value distractors slowed down the response times (RT) of target
choices. Finally, we take these findings to propose an extension of No evidence for distractor effect on target choices. To investigate
the attentional drift diffusion model (aDDM)16,17, a sequential sam- the distractor effect on relative choice accuracy, we performed two
pling decision-making model7,18,19 that accounts for the influence statistical tests. First, we compared the accuracy averaged over tri-
of attention on choice. According to our proposal, the probability als that included a high- versus a low-value distractor (Fig. 2a). In
to fixate an option depends on the option’s accumulated value. We contrast to Louie and colleagues4, we found no significantly lower
show that this computational model offers a comprehensive account accuracy for high-value distractor trials, either in the direct rep-
of all qualitative patterns in our choice, RT and eye-tracking data. lication (one-sided paired t-test, t(101) = −0.05, P = 0.479, effect
size Cohen’s d = −0.01, 95% confidence interval (CI) of the differ-
results ence = [−0.01, 0.01]) or in the eye-tracking experiment (t(36) = 0.21,
Choice task and descriptive statistics. Both experiments consisted P = 0.583, d = 0.03, 95% CI = [−0.02, 0.02]). For the second test, we
of two computerized tasks each (Fig. 1). In the first task, partici- performed a random-effects logistic regression analysis for which
pants indicated their subjective value of each food snack on a con- relative choice accuracy was regressed onto the value of each option
tinuous scale. Based on the results of this task, the choice sets for (that is, V1, V2, V3) in every participant, and a one-sample t-test
the second task were created such that, on each trial, two targets on the regression coefficients was performed on the group level
from the third of snacks with the highest values and one distractor (Fig. 2b). Expectedly, V1 had a significantly positive influence on
from the two-thirds of snacks with the lowest values were presented. accuracy (direct replication: t(101) = 9.53, P < 0.001, d = 0.94, 95%
Participants were then asked to choose their preferred snack in CI = [0.88, 1.34]; eye-tracking experiment: t(36) = 10.52, P < 0.001,
every trial. In the direct replication, we followed the procedures of d = 1.73, 95% CI = [0.89, 1.31]), and V2 had a significantly negative
Louie and colleagues4 as closely as possible using the original com- influence (direct replication: t(101) = −9.75, P < 0.001, d = −0.97,
puter codes provided to us by the study’s first author. The setup of 95% CI = [−0.97, −0.64]; eye-tracking experiment: t(36) = −10.17,
the eye-tracking experiment differed in some aspects, including the P < 0.001, d = −1.67, 95% CI = [−1.10, −0.73]). However, there was
arrangement of options in the ternary choice task (see Fig. 1b and no statistically significant effect of V3 on choice accuracy (direct
Methods). All tasks were incentivized. replication: t(101) = −0.38, P = 0.351, d = −0.04, 95% CI = [−0.04,
In the direct replication experiment, participants chose the best 0.02]; eye-tracking experiment: t(36) = −0.67, P = 0.254, d = −0.11,
option in 68.6% of trials on average, which was slightly higher 95% CI = [−0.07, 0.03]). Notably, our analyses deviated from that
compared to the original study (60.5%). In the eye-tracking experi- of Louie and colleagues4 because we performed a random-effects
ment, participants made even more accurate decisions (75.3%), rather than a fixed-effects analysis and replaced the normalized V3
partially due to preregistered exclusion criteria that were added in predictor variable (normV3 = V3/0.5 × [V1 + V2]) by the ‘raw’ V3.
Nature HuMaN BeHaViour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NATure HumAN BeHAVIour Articles
Table 1 | Descriptive statistics of the two experiments
experiment n Best chosen Second-best chosen Distractor chosen rt (ms)
Direct replication 102 68.6% (13.0) 28.6% (11.0) 2.8% (4.5) 2,261 (800)
Eye-tracking 37 75.3% (9.0) 22.6% (6.8) 2.0% (3.4) 1,862 (650)
Group means are reported together with s.d. in parentheses. n, number of participants included in the data analysis.
Direct replication Eye-tracking experiment Direct replication Eye-tracking experiment
0.9 0.9
0.7 0.7
0.5 0.5
0.3 0.3
High V3 Low V3 High V3 Low V3
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
–0.1
–0.2
–0.3
Briefly, our reason for deviating from the original analysis was that original settings are provided in Supplementary Information).
normV3 is confounded with the target-value difference V1 − V2 These deviations from the original analyses were preregistered.
and thus with difficulty, which is particularly problematic for the It is important to note that inferring the replicability of an
fixed-effects analysis (detailed information and analyses with the effect based on its significance in the replication study has been
ycarucca
eciohc
evitaleR
ycarucca
eciohc
evitaleR
ycarucca
eciohc
evitaler
no
tceffE
ycarucca
eciohc
evitaler
no
tceffE
1.5 1.5
1 1
0.5 0.5
0 0
–0.5 –0.5
–1 –1
*** *** *** ***
–1.5 –1.5
V1 V2 V3 V1 V2 V3
High versus low V3 Logistic regression
Statistical test
d
ezis
tceffE
3,000
d 33% Prior
90% Cl Posterior
95% Cl
2,000
1,000
0
–0.1 –0.05 0 0.05 0.1
Regression coefficient of V3
ycneuqerF
25
20
15
10
P < 0.05
5
0
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Participants (n)
ecnaived
ni
tnemevorpmI
a b
c d
e
Fig. 2 | analyses of distractor effects on relative choice accuracy. a, Comparison of trials with high- versus low-value distractors. Individual data points
(grey dots) are shown together with group means (coloured lines) and 95% CIs (black error bars). b, Regression coefficients for the influence of target and
distractor values. Individual data points for effects of V1 and V2 are omitted for better visualization of the V3 effect. c, Assessment of replicability using
the Small Telescopes approach21. The 90% (and 95%) CIs of effect sizes in the direct replication did not overlap with d , indicating replication failure.
33%
d, Prior and posterior distributions of the V3 coefficient according to a hierarchical Bayesian logistic regression (direct replication data). The posterior
density at 0 is much higher than the prior density, indicating very strong evidence for the null hypothesis. e, Improvement in model fit (that is, deviance,
2 × –log-likelihood) for the more complex divisive normalization model compared to the probit model for each participant in the direct replication. A
statistically significant improvement was found in only a few participants (the normalization model was also rejected on the group level). Bayesian analysis
and model comparison for the eye-tracking experiment are shown in Supplementary Fig. 4. ***P < 0.001.
Nature HuMaN BeHaViour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NATure HumAN BeHAVIour
criticized20,21. For this reason we adopted the ‘Small Telescopes’ experiment: t(36) = 3.69, P < 0.001, d = 0.61, 95% CI = [1.72, 5.90]),
approach21 to determine the sample size of our direct replication confirming that they were not simply ignoring the distractors.
experiment and to infer the success of replication. According to this Importantly, this effect does not constitute a violation of IIA and is
approach, one should test whether the 90% CI of the effect size in not specific evidence for divisive normalization12.
the replication study is closer to 0 than a (hypothetical) effect size
that would give the original study a statistical power of only 33% Dynamic influences of value on attention. Our primary eye-
(d ). Using this rationale, we found that the 90% CIs (and even the tracking hypothesis examined an alternative account of the dis-
33%
95% CIs) of the effect sizes from the two distractor effect analyses tractor effect that was based not on divisive normalization but on
described in the previous paragraph did not overlap with the 33% attentional capacity. More specifically, we applied a random-effects
threshold, indicating that our direct replication was indeed unsuc- path analysis to test whether a (potential) negative influence of the
cessful (Fig. 2c). distractor value on relative choice accuracy was mediated by the
Given the absence of an influence of V3 on relative choice amount of attention spent on the distractor (Fig. 4a). In line with
accuracy, we sought to quantify the evidence in favour of the null the attentional account, the path coefficient from V3 to relative gaze
hypothesis by conducting the above-mentioned logistic regression duration on the distractor was significantly positive (t(36) = 1.80,
analysis within a hierarchical Bayesian framework. For the direct P = 0.040, d = 0.30, 95% CI = [0, 0.04]). On the other hand, there
replication, this analysis yielded a Bayes factor in favour of the null was no statistically significant effect of gaze duration on relative
hypothesis (BF ) of 241, which is seen as very strong evidence22 choice accuracy (t(36) = −0.01, P = 0.497, d = 0, 95% CI = [−0.01,
01
(Fig. 2d) (95% highest density interval (HDI) = [−0.04, 0.04]). 0.01]). This is not surprising given the above-mentioned absence
Additionally, we performed a nested model comparison between of a distractor effect on target choices. For the same reason, there
the divisive normalization model, the probit model23 and a baseline was also no statistically significant direct effect of V3 on accuracy.
model that assumed random choices (because the divisive normal- Consistent with our previous work12, we found evidence for a medi-
ization model assumes normally distributed errors, it can be under- ating role of attention with respect to absolute (rather than relative)
stood as a generalization of the probit model). Both the probit and choice accuracy—that is, when including trials in which the distrac-
normalization models predicted decisions of participants in the tor was chosen (Supplementary Fig. 5).
direct replication significantly better than the baseline model (pro- Alongside the path analysis, we predicted that additional evi-
bit: χ2(102) = 25,160; P < 0.001; normalization: χ2(510) = 25,425; dence for value-dependent gaze patterns would be found in more
P < 0.001). Critically, only for a minority of 7 out of 102 participants detailed analyses of the eye-tracking data. First, we tested for early
were choices explained significantly better by the normalization effects of value-based attentional capture11,12,27 by looking at the
model than by the probit model (Fig. 2e). Similarly, a likelihood first fixation in each trial. While there was no statistically signifi-
ratio test on the group level indicated that the higher complexity cant influence of V3 on the probability of fixating the distractor
of the divisive normalization model was not statistically justified by first (t(36) = −0.26, P = 0.604, d = −0.04, 95% CI = [−0.17, 0.13]),
the small improvement in goodness-of-fit (χ2(408) = 265; P > 0.999). we found strong evidence that the first fixation was dependent on
Bayesian analysis and model comparison for the eye-tracking exper- the type of option (F(2,72) = 14.51, P < 0.001, effect size η2 p ¼0:39):
iment yielded equivalent results (Supplementary Fig. 4). We regard on average, 37.0% of first fixations were on the best optiIon, 32.4%
these Bayesian analyses and model comparisons, together with the on the second-best option and 30.6% on the distractor (Fig. 4b).
negative results from the adopted Small Telescopes approach for This effect remained significant even after excluding one par-
direct replications, as providing crucial and strong evidence against ticipant with an exceptionally high dependency (F(2,70) = 16.57,
a negative influence of distractor value on the relative probability of P < 0.001, η2 p ¼0:32). Second, we predicted a top-down effect of
choosing the better of the two targets, and against the normalization value on atItention, meaning that fixations on low-value options
model as offering additional precision in explaining multi-alterna- should become less likely during the choice process. Consistent
tive, value-based decisions. with our hypothesis, the probability of fixating the distractor
decreased as decisions emerged (interaction effect of option type
Higher distractor values slow down choices of target. Contrary to and fixation number: F(12,432) = 8.09, P < 0.001, η2 p ¼0:78)
the absence of an impact on relative choice accuracy, we found a sig- (Fig. 4c). Most importantly, the slope of this decrease was mIodulated
nificantly positive effect of distractor value on RT of target choices by V3 with a steeper decline for distractors of lower values (inter-
(Fig. 3). As a statistical test, we performed a random-effects linear action effect of V3 and fixation number: t(36) = 3.65, P < 0.001,
regression analysis for which the RT of target choices were regressed d = 0.60, 95% CI = [0.02, 0.09]) (Fig. 4d). We also found effects of
onto both V3 and the difference and the sum of target values (that value on attention within the two target options, because partici-
is, V1 – V2; V1 + V2). In line with previous research12,24–26, RT in pants looked more often at the best compared to the second-best
both experiments were significantly reduced by higher target-value option, both at the first fixation (t(36) = 4.52, P < 0.001, d = 0.74,
differences (direct replication: t(101) = −7.83, P < 0.001, d = −0.78, 95% CI = [0.02, 0.05]) and at ensuing fixations (t(36) = 3.88,
95% CI = [−194, −116]; eye-tracking experiment: t(36) = −8.01, P < 0.001, d = 0.64, 95% CI = [0.01, 0.03]). Notably, the last fixation
P < 0.001, d = −1.32, 95% CI = [−211, −126]) and by higher target- in each trial was excluded from these analyses to avoid confusion
value sums (direct replication: t(101) = −6.26, P < 0.001, d = −0.62, with the tendency to fixate the chosen option last16,28.
95% CI = [−155, −80]; eye-tracking experiment: t(36) = −9.02, In summary, our primary eye-tracking analyses revealed both
P < 0.001, d = −1.48, 95% CI = [−211, −134]). More importantly, early and late (top-down) influences of value on attention. The first
RT increased as a function of distractor value (direct replication: fixation was made more often on target options than on distrac-
t(101) = 5.10, P < 0.001, d = 0.51, 95% CI = [29,65]; eye-tracking tors, but this comparatively small difference of about 5% increased
experiment: t(36) = 2.27, P = 0.029, d = 0.37, 95% CI = [2,32]). to >20% during the emerging decision and was most pronounced in
Notably, this effect does not provide evidence for the divisive the presence of low-value distractors.
normalization model, which does not make any RT predictions.
However, the effect is predicted by the extended aDDM (see section Successful replication of an influence of attention on choice.
“Computational modelling” below). Many eye-tracking studies on value-based decisions reported an
In addition to the RT effects, participants were also more likely to influence of attention on choice: options that are looked at longer
choose high- compared to low-value distractors (direct replication: are more likely to be chosen12,16,17,28–32. We tested this effect using a
t(101) = 5.52, P < 0.001, d = 0.55, 95% CI = [2.51, 5.33]; eye-tracking random-effects logistic regression analysis that regressed whether
Nature HuMaN BeHaViour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NATure HumAN BeHAVIour Articles
500 500
0 0
–500 –500
–1,000 –1,000
V1 – V2 V1 + V2 V3 V1 – V2 V1 + V2 V3
2,200 2,200
2,000 2,000
1,800 1,800
1,600 1,600
Lowest Highest Lowest Highest
V3 V3
an option was chosen onto the option’s relative gaze duration while d = 0.51, 95% CI = [0.01, 0.06]), indicating that fixations on high-
controlling for its relative value. Again, the last fixation per trial value options became more likely over the period of single decisions
was excluded from this analysis. In line with the previous litera- (see also Fig. 4a in the original study17). Overall, the reanalysis of an
ture, we found strong evidence for an influence of gaze on choice existing dataset yielded results mostly consistent with our data, in
(t(36) = 7.81, P < 0.001, d = 1.28, 95% CI = [1.45, 2.47]). particular the absence of a distractor effect on target choices and a
top-down influence of value on attention.
Reanalysis of a related dataset. To test the robustness of our find-
ings across laboratories, we reanalysed an existing dataset of an Computational modelling. Our behavioural and eye-tracking
eye-tracking study on ternary food choices17 (note that choice sets results draw a complex picture of the interplay between value, atten-
were created differently in this study, so that its statistical power tion, RT and decisions: no distractor effect on target choices but on
for finding a distractor effect might be lower). Consistent with our RT and a small effect of option value on the first fixation that devel-
results, there was no statistically significant distractor effect on rela- ops into a large value-dependency of fixations as decisions emerge.
tive choice accuracy in this dataset (random-effects logistic regres- We reasoned that all of these effects could be captured computa-
sion: t(29) = −0.67, P = 0.510, d = −0.12, 95% CI = [−0.18, 0.09]), tionally within the framework of the multi-alternative version of
and the hierarchical Bayesian analysis provided strong evidence the aDDM17—but only if this model is extended by a mechanism
for the null hypothesis (BF = 77, 95% HDI = [−0.07, 0.14]). As in of value-based attention. The aDDM assumes that (noisy) evidence
01
our data, there were negative effects of the target-value difference for each option is accumulated proportional to the option’s value
(t(29) = −5.99, P < 0.001, d = −1.09, 95% CI = [−202, −99]) and tar- and that, as soon as the difference of accumulated evidence between
get-value sum (t(29) = −4.02, P < 0.001, d = −0.73, 95% CI = [−235, the highest and second-highest accumulator exceeds a thresh-
−76]) on RT of target choices. However, RT were not dependent sta- old, the option represented by the highest accumulator is chosen
tistically significantly on distractor value (t(29) = −0.58, P = 0.568, (Fig. 5a). To account for the influence of attention on choice, the
d = −0.11, 95% CI = [−61, 34]). Finally, we found some evidence inputs to the accumulators of options that are currently not fixated
for an influence of value on attention: while there was no statisti- are reduced. Importantly, the aDDM does not assume a dependency
cally significant effect of value-based attentional capture on the of the probability to fixate an option on the option’s value. As a con-
first fixation (F(2,58) = 1.01, P = 0.349, η2 p ¼0:05), we found a sig- sequence, the model does not allow one to account for the effects
nificantly positive interaction of option vIalue and fixation number of value on early and late fixations seen in our data (Supplementary
on the probability of fixating an option (t(29) = 2.81, P = 0.009, Fig. 6). Therefore, we extended the model by a mechanism that
emit
esnopser
no
tceffE
)sm(
TR
emit
esnopser
no
tceffE
)sm(
TR
a b
*** *** *** *** *** *
c d
Fig. 3 | analyses of distractor effects on rt. a,b, Regression coefficients for the influence of target-value difference, target-value sum and distractor value
on RT in direct replication (a) and the eye-tracking experiment (b). Individual data points (grey dots) are shown together with group means (coloured
lines) and 95% CIs (black error bars). c,d, Average RT (with 95% CIs) for five levels of V3, from lowest to highest, in direct replication (c) and the
eye-tracking experiment (d). The increase in RT with increasing V3 is clearly visible in a,c. In the eye-tracking experiment, the effect is less pronounced
(consistent with the comparatively small effect size in this experiment). *P < 0.05, ***P < 0.001.
Nature HuMaN BeHaViour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NATure HumAN BeHAVIour
***
Attention 0.6
on distractor
0.5
0.019* –0.000 (NS)
0.4
Relative choice
V3 0.3
–0.002 (NS) accuracy
0.2
0.1
Best Second-best Distractor
option
couples fixation probabilities with accumulated value signals: the 95% CI = [1.41, 1.51]). Finally, the model captured the development
higher the accumulated value of an option, the more likely that it is of fixation probabilities on targets and distractors in its entirety
fixated. Additionally, we initiated the evidence-accumulation pro- (Fig. 5e), including a small effect of option value on the first fixa-
cess 60 ms before the first fixation (Fig. 5a). These two assumptions tion (d = 0.17, 95% CI = [0.14, 0.20]), a steeper within-trial decay of
should enable the aDDM to predict a small influence of value on the fixations for low- compared to high-value distractors (d = 1.58, 95%
first fixation and an increase of this influence over the period of the CI = [1.53, 1.62]) and a higher likelihood of fixating the best com-
emerging decision. pared to the second-best option initially (d = 0.04, 95% CI = [0.01,
Based on simulating the data of our eye-tracking experiment, 0.08]) and at ensuing fixations (d = 0.61, 95% CI = [0.58, 0.65]).
we searched for a parameter set that allowed the extended aDDM Alternative variants of the aDDM with either divisive normaliza-
to capture as many qualitative patterns in our choice, RT and tion or different implementations of value-based attention did not
gaze data as possible. Indeed, we found that the model offered a provide such a comprehensive account of the behavioural and eye-
full account of our results. First, the model described the choice tracking results (Supplementary Figs. 6–10).
probabilities and RT distributions for all three options sufficiently
(Fig. 5b). Second, it did not predict a statistically significant Discussion
distractor effect on relative choice accuracy (average effect size In the present study, we set out to assess the replicability of the dis-
d = 0.01, 95% CI = [−0.02, 0.04]) (Fig. 5c). Third, the model tractor effect on relative choice accuracy reported by Louie and col-
accounted for the negative influences of the difference (d = −2.82, leagues4 and to test an alternative underlying mechanism that relies
95% CI = [−2.92, −2.72]) and sum (d = −0.42, 95% CI = [−0.46, not on divisive normalization of neural value signals but on value-
−0.38]) of target values on RT (the target-value difference effect based attention. The results of our two studies and the reanalysis
is essentially a difficulty effect that is predicted by any sequential of a previously published dataset17 suggest that there is no reliable
sampling model; the target-value sum effect results from the mul- distractor effect on choices (and thus no violation of the IIA axiom),
tiplicative relationship between value and attention in the aDDM33: and that the distribution of attention depends on value with the pre-
high values amplify the influence of attention, inducing stronger dicted dynamics. An extension of the multi-alternative aDDM17, in
deflections of the decision variable and thus faster crossing of the which the probability to fixate an option is coupled with the option’s
threshold). More importantly, the model also accounts for the posi- accumulated value signal, allowed us to capture a total of ten dif-
tive influence of distractor value on RT (d = 0.39, 95% CI = [0.32, ferent behavioural and eye-movement patterns: effects of V1 and
0.45]) (Fig. 5d). Fourth, the model predicted an influence of relative V2 on relative choice accuracy, no effect of V3 on choices, effects of
gaze duration on the probability of choosing an option (d = 1.46, V1 – V2, V1 + V2 and V3 on RT, an influence of attention on choice,
ytilibaborp
noitaxif
tsriF
Best
0.5 0.5
Second-best
Distractor
0.4 0.4
0.3 0.3
0.2 0.2
0.1 0.1
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 0 2 4 6 8 10 12
Fixation number (within trial) Fixation number (within trial)
ytilibaborp
noitaxiF
ytilibaborp
noitaxiF
a b
c d
High-value distractor
Low-value distractor
Fig. 4 | evidence for value-based attention. a, Path analysis testing for mediation of the distractor effect by attention. As predicted, distractor value was
positively linked to relative gaze duration on the distractor. Due to the absence of a distractor effect on relative choice accuracy, however, there was no
mediation. b, The probability of fixating different option types at the first fixation was not random. Individual data points (grey dots) are shown together
with group means (coloured lines) and 95% CIs (black error bars). The effect remained significant when excluding the outlier with 58% and 10% first
fixations on the best option and the distractor, respectively. c, Development of fixations per option type over the course of single trials. d, Development
of fixations on high- and low-value distractors over the course of single trials. Consistent with value-based attention, the decline in fixation probability is
modulated by distractor value. NS, not significant. *P < 0.05, ***P < 0.001.
Nature HuMaN BeHaViour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NATure HumAN BeHAVIour Articles
Choice threshold
Best
Second-best
Distractor
0 200 400 600 800 1,000
Time (ms)
an effect of option type on the first fixation, the development of fixa- of divisive normalization or value-range adaptation appears to be
tions for the three option types over time and, finally, a dependency mixed, with some studies reporting positive evidence4,38 but others
of the within-trial decay of distractor fixations on V3. reporting null findings12,34,36,39 or even contradictory effects40.
Divisive normalization has been proposed as a canonical neural Importantly, the above-mentioned studies are not direct replica-
computation that is remarkably ubiquitous in the brain2, and there tions of the seminal study by Louie and colleagues4. Assessing the
is substantial evidence that neural representations of subject value replicability of an effect via direct replications is essential for estab-
also exhibit this3,34 or related forms35–37 of adaptation to the range lishing the robustness of empirical research, which in turn is a pre-
of offered values. However, the evidence for a behavioural impact requisite for scientific progress10,20. Notably, researchers were not
eulav
noisiced
evitaleR
Fixation: Fixation: Fixation: Fixation:
second-best best distractor best
P(fix) = 0.35 P(fix) = 0.33 P(fix) = 0.3 P(fix) = 0.41
8
0.72
6
0.54 Best chosen (data) 4
Best chosen (model)
2nd-best chosen (data) 2
2nd-best chosen (model)
0.36 Distractor chosen (data)
0
Distractor chosen (model)
–2
0.18
–4
0 –6
0 2,000 4,000 6,000 V1 V2 V3
RT (ms)
ytisned
evitalumuC
ycarucca
eciohc
evitaler
rof
d
ezis
tceffE
semit
esnopser
rof
d
ezis
tceffE
2
1
0
–1
–2
–3
–4
–5
V1 – V2 V1 + V2 V3
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2 Best (data)
Best (model)
Second-best (model)
Second-best (data)
0.1 Distractor (data)
Distractor (model)
0 2 4 6 8 10 0 2 4 6 8 10
Fixation number (within trial) Fixation number (within trial)
ytilibaborp
noitaxiF
a
b c d
e
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
High-value distractor (data)
High-value distractor (model)
0.1 Low-value distractor (data)
Low-value distractor (model)
Fig. 5 | illustration and predictions of the aDDM with value-based attention. a, Sequential sampling process of the aDDM for an example trial. Relative
decision values depicted are based on a comparison between each option’s accumulator and the best alternative accumulator. The choice process
terminates when one decision value reaches the threshold. Fixations of options are indicated by a white background, while gaps before the first fixation
and between fixations are indicated by a grey background (gaps between fixations were implemented to match the empirical gaps between fixations,
which lasted ~60 ms on average). The probability of each fixation is stated at the bottom and is based on accumulated value (via a logistic function; see
equation (8) in Supplementary Information). Fixation durations are drawn from a log-normal distribution (whose parameters were fitted to the empirical
fixation durations). b, Cumulative density of empirical and model-predicted RT distributions for each option type. c,d, Effect sizes of the influence of
V1, V2 and V3 on relative choice accuracy (c) and target-choice RT (d) for 100 simulations of the eye-tracking experiment with the extended aDDM.
Grey dots denote the effect sizes for each simulation, while coloured lines and black error bars show the overall means and their 95% CIs, respectively.
e, Comparison of the empirical and model-predicted development of fixations for different options types over the course of single trials. Shaded areas
represent 95% CIs of the data.
Nature HuMaN BeHaViour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NATure HumAN BeHAVIour
only inspired by the results reported by Louie and colleagues4 when responses emerges naturally from the sequential sampling frame-
conducting new behavioural and neuroscientific experiments, but work and does not provide evidence for divisive normalization.
have also started to develop computational models that attempt to Finally, the model does not provide a rationale for the speculation
take the distractor effect into account41,42. Therefore, we consider that participants in the original and the current study might have
our unsuccessful replication as being essential to opening up dis- employed two extremely different choice strategies (despite the
cussion on the implications of neural value-range adaptations on fact that the direct replication was kept as similar as possible to the
overt behaviour. Notably, our study addresses neither the potential original study, including the same instructions). In our view, it is
dynamic effects of divisive normalization across multiple deci- much more plausible to assume that participants in the two stud-
sions43 nor the robustness of the effects of the monkey experiment ies (as well as in ref. 17) employed similar strategies, which are best
reported by Louie and colleagues4 (note, however, that another described by our proposed extension of the aDDM.
monkey-based study reported that changing the range of values Beyond speaking against a role of divisive normalization in shap-
does not affect economic preferences39). ing multi-alternative decisions, our study provides strong evidence
Violations of the IIA axiom have been found and replicated for a dynamic dependency of attention on value. While people
in various settings of multi-alternative decision-making includ- engage in the choice process and accumulate evidence for each
ing consumer choice8, risky decision-making44 and intertemporal option, they focus more and more on the two options that appear
choice9. In fact, the ability to account for specific IIA violations such to be most attractive (usually the targets) and disregard more and
as the attraction effect8,9 has become a benchmark for decision- more the seemingly worst option (usually the distractor). Notably, a
making models in cognitive science7. What all of the choice settings positive feedback loop between attention and preference formation
in which robust violations of IIA can be found have in common is that results in a ‘gaze cascade effect’ has been proposed in a previous
that options are characterized by two (or more) distinct and well- eye-tracking study28. This proposal has been criticized in a simula-
quantifiable attributes (for example, amount and delay in the case tion study50, which showed that the tendency to fixate the chosen
of intertemporal choices). On the contrary, when attribute values option at late choice stages could be explained without assuming
are fuzzy45 or when decision are made under time pressure12 such that preferences drive attention. However, we found robust effects of
that careful attribute-wise comparisons are hindered, violations of value on attention already at the first fixation, lending new support
IIA are less likely to occur. Similarly, violations of IIA in experience- for the idea of a feedback loop51.
based decisions, in which attribute values can be learned only via It is interesting to note that the developers of the aDDM have
feedback, appear to emerge from specific mechanisms during the reported some initial evidence of value-based attention in their
processing of feedback rather than during the choice process itself46. dataset on ternary decisions17 but not in their dataset on binary
We argue that the absence of IIA violations in the present study is decisions16, even though a systematic mechanism was not imple-
consistent with the previous literature, given that decisions between mented in either of the aDDM versions. Our data provide more
choice of food snacks appear to rely on a single attribute (taste) pro- compelling evidence for value-based attention, possibly due to an
viding people are not instructed to consider additional attributes increase in statistical power given the larger number of participants
(for example, health)47. On a computational level, our findings indi- (37 versus 30) and trials per participant (300 versus 100), and the
cate that divisive normalization is not a necessary element to take superior sampling rate of the eye-tracker (500 versus 50 Hz) in our
into account when trying to develop models of decision-making study (similarly, we attribute the absence of a distractor effect on
that relax the IIA assumption. RT in the dataset of ref. 17 to a lack of statistical power). In general,
While our results provide strong evidence against a negative dis- the partially divergent findings from binary and ternary decisions
tractor effect on choices, we obtained significantly positive effects could indicate that people adapt their distribution of attention stra-
on RT in both experiments. This finding might motivate the specu- tegically (top-down) to reduce cognitive effort in multi-alternative
lation that our results and those of the original study could be rec- decision-making and mainly to sample information about the two
onciled by assuming that participants of the two different studies options that appear to be better than all remaining candidates52,53.
employed two different choice strategies, one leading to a distractor Even if this does not improve choice accuracy, it leads to faster and
effect on choices and the other leading to a distractor effect on RT. thus more efficient decisions.
More specifically, one could devise a DDM variant with normalized Importantly, our model simulations suggest that alternative
input values and two different choice-rule strategies, one strategy implementations of value-based attention based not on accumu-
being that the option with the highest accumulator value is cho- lated but on input values12,54 do not provide the same comprehensive
sen at a predetermined time point (that is, a ‘deadline’ strategy) and account of all behavioural and gaze patterns. In a related study of
the other strategy being that the option whose accumulator reaches our group12, we proposed a sequential sampling model that assumed
the decision threshold first is chosen (that is, a ‘threshold’ strategy). an attentional mechanism based on input values, the mutual inhibi-
In Supplementary Fig. 11 we show that such a model indeed pre- tion with value-based attentional capture (MIVAC) model. MIVAC
dicts a distractor effect on choices under the deadline strategy and a offered a sufficient account of the behavioural and eye-tracking
distractor effect on RT under the threshold strategy. For the follow- data in this previous study. Regarding the current study, however,
ing reasons, however, we consider this model, and the speculation MIVAC would not have been able to predict the dynamic depen-
that participants of the two studies employed different strategies, dency of attention on (accumulated) value. Notably, the two stud-
implausible. First, under the deadline strategy, the model does not ies differ in several aspects, including the stimulus material (food
predict an effect of target-value difference (and thus of difficulty) snacks versus coloured rectangles) and the amount of time available
on RT. Although, we do not know whether this effect was present for making decisions. Thus, the comparatively weak effect of value-
in the original study, which did not report RT effects, we consider based attention on the first fixation in the current study (which then
this prediction very unlikely given the robustness of the influence of developed into a larger effect during the ongoing decision) could
difficulty on RT in the current study, as well as in virtually any study be explained by the difficulty in identifying food snacks and their
on decision-making12,16,17,24,26,30,32,33,47–49. Second, under the threshold subjective value through initial peripheral viewing. More work and
strategy, the model neither provides a sufficient account of the over- a better integration of knowledge from vision science and decision-
all choice and RT distributions nor does it predict the gaze patterns making research will be critical to reconcile these different accounts
in our eye-tracking experiment. Third, the assumption of normal- of the influence of value on attention. Furthermore, our model sim-
ized input values is not necessary for the prediction of a distractor ulations do not rule out that combinations of different mechanisms
effect on RT. The prediction that high-value distractors slow down (for example, value-based attention together with interim rejections
Nature HuMaN BeHaViour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NATure HumAN BeHAVIour Articles
of low-value options) might provide the most accurate account of Experimental design of the direct replication experiment. Following
the behavioural and eye-movement data. Therefore, future research recommendations in the literature56, we contacted the first author of the original
study before data acquisition to resolve any ambiguities regarding recruitment of
should develop more principled ways of assessing goodness-of-fit
participants, experimental design and statistical analyses. Thankfully, K. Louie
of choices, RT and gaze patterns on the single-trial level, possibly answered our questions and provided us with their codes for instructions and
via the joint modelling approach55. Finally, it should be noted tasks. Instructions were translated into German by two co-authors independently
that the aDDM does not analyse options on the attribute level but (N.K. and C.L.V.). Inconsistencies were resolved in a discussion with all authors.
assumes a single input value per option. Consequently, the model Participants were asked to refrain from eating for 4 h before the experiment.
At the beginning of the experiment, they read and signed the consent form and
cannot account for the above-mentioned (robust) IIA violations
filled out a brief demographic questionnaire. Participants were informed that
in multi-attribute decision-making7, and further extensions of the after completing the experiment, they were required to stay in the laboratory for
model are required to address this gap. 1 h and were allowed to eat only the snack they could win in the computer tasks.
In conclusion, our study refutes the proposal that divisive Snacks were present and visible in the laboratory, so that participants were sure of
their availability. Afterwards, participants were given instructions about the first
normalization of neural value signals has a sizeable impact on
task, which was a Becker–DeGroot–Marschak (BDM) auction57 to assess their
multi-alternative, value-based decisions. At the same time, it pro-
willingness to pay money for eating a randomly selected food snack at the end of
vides compelling evidence for a dynamic influence of value on the the experiment. They were endowed with a 5-Swiss franc (CHF) coin and were
allocation of attention during decision-making and offers a com- told that this money could be used to place a bid for each snack in the auction task.
prehensive account of the complex interplay of value, attention, The instructions explained the rationale of the BDM auction: For each snack, a
bid had to be placed on a continuous scale based on CHF 0–5. If a trial from the
response times and decisions within a well-established computa-
auction was selected at the end of the experiment, they would be asked to draw
tional framework.
one chip from a bag that contained chips with values ranging from CHF 0 to 5 in
steps of 0.10. The value of the drawn chip would determine the price of the snack
Methods of the selected trial. If bid ≥ price, then the snack would be paid out for the price,
Preregistration protocols. Before data collection, each experiment was otherwise no transaction would happen. Two practice trials were provided. Each
preregistered on the Open Science Framework (OSF) (https://osf.io/qrv2e/ of the 30 snacks was presented twice during the auction. The order of presented
registrations). The direct replication experiment was preregistered on snacks was randomized for each participant anew.
24 September 2018; the eye-tracking experiment was preregistered on 1 March The average bid of each snack was taken as its subjective value to generate
2019. Preregistrations comprised descriptions of the rationale of the study, the choice sets for the second task, the ternary choice task. The algorithm for
main hypotheses, experimental procedures, power analyses, exclusion criteria generating the snack worked as follows: snacks were ordered by value, the
and data analysis. The protocol of the direct replication also outlined and justified 10 highest snacks were used as targets and, from the remaining 20 snacks,
the planned deviations from the original study (for example, use of V3 instead of 10 distractors were selected by taking the lowest, third-lowest, …, nineteenth-
normV3 for testing distractor effects). For this protocol, we used OSF’s Replication lowest snack. Then, possible pairs of targets were generated, ordered by value
Recipe template based on Brandt et al.56. For the protocol of the eye-tracking difference and binned into 5 levels. For each of the 10 distractors, 5 pairs from each
experiment, we used the OSF Preregistration template. Before preregistering the value-difference level were drawn randomly (without replacement) resulting in
direct replication, the associated protocol was sent to the first author of Louie and 10 × 5 × 5 = 250 trials. These procedures ensured large and uncorrelated ranges of
colleagues4, who approved it. distractor values (V3) and target-value differences (V1 – V2) (but did not ensure
that normV3 and V1 – V2 would be uncorrelated; see Supplementary Fig. 1). The
Participants. A total of 148 participants took part in the study, 103 in the direct order of trials and the assignment of options to screen locations were randomized.
replication experiment and 45 in the eye-tracking experiment. One participant Instructions of the choice task, together with two practice trials, were provided
in the direct replication had to be excluded, resulting in a final sample of after the BDM auction. Participants were told that if a trial from the choice task
102 participants in this experiment (72 female, age: 18–51 years, mean = 24.78, was selected at the end of the experiment, they would receive the chosen snack
s.d. = 6.37; four participants did not report their age). The excluded participant did from that trial.
not bid any money in the auction task for >50% of the snacks, making it impossible Following Louie et al.4, stimuli were presented on a 13-inch laptop (Apple Inc.
to perform a median-split of high- and low-value distractors and a random-effects Mac book, year 2012) and only one participant at a time was tested. Responses
regression analysis with distractor value (in Supplementary Information we show were made with a computer mouse. For stimulus presentation, the Matlab-
that inclusion of this participant in a fixed-effects regression analysis could have based software package Psychtoolbox-3 was used. Snack stimuli (size 400 × 400,
induced spuriously significant effects). Eight participants in the eye-tracking resolution 72 × 72) were presented on a black background. In the BDM auction, a
experiment had to be excluded, resulting in a final sample of 37 participants in snack option was presented at the centre of the screen together with the current bid
this experiment (26 female, age: 19–61 years, M = 27.63, s.d. = 11.14; one participant amount and a horizontal bar beneath it. At the beginning of each trial, the bid was
did not report their age). Four participants were excluded due to incompatibilities initialized at half of the maximum bid and half of the bar was filled with white (the
with the eye-tracking device, and another four were excluded for not passing rest with grey). By moving the bar to the left or right, participants could reduce or
one of the preregistered exclusion criteria (three participants rated >40% of the increase their bid, which was indicated to them by the amount displayed and the
food snacks as 0, and one chose the low-value target more often than the high- white filling of the bar. By pressing the left mouse button, they confirmed their
value). As in the original study, convenience sampling was used and most of the bids. The mouse cursor was displayed by the CrossHair setting of Psychotoolbox-3
participants were students of the University of Basel (87 in direct replication, 33 in and was enforced to staying within the bar. An intertrial interval (ITI) of 1 s
the eye-tracking experiment). Participants were not allowed to be on a diet or to separated trials (blank screen). In the choice task, the three options of a trial were
suffer from food allergies, food intolerances or mental illnesses, and they had to be presented along the horizontal midline from left to right. The mouse cursor was
willing to eat (in principle) all of these food types: chocolate, crisps, nuts, candy. initialized beneath the middle option. When moving the cursor over one of the
Participants with insufficient knowledge of the project language (German) were options, the option was highlighted by a surrounding white rectangle. The option
not invited. could then be chosen by pressing the left mouse button. Trials were separated with
a variable ITI between 1 and 1.5 s (in steps of 0.1 s).
Sample size determination. We adopted the Small Telescopes approach21 to Food snacks were products from local Swiss supermarkets. Selection of the
determine the sample size of the direct replication experiment. According to this food snacks for the two experiments was based on a pilot study with a different
method, the sample size of the replication study should be based on achieving pool of 21 participants that rated 60 food snacks with respect to liking, familiarity,
≥80% statistical power to find that—when assuming a true effect size of 0—the distinctiveness and category matching (details can be found in ref. 58). As in
effect size in the replication study is significantly lower than the (hypothetical) the original study, participants received a monetary reimbursement for their
effect size that would give the original study only 33% statistical power. Applying participation (CHF 20 per hour).
this rationale to the case of Louie et al.4, who tested 40 participants, and our
planned statistical tests (that is, paired or one-sample t-tests, effect size Cohen’s d) Experimental design of the eye-tracking experiment. The procedures of the
resulted in a suggested sample size of 103. eye-tracking experiment were largely identical to those of the direct replication.
The sample size of the eye-tracking experiment was based on a power Here, we describe only the differences between the two experiments. A higher
analysis that assumed a medium effect size of d = 0.5 for an effect of value-based number of snacks (45) was used to reduce the number of repetitions of options in
attention on relative choice accuracy (one-sided, one-sample t-tests, alpha consecutive choice trials. A higher number of decisions (300) was used to increase
error = 5%, power = 0.90). This analysis resulted in a suggested sample size of statistical power. The algorithm to create choice sets was adjusted accordingly
36 participants. Due to known incompatibility issues of eye-tracking devices, we (that is, 15 distractors × 5 target-value difference levels × 4 random draws of target
tested 45 participants and then checked whether ≥36 full datasets that also met the pairs per difference level). Instead of a BDM auction, participants rated their
behavioural inclusion criteria were collected. These procedures were described in subjective liking of each snack on a continuous bar (from ‘like not at all’ to ‘like
the preregistration protocol. very much’). The bar included red vertical lines at 20, 40, 60 and 80% of its size as
Nature HuMaN BeHaViour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NATure HumAN BeHAVIour
orientation. No monetary value was displayed. The mouse cursor for the rating priors for the standard deviations did not affect the results qualitatively). Priors
task was a yellow arrow. Importantly, the rating task was incentivized: participants for group-level standard deviations were truncated to be ≥0. Gibbs sampling as
were informed that if their reward at the end of the experiment was determined implemented in JAGS was performed within Matlab (function matjags.m) with
from the rating task, two rating trials would be selected randomly and they would 4 chains, 2,000 burn-in samples, 10,000 recorded samples and a thinning of 10.
receive the higher-rated snack. A grey background was used during the rating and Convergence was ensured by requiring R-hat values for all parameters to be <1.01.
choice tasks. ITI screens included a white fixation cross at the centre of the screen. The Bayes factor was determined using the Savage–Dickey density ratio test60.
Options in the choice task were presented in triangular orientation (lower left, Notably, the hierarchical Bayesian approach circumvents the disadvantages of
upper middle, lower right) so that the first fixation was not automatically on the both the fixed-effects approach (which led to spurious effects; see Supplementary
middle option. Choices were made not with the computer mouse but with the left, Information) and the random-effects approach (which could not be performed in
upper and right arrow keyboard buttons. When a decision was made, the chosen one participant; see above). Therefore, we performed the Bayesian analysis twice,
option was highlighted by a white frame for 0.5 s. The Matlab-based software with and without the excluded participant, and obtained the same Bayes factor of
package Cogent 2000 was used for stimulus presentation. A desktop computer with 241 in favour of the null hypothesis.
a 22-inch monitor was used and the display resolution was set to 1,280 × 1,024. Random-effects linear regression analyses were conducted to test influences
Participants were required to wait for 30 min in the laboratory after completing the of V1 – V2, V1 + V2 and V3 on RT in both experiments. RT beyond s.d. = 4 of the
computer tasks. During this time, they were asked to rate the snacks with respect group mean were excluded. Two-sided P-values are reported for these analyses.
to their distinctiveness and familiarity using the same rating scheme as for the
subject value ratings (for one participant, these ratings were not recorded due to a Preregistered data analyses of the eye-tracking experiment. Eye-tracking data
computer crash; because these ratings were not central to any of our analyses, we were preprocessed by recoding the raw gaze positions into events (fixations,
decided to include this participant). The 19 psychology students of the University saccades, blinks) in SMI’s BeGaze software package using the high-speed detection
of Basel that took part in the experiment could choose between money (CHF algorithm with default values. For one participant, recoding with BeGaze did not
20 per hour) or course credits as reimbursement. work properly and SMI’s Event Detection software was used instead. AOIs for
In addition to these changes, the task was adjusted for eye-tracking purposes. the left, middle and right options were defined such that fixations on the entire
Gaze positions were recorded using an SMI RED500 eye-tracking device with stimulus picture (including the black space around the snack) counted towards
500-Hz sampling rate. Eye movements were recorded only during the choice the respective option. The main dependent variables were relative gaze duration
task. Instructions of the choice task included information about the calibration (that is, the amount of time within a trial during which an option was looked at
procedures. The initial calibration was conducted before the first choice task. relative to the amount of time during which any option was looked at) and the
Between trials, participants were required to look at the fixation cross. If their gaze number of fixations.
stayed within an (invisible) area of interest (AOI) with a diameter of 205 pixels The behavioural data analyses matched those of the direct replication
around the fixation cross, a counter was initialized at 0 and increased by 1 every experiment. In addition, we tested for a mediation of the distractor effect by
10 ms until it reached 100, which started the next trial. If the gaze went beyond the value-based attention via a path analysis, in which relative choice accuracy was
AOI, the counter decreased by 1 every 10 ms. Thus, in the optimal case of purely regressed onto both V3 and relative gaze duration while relative gaze duration
within-AOI gazes, a trial was started after 1 s. This procedure ensured a high was also regressed onto V3. A random-effects approach was applied with the path
calibration quality throughout the experiment. If a choice trial could not be started analysis being performed within each participant and the resulting regression
within 10 s, the eye-tracker was recalibrated. If more than three re-calibrations coefficients being subjected to one-sample t-tests against 0 on the group level. To
within a single trial or more than five re-calibrations over ten consecutive trials test for early effects of value-based attention, a random-effects logistic regression
were required, the experiment was aborted. analysis was conducted regressing whether the first fixation was on the distractor
onto V3. Trials with only one fixation were excluded from this analysis. To test for
Preregistered data analyses of the direct replication experiment. The replicability late effects of value-based attention, a random-effects logistic regression analysis
of the distractor effect was assessed by two statistical tests: a comparison of relative was conducted regressing whether any fixation (except the last) was on the
choice accuracy between trials with high- versus low-value distractors and a distractor onto V3, the within-trial fixation number and the interaction between
logistic regression of relative choice accuracy with V3 (together with V1 and V2) V3 and fixation number. To avoid non-essential multicollinearity12,61, predictor
as predictor variable. These tests were also conducted by Louie and colleagues4, but variables were standardized before generating their interaction term. The critical
we modified the analyses in the following ways (modifications were preregistered). test is whether the interaction term is significantly positive, as this indicates a
The median-split between high- and low-value distractors was performed within stronger decline of attention on low- compared to high-value distractors. Trials
each participant to ensure equal trial numbers per level; the median-split was based in which the distractor was chosen were excluded from this analysis, to ensure
on V3 rather than normV3; similarly, normV3 was replaced by V3 in the logistic that the influence of V3 on looking at the distractor was not driven by the fact
regression; the regression was conducted within each participant and the resulting that high-value distractors are more likely to be chosen than low-value. Further
coefficients were tested against 0 (one-sample t-test). Our reasons for deviating note that this regression analysis requires a sufficient amount of fixations at each
from the original analyses were as follows. We replaced normV3 by V3, because fixation number, across trials. Therefore, we included only those fixation numbers
normV3 is confounded with the target-value difference V1 – V2 and thus with per participant for which we had ≥30 fixations (for example, if a participant had
the difficulty in choosing between the targets (detailed information is provided 32 fixations at fixation number 6 but only 25 fixations at fixation number 7, for that
in Supplementary Information). We replaced the fixed-effects by the random- participant we would analyse only up to the sixth fixation). This procedure was
effects analysis approach, because the latter allows a better generalization to the described in the preregistration protocol.
population59 and avoids spuriously significant effects (detailed information
is provided in Supplementary Information). Importantly, we also provide Additional data analyses of the eye-tracking experiment. As an additional test
additional analyses including analyses with normV3 and fixed-effects analyses for early effects of value-based attention, a repeated-measures analysis of variance
in Supplementary Information. None of these analyses provided evidence that (ANOVA) was conducted with option type (best, second-best, distractor) as
would support the normalization model. Data distribution was assumed to be factor and fixation probability as dependent variable. As an additional test for late
normal, but this was not formally tested. One-sided P-values are reported for effects of value-based attention, a repeated-measures ANOVA was conducted with
preregistered tests. option type and within-trial fixation number as factors and fixation probability as
As stated above, replication success was assessed based on the Small Telescopes dependent variable. Greenhouse–Geisser correction was used when assumptions
approach21. The effect size that would give the original study (with 40 participants) of sphericity were violated. To test for early and late effects of value-based attention
only 33% statistical power was d 33% = −0.25 for both tests. The critical effect size on the allocation of attention between target options, paired t-tests were performed
for the replication study (with 102 participants) at which replication failure would that compared the frequency of fixations on the best versus the second-best option,
be concluded (because the 90% CI of the replication effect size does not overlap separately for the first and for later fixations. To test for an influence of attention on
with d 33%) was d = −0.08. Notably, this is a more lenient criterion than inferring choice16,17, a random-effects logistic regression analysis was conducted with relative
replication success based on statistical significance in the replication study, which gaze duration towards an option and relative value of an option (that is, the value of
would have required d = −0.16. an option relative to the sum of values in the choice set) as predictor variables and
choice of an option as dependent variable. The critical test is whether the influence
Additional data analyses of the direct replication experiment. The Small of gaze is positive. The relative value predictor serves as a control variable. The last
Telescopes approach provides a systematic test of replication success within the fixation per trial was excluded from all these analyses.
realm of frequentist statistics without making (unjustified) inferences on the Statistical analyses were performed in Matlab (regression analyses) and R
basis of non-significant hypothesis tests21. In addition, we sought to quantify the (path analyses with the lavaan package, ANOVAs with the packages car and
evidence in favour of the null hypothesis of no distractor effect on relative choice heplots). Information about the reanalysis of the dataset of ref. 17 is provided in
accuracy, by repeating the logistic regression analysis with V1, V2 and V3 as Supplementary Information.
predictors in a hierarchical Bayesian framework. Individual regression coefficients
were assumed to be drawn from group-level normal distributions with means Computational modelling. Information on the model comparison between probit
μ(V i) and standard deviations σ(V i). Priors for group-level parameters were and divisive normalization, as well as on the extended aDDM, is provided in
normal distributions with means 0 and standard deviations 5 (choosing different Supplementary Information.
Nature HuMaN BeHaViour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NATure HumAN BeHAVIour Articles
Ethics statement. All participants gave written informed consent, and the study 26. Fontanesi, L., Gluth, S., Spektor, M. S. & Rieskamp, J. A reinforcement
was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Department of Psychology at the learning diffusion decision model for value-based decisions. Psychon. Bull.
University of Basel. All experiments were performed in accordance with the Rev. 26, 1099–1121 (2019).
relevant guidelines and regulations. 27. Pearson, D. et al. Value-modulated oculomotor capture by task-irrelevant
stimuli is a consequence of early competition on the saccade map. Atten.
Reporting summary. Further information on research design is available in the Percept. Psychophys. 78, 2226–2240 (2016).
Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article. 28. Shimojo, S., Simion, C., Shimojo, E. & Scheier, C. Gaze bias both reflects and
influences preference. Nat. Neurosci. 6, 1317–1322 (2003).
Data availability 29. Fiedler, S. & Glöckner, A. The dynamics of decision making in risky choice:
an eye-tracking analysis. Front. Psychol. 3, 335 (2012).
Data of all participants included in the final samples of the two experiments are
30. Cavanagh, J. F., Wiecki, T. V., Kochar, A. & Frank, M. J. Eye tracking and
publicly available on OSF (https://osf.io/qrv2e/).
pupillometry are indicators of dissociable latent decision processes. J. Exp.
Psychol. Gen. 143, 1476–1488 (2014).
Code availability
31. Stewart, N., Gächter, S., Noguchi, T. & Mullett, T. L. Eye movements in
Custom code that supports the findings of this study is publicly available on OSF strategic choice. J. Behav. Decis. Mak. 29, 137–156 (2016).
(https://osf.io/qrv2e/). 32. Thomas, A. W., Molter, F., Krajbich, I., Heekeren, H. R. & Mohr, P. N. C.
Gaze bias differences capture individual choice behaviour. Nat. Hum. Behav.
Received: 13 July 2019; Accepted: 7 January 2020; 3, 625–635 (2019).
Published: xx xx xxxx 33. Smith, S. M. & Krajbich, I. Gaze amplifies value in decision making.
Psychol. Sci. 30, 116–128 (2019).
34. Holper, L. et al. Adaptive value normalization in the prefrontal cortex is
references reduced by memory load. eneuro 4, ENEURO.0365-17.2017 (2017).
1. Glimcher, P. W. & Rustichini, A. Neuroeconomics: the consilience of brain 35. Padoa-Schioppa, C. Range-adapting representation of economic value in the
and decision. Science 306, 447–452 (2004). orbitofrontal cortex. J. Neurosci. 29, 14004–14014 (2009).
2. Carandini, M. & Heeger, D. J. Normalization as a canonical neural 36. Cox, K. M. & Kable, J. W. BOLD subjective value signals exhibit robust range
computation. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 13, 51–62 (2012). adaptation. J. Neurosci. 34, 16533–16543 (2014).
3. Louie, K., Grattan, L. E. & Glimcher, P. W. Reward value-based gain control: 37. Kobayashi, S., Pinto de Carvalho, O. & Schultz, W. Adaptation
divisive normalization in parietal cortex. J. Neurosci. 31, 10627–10639 (2011). of reward sensitivity in orbitofrontal neurons. J. Neurosci. 30,
4. Louie, K., Khaw, M. W. & Glimcher, P. W. Normalization is a general neural 534–544 (2010).
mechanism for context-dependent decision making. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 38. Furl, N. Facial-attractiveness choices are predicted by divisive normalization.
110, 6139–6144 (2013). Psychol. Sci. 27, 1379–1387 (2016).
5. Savage, L. J. The Foundations of Statistics (Wiley, 1954). 39. Rustichini, A., Conen, K. E., Cai, X. & Padoa-Schioppa, C. Optimal
6. Luce, R. D. Individual Choice Behavior: A Theoretical Analysis coding and neuronal adaptation in economic decisions. Nat. Commun. 8,
(Dover Publications, 1959). 1208 (2017).
7. Busemeyer, J. R., Gluth, S., Rieskamp, J. & Turner, B. M. Cognitive and neural 40. Chang, L. W., Gershman, S. J. & Cikara, M. Comparing value coding
bases of multi-attribute, multi-alternative, value-based decisions. Trends Cogn. models of context-dependence in social choice. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 85,
Sci. 23, 251–263 (2019). 103847 (2019).
8. Huber, J., Payne, J. W. & Puto, C. Adding asymmetrically dominated 41. Li, V., Michael, E., Balaguer, J., Herce Castañón, S. & Summerfield, C.
alternatives: violations of regularity and the similarity hypothesis. J. Consum. Gain control explains the effect of distraction in human perceptual,
Res. 9, 90–98 (1982). cognitive, and economic decision making. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 115,
9. Gluth, S., Hotaling, J. M. & Rieskamp, J. The attraction effect modulates E8825–E8834 (2018).
reward prediction errors and intertemporal choices. J. Neurosci. 37, 42. Tajima, S., Drugowitsch, J., Patel, N. & Pouget, A. Optimal policy for
371–382 (2017). multi-alternative decisions. Nat. Neurosci. 22, 1503–1511 (2019).
10. Munafò, M. R. et al. A manifesto for reproducible science. Nat. Hum. Behav. 43. Khaw, M. W., Glimcher, P. W. & Louie, K. Normalized value coding explains
1, 0021 (2017). dynamic adaptation in the human valuation process. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci.
11. Anderson, B. A., Laurent, P. A. & Yantis, S. Value-driven attentional capture. USA 114, 12696–12701 (2017).
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 108, 10367–10371 (2011). 44. Mohr, P. N. C., Heekeren, H. R. & Rieskamp, J. Attraction effect in risky
12. Gluth, S., Spektor, M. S. & Rieskamp, J. Value-based attentional capture choice can be explained by subjective distance between choice alternatives.
affects multi-alternative decision making. eLife 7, e39659 (2018). Sci. Rep. 7, 8942 (2017).
13. Tsetsos, K., Chater, N. & Usher, M. Salience driven value integration explains 45. Frederick, S., Lee, L. & Baskin, E. The limits of attraction. J. Mark. Res 51,
decision biases and preference reversal. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 109, 487–507 (2014).
9659–9664 (2012). 46. Spektor, M. S., Gluth, S., Fontanesi, L. & Rieskamp, J. How similarity between
14. Glickman, M., Tsetsos, K. & Usher, M. Attentional selection mediates framing choice options affects decisions from experience: the accentuation-of-differences
and risk-bias effects. Psychol. Sci. 29, 2010–2019 (2018). model. Psychol. Rev. 126, 52–88 (2019).
15. Usher, M., Tsetsos, K., Glickman, M. & Chater, N. Selective integration: an 47. Tusche, A. & Hutcherson, C. A. Cognitive regulation alters social and dietary
attentional theory of choice biases and adaptive choice. Curr. Dir. Psychol. Sci. choice by changing attribute representations in domain-general and
https://doi.org/10.1177/0963721419862277 (2019). domain-specific brain circuits. eLife 7, e31185 (2018).
16. Krajbich, I., Armel, C. & Rangel, A. Visual fixations and the computation and 48. Grueschow, M., Polania, R., Hare, T. A. & Ruff, C. C. Automatic versus
comparison of value in simple choice. Nat. Neurosci. 13, 1292–1298 (2010). choice-dependent value representations in the human brain. Neuron 85,
17. Krajbich, I. & Rangel, A. Multialternative drift-diffusion model predicts the 874–885 (2015).
relationship between visual fixations and choice in value-based decisions. 49. Ratcliff, R. & Rouder, J. N. Modeling response times for two-choice decisions.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 108, 13852–13857 (2011). Psychol. Sci. 9, 347–356 (1998).
18. Forstmann, B. U., Ratcliff, R. & Wagenmakers, E.-J. Sequential sampling 50. Mullett, T. L. & Stewart, N. Implications of visual attention phenomena for
models in cognitive neuroscience: advantages, applications, and extensions. models of preferential choice. Decision 3, 231–253 (2016).
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 67, 641–666 (2016). 51. Cavanagh, S. E., Malalasekera, W. M. N., Miranda, B., Hunt, L. T. &
19. Gold, J. I. & Shadlen, M. N. The neural basis of decision making. Annu. Rev. Kennerley, S. W. Visual fixation patterns during economic choice reflect
Neurosci. 30, 535–574 (2007). covert valuation processes that emerge with learning. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci.
20. Asendorpf, J. B. et al. Recommendations for increasing replicability in USA 116, 22795–22801 (2019).
psychology. Eur. J. Pers. 27, 108–119 (2013). 52. Callaway, F. & Griffiths, T. Attention in value-based choice as optimal sequential
21. Simonsohn, U. Small telescopes: detectability and the evaluation of replication sampling. Preprint at PsyArXiv https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/57v6k (2019).
results. Psychol. Sci. 26, 559–569 (2015). 53. Sims, C. A. Implications of rational inattention. J. Monet. Econ. 50,
22. Kass, R. E. & Raftery, A. E. Bayes factors. J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 90, 773–795 (1995). 665–690 (2003).
23. McFadden, D. Economic choices. Am. Econ. Rev. 91, 351–378 (2001). 54. Towal, R. B., Mormann, M. & Koch, C. Simultaneous modeling of visual
24. Polanía, R., Krajbich, I., Grueschow, M. & Ruff, C. C. Neural oscillations and saliency and value computation improves predictions of economic choice.
synchronization differentially support evidence accumulation in perceptual Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 110, E3858–E3867 (2013).
and value-based decision making. Neuron 82, 709–720 (2014). 55. Turner, B. M. et al. A Bayesian framework for simultaneously modeling
25. Palminteri, S., Khamassi, M., Joffily, M. & Coricelli, G. Contextual modulation neural and behavioral data. Neuroimage 72, 193–206 (2013).
of value signals in reward and punishment learning. Nat. Commun. 6, 56. Brandt, M. J. et al. The Replication Recipe: what makes for a convincing
8096 (2015). replication? J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 50, 217–224 (2014).
Nature HuMaN BeHaViour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NATure HumAN BeHAVIour
57. Becker, G. M., DeGroot, M. H. & Marschak, J. Measuring utility by a author contributions
single-response sequential method. Behav. Sci. 9, 226–232 (1964). All authors designed the study. N.K., M.K. and C.L.V. collected the data. All authors
58. Mechera-Ostrovsky, T. & Gluth, S. Memory beliefs drive the memory bias on analysed the data. S.G. wrote the manuscript. N.K., M.K. and C.L.V. revised the manuscript.
value-based decisions. Sci. Rep. 8, 10592 (2018).
59. Holmes, A. P. & Friston, K. J. Generalisability, random effects & population
Competing interests
inference. Neuroimage 7, S754 (1998).
60. Lee, M. D. & Wagenmakers, E.-J. Bayesian Cognitive Modeling: A Practical The authors declare no competing interests.
Course (Cambridge Univ. Press, 2013).
61. Aiken, L. S. & West, S. G. Multiple Regression: Testing and Interpreting
additional information
Interactions (SAGE, 1991).
Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41562-020-0822-0.
acknowledgements
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to S.G.
We thank K. Louie for providing us with materials from the original study and for
approving the preregistration protocol of the direct replication experiment. Further Peer review information Primary Handling Editor: Marike Schiffer
thanks go to I. Krajbich and A. Rangel for sharing their data and to I. Krajbich and Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
J. Rieskamp for comments on an earlier version of the manuscript. S.G. was supported
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
by a grant from the Swiss National Science Foundation (no. 100014_172761). The
published maps and institutional affiliations.
funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish or
preparation of the manuscript. © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2020
Nature HuMaN BeHaViour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
1
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Corresponding author(s): Sebastian Gluth
Last updated by author(s): Dec 6, 2019
Reporting Summary
Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency
in reporting. For further information on Nature Research policies, see Authors & Referees and the Editorial Policy Checklist.
Statistics
For all statistical analyses, confirm that the following items are present in the figure legend, table legend, main text, or Methods section.
n/a Confirmed
The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
A statement on whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided
Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.
A description of all covariates tested
A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
A full description of the statistical parameters including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient)
AND variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)
For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted
Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.
For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated
Our web collection on statistics for biologists contains articles on many of the points above.
Software and code
Policy information about availability of computer code
Data collection The computerized task were presented with Matlab (version R2016a) and its toolboxes Psychotoolbox-3 (replication experiment) and
Cogent 2000 (eye-tracking experiment). Eye-tracking data was recorded with an SMI RED500 eye tracker and the software iView X
(version 2.8).
Data analysis Behavioral data was analyzed with Matlab (version R2018a) and R (version 3.5.2). Eye-tracking data was preprocessed (i.e., recoded into
events such as saccades and fixations) with SMI's BeGaze software and further analyzed in R and Matlab.
For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors/reviewers.
We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Research guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.
Data
Policy information about availability of data
All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable:
- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets
- A list of figures that have associated raw data
- A description of any restrictions on data availability
Data of all participants included in the final samples of the two experiments are publicly available on OSF (https://osf.io/qrv2e/).
2
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Field-specific reporting
Please select the one below that is the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.
Life sciences Behavioural & social sciences Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences
For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/documents/nr-reporting-summary-flat.pdf
Behavioural & social sciences study design
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
Study description Quantitative research study with a within-subject design. There are two experiments, a direct replication experiment and an eye-tracking
experiment. Both experiments were preregistered at OSF (https://osf.io/qrv2e/registrations).
Research sample A total of 148 participants took part in the study, 103 in the direct replication experiment, 45 in the eye-tracking experiment. For
reasones outlined below, 1 participant in the direct replication had to be excluded, resulting in a final sample of 102 participants in this
experiment (72 female, age: 18-51, M = 24.78, SD = 6.37; four participants did not report their age), and 8 participants in the eye-tracking
experiment had to be excluded, resulting in a final sample of 37 participants in this experiment (26 female, age: 19-61, M = 27.63, SD =
11.14; one participant did not report their age). Representativeness of the sample was not ensured.
Sampling strategy Convenience sampling; most of the participants were students of the University of Basel (87 in direct replication, 33 in the eye-tracking
experiment). Sample sizes were determined based on a priori statistical power analyses. The power analysis for the direct replication
experiment was based on the "Small Telescopes" approach for replication studies (details are provided in the manuscript). The power
analysis for the eye-tracking experiment assumed a medium effect size of d = 0.5 for an effect of value-based attention on relative choice
accuracy (one-sided, one-sample t-tests, alpha error = 5%, power = .90).
Data collection Demographic data was collected with a pen-and-paper questionnaire. Behavioral data was collected with computerized tasks. Eye-
tracking data was collected in the second experiment. The experimenters were not blind to the hypotheses of the study.
Timing Experiment 1: Sept. - Nov. 2018; Experiment 2: March 2019
Data exclusions One participant was excluded in the direct replication experiment who did not bid any money in the auction task for more than 50% of
the snacks so that data analysis for this participant was made impossible. Eight participants were excluded in the eye-tracking experiment
for the following reasons: Four participants were excluded due to incompatibilities with the eye-tracking device; another four
participants were excluded for not passing one of the preregistered exclusion criteria (i.e., three participants rated more than 40% of the
food snacks with 0, one participant chose the low-value target more often than the high-value target).
Non-participation Apart from the above-mentioned four participants with eye-tracking incompatibility issues, no participant dropped out of the study.
Randomization Not applicable as the study used a within-subject design.
Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods
We require information from authors about some types of materials, experimental systems and methods used in many studies. Here, indicate whether each material,
system or method listed is relevant to your study. If you are not sure if a list item applies to your research, read the appropriate section before selecting a response.
Materials & experimental systems Methods
n/a Involved in the study n/a Involved in the study
Antibodies ChIP-seq
Eukaryotic cell lines Flow cytometry
Palaeontology MRI-based neuroimaging
Animals and other organisms
Human research participants
Clinical data
Human research participants
Policy information about studies involving human research participants
Population characteristics see above
Recruitment Participants were recruited via two online platforms used by the Decision Neuroscience team at the Department of Psychology
3
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Recruitment in Basel. One platform is mainly used by psychology students, the other platform is mainly used by non-psychology students at
the university.
Ethics oversight Ethics Committee of the Department of Psychology at the University of Basel
Note that full information on the approval of the study protocol must also be provided in the manuscript.