Articles
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-019-0637-z
Neurocomputational mechanisms underlying
motivated seeing
Yuan Chang Leong 1*, Brent L. Hughes2, Yiyu Wang3 and Jamil Zaki1
People tend to believe that their perceptions are veridical representations of the world, but also commonly report perceiving
what they want to see or hear. It remains unclear whether this reflects an actual change in what people perceive or merely a bias
in their responding. Here we manipulated the percept that participants wanted to see as they performed a visual categorization
task. Even though the reward-maximizing strategy was to perform the task accurately, the manipulation biased participants’
perceptual judgements. Motivation increased neural activity selective for the motivationally relevant category, indicating a bias
in participants’ neural representation of the presented image. Using a drift diffusion model, we decomposed motivated seeing
into response and perceptual components. Response bias was associated with anticipatory activity in the nucleus accumbens,
whereas perceptual bias tracked category-selective neural activity. Our results provide a computational description of how the
drive for reward leads to inaccurate representations of the world.
People tend to think of their perception as a veridical Neuroimaging offers a second, complementary approach for dis-
representation of the external world, but this view has long sociating response from perceptual biases. The neural mechanisms
been challenged by psychological research1,2. Instead, people underlying motivational effects on perceptual judgements are not
often report percepts that they are motivated to perceive, well understood, but separate literatures on the neuroscience of
a phenomenon we term motivated perception. In one classic motivation and perception suggest distinct neural processes that
example in the visual domain, Dartmouth and Princeton students could be related to different components of bias. In particular, both
watched the same football game. Fans of each team subsequently functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and electrophysiol-
reported seeing the other team commit more fouls3. Likewise, ogy studies have identified the nucleus accumbens (NAcc) as a key
participants presented with ambiguous line drawings were structure in mediating motivational processes10,11. One putative role
more likely to report seeing the interpretation associated with of the NAcc is that it biases response selection in favour of actions
desirable outcomes4. associated with higher reward12–14. Notably, greater NAcc activ-
One interpretation of these findings is that motivational factors, ity precedes approach behaviour to reward-predicting stimuli15,
such as desires and wants, exert top-down influence over perceptual whereas inactivating the NAcc reduces the preference for responses
processing, such that people become biased towards seeing what associated with larger rewards16. Thus, we predict that the NAcc
they want to see5. We refer to the bias in perceptual processing as would play a role in response biases by increasing the readiness to
a perceptual bias. Alternatively, these effects could instead reflect a make motivationally desirable judgements.
response bias: a bias not in what participants see, but merely in what Conversely, previous work suggests that perceptual judge-
they report seeing6,7. Although these two interpretations appear ments are determined by comparing the activity of neurons selec-
at odds with each other, they are not mutually exclusive; motiva- tive to different perceptual features17,18. For example, monkeys in a
tion could simultaneously bias both perception and responses. direction-of-motion task were more likely to categorize a cloud of
Computational models offer a promising analytical approach to dots as moving upward when activity was higher in sensory neu-
dissociate these two sources of bias and identify their independent rons preferring upward motion than in sensory neurons preferring
contributions to perceptual judgements. downward motion19. Similarly, Heekeren and colleagues demon-
Drift diffusion models (DDMs) assume that perceptual judge- strated in humans that perceptual judgements on a face/scene cat-
ments arise from the accumulation of noisy sensory evidence egorization task were computed by comparing activity in areas in
towards one of two decision thresholds8,9. When the level of evi- the ventral temporal cortex selective to each category20. Motivation
dence exceeds the threshold associated with a particular percept, could potentially bias this comparison process by driving attention
the corresponding response is made. Within this framework, a towards the features associated with a motivationally desirable per-
response bias can be modelled as a bias in the starting point of evi- cept21. This enhances the neural response to those features, thus giv-
dence accumulation. This reduces the amount of evidence needed ing rise to a perceptual bias.
to make a response, but assumes no effect on perceptual processing. The goal of the present study was twofold: (1) to decompose
Conversely, a perceptual bias can be modelled as a bias in the rate motivational influences on perceptual judgements into a response
of evidence accumulation. This in turn reflects sensory information bias and a perceptual bias, and (2) to examine the neurocomputa-
accumulating faster for one percept than for another, implying that tional mechanisms underlying motivational biases on perceptual
perceptual processes are biased towards seeing that percept. The judgements. To do this, we presented human participants visually
extent to which each bias influences behaviour can then be esti- ambiguous images created by morphing a face image and a scene
mated from empirical data. image together, and rewarded them for correctly categorizing
1Department of Psychology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA. 2Department of Psychology, University of California, Riverside, CA, USA.
3Department of Psychology, Northeastern University, Boston, MA, USA. *e-mail: ycleong@stanford.edu
Nature HumaN BeHaviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NatURE HUMaN BEHavIOUR
whether the face or scene was of higher intensity. We manipulated a Cooperation Competition
participants’ motivation by instructing them on each trial that they
would win or lose extra money if the upcoming stimulus was of a Waiting for Waiting for
particular category. Crucially, participants would gain or lose this 4 s teammate opponent
additional money based only on the actual category of the stimulus, Your teammate bets 40 Your opponent bets 40
not what they reported seeing. As such, even though participants c he an vets mth oa rt e t h e next image will c he an vets mth oa rt e t h e next image will
were motivated to see one category over the other, they would earn 4 s Face Scene
the most money on the task if they reported the stimulus category
Time
accurately.
We estimated the magnitude of response and perceptual biases 2 s
exhibited by our participants by fitting a DDM to choice and reac- Face How confident were you? Face How confident were you?
tion time data. Using fMRI, we searched for distinct neural pro-
1 2 3 4 5 1 2 3 4 5
cesses associated with each bias. Furthermore, as the perception of 2–4 s
faces and scenes is associated with distinct patterns of activity in the
ventral occipito-temporal cortex20,22,23, we used multivoxel pattern
analysis to measure the level of face-selective and scene-selective
b Teammate’s bet Opponent’s bet
activity as a correlate of perception. If the motivation to see one
e lc aga tt o ee r sg y po , er ity
r c
wi en poc u tr ule d aa
l
s p pe r rs o
o
vt ch i ede se sl ie a nv d ge d .l i Bo ti yf o n cn oe a mu l r e ba v il i
n
da iec nnt gi cv tei ht ty eh ns ae etl ue m rc aoti ltv i me v a ef to ai sor
u
nt rh ema st o
w
c d ia u tt h- - Corr +ec 4t 0 cents Classification–40 ceW nr to sng Corr –ec 4t 0 cents Classification+ 4 0 c eW nr to sn g
c ao ccm op uu nt ta oti fo mna ol t ivm ao tid oe nl ali ln ig n, f lo uu enr ca ep s p or no a pc eh rc ep pr to uv ai ld je us d ga e mm ee nch tsa .nistic Corr +e 1ct 0 cents 0 ce ntW sro n g Corr +ec 1t 0 cents 0 ce ntW sro n g Corr +e 1ct 0 cents 0 ce ntW sro n g Corr +ec 1t 0 cents 0 ce ntW sro n g
results +50 cents+40 cents –30 cents–40 cents –30 cents–40 cents +50 cents+40 cents
Thirty participants were scanned using fMRI while they performed
Fig. 1 | experimental design. a, Participants were presented with composite
a categorization task with visually ambiguous images comprising a
face–scene images. In the cooperation condition, a teammate first makes
mixture of a face and a scene (Fig. 1a). For each image, participants
a bet on whether the face or scene will be of higher intensity (that is, more
were rewarded for correctly indicating which category was of higher
face or more scene). Participants are then presented with the composite
intensity (that is, ‘more face’ or ‘more scene’). To motivate partici-
image and have to categorize whether it comprises mostly face or mostly
pants to see one category over another, we informed them that they
scene. They then rated how confident they were in their categorization.
would be performing the task with a teammate or an opponent. This
In the competition condition, an opponent makes the bet instead. Face
other ‘player’ would bet on whether the upcoming image would be
images were adapted with permission from ref. 55, Springer US; images
an image with more face or more scene. Participants were told that
licensed by CC BY 4.0. b, Payoff structure. Participants won an extra 40 cents
neither the teammate nor opponent had seen the upcoming image
if the teammate’s bet was correct, but lost 40 cents if the teammate’s
and their bets provided no informational value. Participants won a
bet was wrong. Conversely, they lost 40 cents if the opponent’s bet was
monetary bonus if the teammate’s bet was correct, and lost money if
correct, but won 40 cents if the opponent’s bet was wrong. Participants
the teammate’s bet was wrong (cooperation condition). By contrast,
earned 10 cents for each correct categorization. As the outcome of the bets
participants lost money if the opponent’s bet was correct, and won
was determined by the objective face-to-scene ratio of the presented image
a bonus if the opponent’s bet was wrong (competition condition).
and not by participants’ subjective categorizations, the reward maximizing
The competition condition allowed us to assess the effect of motiva-
strategy was to ignore the bets and perform the categorizations accurately.
tion above and beyond that of semantic priming due to having seen
the words ‘face’ and ‘scene’. Crucially, the outcome of the teammate’s
and opponent’s bets were determined by the objective face/scene
proportion of the presented image, and not by participants’ subjec- The bias in participants’ perceptual judgements could also be
tive categorizations. To earn the most money, participants should due to semantic priming. For example, when the teammate bet that
ignore the bets and make their categorizations accurately (Fig. 1b). the upcoming image would have more face, participants might be
Additional details on participants’ demographics and the experi- more likely to report seeing more face because they were semanti-
mental task are reported in the Methods section: see ‘Participants’ cally primed by having just seen the word ‘face’, and not because
and ‘Experimental task’, respectively. they were motivated to see more face. The competition condition
allows us to directly test this competing account.
Motivation biases visual categorization. For each condition, we In the competition condition, participants were motivated to
estimated the psychometric function describing the relationship see the category that was inconsistent with the opponent’s bet. For
between participants’ categorizations and the relative proportions example, if the opponent bet that the upcoming image would have
of face and scene in an image. Not surprisingly, as the propor- more scene, participants would be motivated to see more face. If
tion of scene in an image increases, participants were more likely the bias in participants’ judgements resulted from semantic prim-
to categorize the image as having more scene (generalized linear ing, participants would instead be more likely to report seeing the
mixed-effects model (GLME): z = 16.9, P < 0.001, b = 2.19, 95% category consistent with the opponent’s bet. Consistent with a moti-
CI = 1.93–2.44). vational account, participants were less likely to categorize an image
To examine the effect of motivation, we estimated separate as having more scene when the opponent bet scene than when the
psychometric functions depending on the teammate’s or oppo- opponent bet face (GLME: z = −4.11, P = 0.012, b = −0.47, 95%
nent’s bet (Fig. 2a). In the cooperation condition, participants CI = −0.69 to −0.24). These results also highlight the flexible nature
were more likely to report seeing more scene when the teammate of the motivational bias, as participants were able to remap the rela-
bet on scene than when the teammate bet on face (GLME: z = 2.52, tionship between the word presented to them and the percept they
P = 0.012, b = 0.33, 95% CI = 0.07–0.59); that is, participants were were motivated to see based on the experimental context.
more likely to report seeing the category that the bet motivated To quantify the magnitude of motivational bias across the
them to see. two conditions, we computed the condition × bet interaction on
Nature HumaN BeHaviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NatURE HUMaN BEHavIOUR Articles
a Cooperation Competition
1.00 Bet scene
Bet face
0.75
b c
participants’ categorizations. This interaction was significant (GLME: process is determined by a free parameter, z, and the decision
z = 3.35, P < 0.001, b = 0.81, 95% CI = 0.34–1.28), such that par- threshold is determined by a free parameter, a. The rate of evidence
ticipants were more likely to make categorizations consistent with accumulation is determined by the drift rate, v, which depends
the teammate’s bet and inconsistent with the opponent’s bet. Taken on the sensory information on each trial. In the case of our task,
together, these results indicate that participants’ categorizations an image with a high scene proportion would be associated with
were biased by what they were motivated to see. a highly positive v, whereas an image with a high face proportion
We estimated each participant’s motivational bias as the individ- would be associated with a highly negative v. When the accumula-
ual effect of the condition × bet interaction. Although the majority tion process reaches one of the two thresholds (the top threshold
of participants exhibited motivational bias, the degree of bias var- for scene and the bottom threshold for face), a response is initiated.
ied across individuals (Fig. 2b). Participants who exhibited stronger From a DDM perspective, our participants’ motivational bias
motivational bias made fewer correct categorizations, indicating could reflect either or both of two mechanisms (Fig. 3a). First, a
that the motivational bias impaired performance on the task and led shift in the starting point, z, could result in an a priori bias to make
to decreased earnings (Pearson’s r = −0.49, P = 0.006; robust regres- motivationally consistent judgements. In particular, shifting the
sion: F = 10.5, P = 0.010, b = −0.31, 95% CI = −0.49 to −0.12; starting point towards the decision threshold of the motivationally
(1,28)
Fig. 2c). Additional analyses suggest that the performance impair- consistent category reduces the amount of evidence needed to make
ment was not due to general differences in attention or perceptual the motivationally consistent response, thus creating a response
sensitivity, but rather because some participants were more affected bias. Second, a bias in the drift rate, v, could favour evidence accu-
by the motivation manipulation than others (Supplementary Notes 1 mulation in favour of the motivationally consistent category. This
and 2 and Supplementary Fig. 1). All behavioural findings were rep- results in sensory evidence accumulating faster for the motivation-
licated in a separate group of 28 participants who performed the ally consistent category, thus creating a perceptual bias. Both biases
task without undergoing fMRI (Supplementary Fig. 2). increase the proportion of motivationally consistent judgements,
but have distinguishable effects on the shape of reaction time distri-
Motivation biases both starting point and drift rate. Having estab- butions9,24 (Supplementary Fig. 3).
lished that participants’ categorizations were biased by what they To examine whether either or both of these processes explained
wanted to see, we proceeded to examine how motivation biased the the bias observed in our task, we fit three different DDMs to par-
decision process. To this end, we fit a DDM to participants’ choice ticipants’ data25 (see ‘DDM’ in Methods): (1) a model in which
and reaction time data. The DDM is a model of the cognitive pro- motivation biases the starting point (z model), (2) a model in which
cesses involved in two-choice decisions9, and assumes that choice motivation biases the drift rate (v model), (3) and a model in which
results from the accumulation of noisy sensory evidence towards one motivation biases both the starting point and drift rate (z & v model).
of two decision thresholds. The starting point of the accumulation For comparison, we also fit an unbiased model in which neither
)enecs
dnopser(P
saib
lanoitavitoM
0.50
0.25
0
0 25 50 75 100 0
Scene (%)
12
4
11
2
10
r = –0.49, P = 0.006
0 y = –0.31x + 11.29
F(1, 28) = 10.5, P = 0.010
0
–1 0 1 2 3 4
Motivational bias
)$(
sgninraE
Bet × condition interaction
P < 0.001
25 50 75 100
Participant
Fig. 2 | motivation biases visual categorization. All panels include data from 30 participants. a, Participants were more likely to categorize the ambiguous
image as what they wanted to see. In the cooperation condition, participants’ psychometric function was shifted left when the teammate bet on more
scene relative to when the teammate bet on more face, indicating that less scene evidence was needed to categorize an image as having more scene. In
the competition condition, participants’ psychometric function was shifted right when the opponent bet on more scene relative to when the opponent bet
on more face, indicating that more scene evidence was needed to categorize an image as having more scene. Statistical significance was assessed using
GLME (see ‘Psychometric functions’ in Methods). Error bars indicate s.e.m. b, The magnitude of bias in each participant, defined as the individual effect
of the bet × condition interaction. Higher values indicate stronger bias. c, Participants with greater motivational bias performed worse on the task and
received lower earnings. See Supplementary Fig. 2 for replication with an independent group of participants.
Nature HumaN BeHaviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NatURE HUMaN BEHavIOUR
t participants’ data (DIC: z & v: 12,535; z: 12,619; v: 12,546, null:
1
a Scene 12,735; Fig. 3b), suggesting that motivation biased both the start-
ing point and the drift rate of evidence accumulation. The best-fit
v
values and summary statistics of all model parameters are reported
in Supplementary Table 1.
z Time Next, we examined how the starting point and the drift rate were
affected by motivation. We extracted the posterior distribution
of the starting point bias estimated by the z & v model (Fig. 3c).
Mot
t
0
MotS Fac ce ene
RT
P sto as ri tt ii nv ge pva ol iu ne
t
s
i
si n bd iaic sa et de ta
o
wpo as rdit siv te
h
m
e
so ct eiv na et i to hn ra el
s
hb oia lds, wsu hc eh
n
t ph aa rt
t
it ch ie
-
Face pants were motivated to see more scene, and biased towards the
Stimulus on Response
face threshold when participants were motivated to see more face.
If more than 95% of the posterior distribution were to be greater
1.00 than 0, we consider it to be strong evidence that the estimate was
12,700
positive; 96.8% of the posterior distribution of the starting point bias
0.75
was greater than 0 (P(z 0) = 0.968, mean = 0.051, 95% credible 12,600 0.50 97% interval = −0.003 to 0.10b 5ia )s ,> indicating strong evidence that motiva-
tion biased the starting point of evidence accumulation towards the
0.25
12,500 threshold of the motivationally consistent category.
0 Similarly, there was strong evidence that the bias in the drift rate
0
z & v z v Null 0 0.1 0.2 was greater than 0 (P(v > 0 = 0.991, mean = 0.092, 95% credible
bias
Model Z interval = 0.015–0.168; Fig. 3d), indicating that evidence accumula-
bias
tion was biased towards the face category when participants were
motivated to see more face, and towards the scene category when
participants were motivated to see more scene. Taken together, the
modelling results suggest that motivation biased perceptual judge-
99% ments by increasing the predisposition to respond in a motivation-
ally consistent manner, as well as by biasing sensory processing in
favour of the motivationally consistent category.
DDM accounts for asymmetries in reaction time. Participants
0 0.1 0.2
were faster at making categorizations that were consistent with their
V
bias motivations (linear mixed-effects model (LME): two-tailed, one-
sampled t = −2.80, P = 0.009, b = −0.05, 95% CI = −0.98 to −0.02).
(28)
In particular, participants were faster to categorize an image as a face
when motivated to see more face (LME: two-tailed, one-sampled
t = −3.12, P = 0.004, b = -0.07, 95% CI = −0.11 to −0.02), and faster
(28)
to categorize an image as a scene when motivated to see more scene
(LME: two-tailed, one-sampled t = −2.11, P = 0.04, b = −0.04, 95%
(28)
CI = −0.09 to −0.01; Fig. 4a). We examined whether the z & v model
would account for this feature of the data. We simulated choice and
reaction time data using the z & v model (see ‘Model simulations’ in
Methods), and showed that the simulated data reproduced the pat-
tern of reaction times where motivationally consistent responses were
faster than motivationally inconsistent responses (LME: two-tailed,
one-sampled t = −3.65, P = 0.001, b = −0.04, 95% CI = −0.06 to
(28)
−0.02; Fig. 4b). This was true for both face responses (LME: two-
tailed, one-sampled t = −3.79, P < 0.001, b = −0.05, 95% CI = −0.07
(28)
to −0.02) and scene responses (LME: two-tailed, one-sampled
t = −2.86, P = 0.007, b = −0.03, 95% CI = −0.06 to −0.01). The
(29)
model simulations also predict a non-monotonic relationship between
mean reaction time and percentage scene, with a turning point at
the starting point nor the drift rate was biased by motivation (null 50% scene. This pattern was not observed in the data (Fig. 4a,b).
model). As the pattern of reaction times was comparable across the At present, it is unclear whether this reflects a deviation from the
cooperation and competition conditions (Supplementary Fig. 4), all model or an unreliable estimate from the data. As our experiment
models were fit to data pooled over both conditions to take advan- did not sufficiently and evenly sample the space of percentage scene
tage of the larger number of trials for more reliable estimates. to accurately estimate the relationship between percentage scene and
We compared the model fits based on the deviance informa- mean reaction times, we do not explore this further.
tion criterion26 (DIC; a common metric of model comparison for We compared the model simulations from the z & v model
hierarchical models that penalizes for model complexity, with lower to that of the other models, and show that the z & v model pro-
values indicating better fit). To verify that DIC is an accurate met- vides a closer match to the empirical data than the other models
ric for model comparison, we fit the models to simulated data and (Supplementary Fig. 6 and Supplementary Note 4). Finally, we show
demonstrated that DIC reliably identifies the true model used to that the model simulations from the z & v model reproduced each
generate each dataset (Supplementary Note 3 and Supplementary participant’s choice and reaction time distributions (Supplementary
Fig. 5). When the models were fit to experimental data, DIC iden- Fig. 7). Altogether, these results indicate that model fits of the z & v
tified the z & v model as the model that provided the best fit to model align well with participants’ data.
CID ytisneD
1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0
ytisneD
a
b c
d
Fig. 3 | modeling results. a, Schematic diagram of the DDM. On each trial,
choice depends on the accumulation of noisy sensory evidence towards
one of two decision thresholds. Motivation biases categorizations by
modulating both the starting point and the drift rate. t and t refer to the
0 1
non-decision time related to stimulus encoding and response execution,
respectively. a, decision threshold; z, starting point; v, drift rate; purple line,
decision variable (i.e., accumulated evidence); solid black line, average drift;
Mot , motivated to see more face; Mot , motivated to see more scene;
Face Scene
RT, reaction time. b, The z & v model has the lowest DIC score, indicating
that it provides the best fit to participants’ data. See Supplementary Table 1
for best-fit values and summary statistics of all model parameters.
c, Posterior distribution of the starting point bias (z ). The dashed line
bias
indicates 0 (no bias). More than 95% of the distribution was greater
than 0, indicating strong evidence of a starting point bias. d, Posterior
distribution of the drift bias (v ). More than 95% of the distribution was
bias
greater than 0, indicating strong evidence of a drift bias.
Nature HumaN BeHaviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NatURE HUMaN BEHavIOUR Articles
We then examined whether the NAcc response would be associ- Face Scene
2.5 ated with either participants’ response bias, their perceptual bias or
both biases.
2.0 For each participant, we computed response bias as the posterior
mean estimate of that participant’s starting point bias (z ; Fig. 3c),
1.5 bias
and perceptual bias as the posterior mean estimate of their drift bias
(v ; Fig. 3d). Estimates of the two biases were not significantly cor-
1.0 Mot Scene bias
Mot Face related (Pearson r = 0.290, P = 0.120; robust regression: F (1,28) = 1.58,
0 P = 0.219, b = 0.58, 95% CI = −0.33 to 1.49). When both biases were
0 25 50 75 100 0 25 50 75 100
entered as predictors in the same linear regression model, partici-
Scene (%)
pants’ response bias was associated with the NAcc response (linear
2.5 regression: two-tailed, one-sampled t (27) = 2.71, P = 0.012, β z = 0.47,
95% CI = 0.12–0.83), but their perceptual bias was not (linear
2.0 regression: two-tailed, one-sampled t = 0.37, P = 0.711, β = 0.07,
(27) v
95% CI = −0.29 to 0.42; Fig. 6a).
1.5 NAcc activity can lead to a response bias by increasing the
readiness to make a particular response. This account would pre-
1.0 Mot Scene dict that the increase in NAcc activity was preparatory in nature
Mot
Face
0 and would precede the onset of the image. To test this hypothesis,
0 25 50 75 100 0 25 50 75 100 we examined the average activity in the NAcc as a trial unfolded,
Scene (%)
separately for trials on which participants made motivationally con-
sistent categorizations (motivation consistent trials) and for trials
on which participants made motivationally inconsistent categori-
zations (motivation inconsistent trials). Consistent with a prepara-
tory account, NAcc activity was significantly higher on motivation
consistent trials prior to the image appearing on the screen and
remained significantly higher until image offset (Fig. 6b,c and
Supplementary Table 2).
Notably, the results also provide evidence against the alternative
account that NAcc activation reflects the reward participants’ expe-
rience on seeing the category that they were motivated to see, as
the increase in NAcc activity occurred before participants saw the
image. Instead, the results suggest that NAcc activity predisposes
participants to categorize an image as the category that they were
motivated to see, and sustained NAcc activation increases the likeli-
hood of making motivationally consistent responses.
One implication of these results is that trial-by-trial NAcc activity
might be related to trial-by-trial variability in the starting point,
Motivationally consistent categorizations are associated with such that the starting point is more biased towards the motiva-
activity in the salience network and dorsal attention network. tionally consistent category when NAcc activity is higher. As we
To identify the brain areas associated with motivational biases in did not explicitly model the trial-by-trial variability in the model
perceptual judgements, we first performed a whole-brain contrast parameters, we cannot test this hypothesis in the current study. We
to identify voxels that responded differently on trials on which opted not to model the trial-by-trial variability in model parameters
participants categorized an image as the category that they were because doing so can compromise the reliability and accuracy of the
motivated to see (motivation consistent trials) than on trials on estimates of the individual parameters, especially when the number
which they categorized an image as the category that they were of trials per participant is small27. Nevertheless, we believe that this
motivated to not see (motivation inconsistent trials). This con- is an interesting question that warrants further investigation in a
trast revealed activations in two networks of brain regions: (1) the future study with a larger dataset.
salience network, which includes the NAcc, the insula, the dorsal
anterior cingulate (dACC), and (2) the dorsal attention network, Face-selective and scene-selective neural activity is associated
including the intraparietal sulcus (IPS) and frontal eye fields with perceptual bias. Face-selective and scene-selective activ-
(FEFs) (Fig. 5). ity in the ventral occipito-temporal cortex provides a proxy mea-
sure of participants’ perception. Thus, we examined whether
NAcc activation is associated with response bias. The NAcc is motivation affected perception by assessing whether the motivation
thought to be crucial in mediating the effects of motivation on to see faces or scenes modulated this activity. We applied multivari-
actions and has been previously implicated in biasing responses ate pattern analysis to the blood-oxygen-level-dependent (BOLD)
towards actions associated with larger rewards12–14. Thus, we pre- data to quantify the level of face-selective and scene-selective
dicted that the NAcc would be associated with the response bias activity on each trial. Specifically, we trained a logistic regression
when making motivated perceptual judgements. We defined a classifier to estimate the probability that participants were seeing
NAcc region of interest (ROI) using the Harvard–Oxford Cortical a scene rather than a face based on the pattern of activity in the
Structural Atlas, and computed the NAcc response of each partici- ventral occipito-temporal cortex (see ‘Multivoxel pattern analyses’
pant as the average z-statistic of the motivation consistent > moti- in Methods).
vation inconsistent contrast in the ROI (Fig. 5). This value reflects As the proportion of scene in an image increased, the classifier
the extent to which the NAcc of a particular participant was more predicted that the participants were seeing a scene with higher prob-
active when they made motivationally consistent categorizations ability, indicating that the classifier tracked the amount of scene in
than when they made motivationally inconsistent categorizations. the presented image (LME: two-tailed, one-sampled t = 25.8,
(4,756)
)s(
TR
)s(
TR
a
b
Fig. 4 | DDm accounts for asymmetries in reaction times. a, Reaction
times for face (left) and scene (right) responses at each percentage scene,
separately for when participants were motivated to see faces and scenes.
Participants were faster to categorize an image as the category that they
were motivated to see. Trial types with fewer than 48 trials (that is, 1% of
the total number of trials) were excluded from the plot because there were
too few trials for reliable estimates and they tend to come from a small
number of participants. Error bars indicate between-subjects s.e.m.
b, Model-predicted reaction times. Reaction times were simulated using the
z & v model with parameter values sampled from the posterior distribution.
Five hundred datasets were simulated, each with the same number of
participants and trials as the original data in a. Reaction times were first
averaged over simulations to obtain an average reaction time for each trial
type for each participant, and then averaged over participants to obtain the
mean reaction time for each type. Error bars denote between-subjects s.e.m.
Nature HumaN BeHaviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NatURE HUMaN BEHavIOUR
Motivation consistent > motivation inconsistent
FEF
dACC IPS
R L P A P A
NAcc
NAcc Insula
TFCE-corrected
P < 0.05
y = 6 x = –6 x = –22
NAcc ROI
Salience network Dorsal attention network
Fig. 5 | Neural correlates of motivational bias. Activity in the salience network and the dorsal attention network was higher when participants made
motivationally consistent categorizations than when participants made motivationally inconsistent categorizations. Correction for multiple comparisons
was performed using threshold-free cluster enhancement (TFCE) with an alpha level of 0.05 (ref. 62). The NAcc ROI was defined using the Harvard–Oxford
Cortical Structural Atlas. A, anterior; L, left; P, posterior; R, right.
~
NAcc response 0.2 0.2 MotCon – MotIncon
0.75 βz z bias + βvv bias + β0 + ε
* T/O * * *
makes bet Image Image * * *
0.50 0.1 onset offset 0.1
0.25
0 0
Waiting for
0 T/O
MotCon
–0.1 MotIncon –0.1
–0.25
–8 –6 –4 –2 0 2 4 6 8 –8 –6 –4 –2 0 2 4 6 8
Time (s) Time (s)
P < 0.001, b = 0.12, 95% CI = 0.11–0.13). There was a significant to 0.050; interaction by group: two-tailed, one-sampled t = 2.14,
(4,752)
bet × condition interaction on classifier probability, such that P = 0.033, b = 0.08, 95% CI = 0.02–0.14; Fig. 7a).
the classifier was more likely to predict that participants were We then extracted each participant’s individual effect of the
seeing a scene when they were motivated to see a scene than bet × condition interaction on classifier probability to obtain a mea-
when they were motivated to see a face (LME: two-tailed, one- sure of the extent to which motivation biased face-selective and
sampled t = 2.05, P = 0.040, b = 0.038, 95% CI = 0.002–0.075; scene-selective activity in the participant. The bias in participant’s
(4,756)
Supplementary Fig. 8), indicating that the motivation to see a cat- face-selective and scene-selective activity correlated strongly with
egory increased the level of sensory evidence for that category in their behavioural bias (Pearson r = 0.69, P < 0.001; robust regres-
the visual pathway. In other words, motivation not only biased par- sion: F = 15.1, P < 0.001, b = 6.94, 95% CI = 3.73–10.15; Fig. 7b),
(1,28)
ticipants’ categorization of an image but it also biased their neural indicating that participants who were more biased in their categori-
representation of the image. zations were also more biased in their neural representation of the
Next, we examined how the bias in category-selective activity presented image.
relates to the bias in participants’ categorical judgements (that is, We then sought to relate the bias in face-selective and scene-
the motivational effect on a participant’s psychometric function). selective activity to response and perceptual biases more spe-
There was a significant triple interaction between behavioural bias, cifically. When model estimates of the two biases were entered
condition and bet on the level of category-selective activity (LME: as predictors in the same linear regression model, participants’
two-tailed, one-sampled t = 3.37, P = 0.001, b = 0.06, 95% perceptual bias was associated with the bias in face-selective and
(4,752)
CI = 0.02–0.09). To better interpret the directionality of the interac- scene-selective neural activity (linear regression: two-tailed, one-
tion, we performed a median split to divide participants into those sampled t = 3.12, P = 0.004, β = 0.49, 95% CI = 0.17–0.82), but
(27) v
with higher behavioural bias and those with lower behavioural bias. their response bias was not (linear regression: two-tailed, one-sam-
Motivation biased the classifier probability of high-bias participants pled t = 1.63, P = 0.115, β = 0.26, 95% CI = −0.07 to 0.58; Fig. 7c).
(27) z
(LME: two-tailed, one-sampled t = 2.96, P = 0.003, b = 0.07, 95% Together with our earlier analyses on NAcc activity, these results
(2,378)
CI = 0.03–0.13), but not of low-bias participants (LME: two-tailed, suggest distinct neural contributions to participants’ biased catego-
one-sampled t = −0.06, P = 0.953, b = −0.002, 95% CI = −0.053 rizations. While the NAcc was associated with a response bias, the
(2,373)
etamitsE
ytivitca
ccAN
ecnereffiD
a b c
βz βv
Fig. 6 | Nacc activation is associated with response bias. a, Linear regression predicting participants’ NAcc response from their starting point bias (z )
bias
and drift bias (v ). The regression coefficient for z was significant, but that for v was not. Error bars indicate s.e. b, NAcc time course time-locked to
bias bias bias
image onset, corrected for haemodynamic lag by shifting the BOLD data by 4 s. The trial starts with the ‘waiting for teammate or opponent (T/O)’ screen
at −6 s. The teammate or opponent makes a bet at −4 s, which remains on the screen for 4 s. The image is presented at 0 s and stays on the screen for 4 s.
NAcc activity was significantly higher on motivation-consistent trials (MotCon) than on motivation-inconsistent trials (MotIncon) from 2 s before image
onset until image offset. c, Difference in activity between motivation-consistent and motivation-inconsistent trials peaked before image offset. Two-tailed,
one-sampled t-tests, *P < 0.05; the full statistics are reported in Supplementary Table 2. Error bars indicate between-subjects s.e.m.
Nature HumaN BeHaviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NatURE HUMaN BEHavIOUR Articles
1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
modulation of face-selective and scene-selective activity in visual The claim that perceptual processes are influenced by motivational
areas was associated with a perceptual bias. By combining computa- factors can be traced back to the ‘New Look’ movement in psychol-
tional modelling with neuroimaging, we identified two dissociable ogy, which argued that the perception of external stimuli is subject
neurocomputational components underlying motivational biases in to the constant influence of a perceiver’s internal goals and states28,29.
perceptual judgements. Recent evidence supporting this view includes studies demonstrating
that perceptually ambiguous stimuli are more likely to be seen as the
Discussion percept associated with favourable outcomes4,30, desirable objects are
This study combines computational modelling of behaviour and judged nearer than undesirable objects31, and desirable food items are
fMRI to examine whether and why people exhibit biases towards judged as larger by dieters than non-dieters32. Whether these results
seeing what they want to see. We developed a behavioural paradigm reflect a bias in subjective reports or a bias in perception remains a
that allowed us to find that people indeed make biased perceptual topic of intense debate (see the open peer commentary for ref. 7). In
judgements, more often labelling ambiguous images as correspond- particular, as these studies rely primarily on subjective reports, and
ing to a reward-associated category. This is true even though par- participants often have an incentive to report seeing what they want
ticipants were incentivized to accurately report their perceptual to see, there is reason to suspect that subjective reports might not
experience, and thus earned less money in the experiment when reflect one’s underlying perceptual experience.
making biased judgements. Evidence from computational model- Our work builds on earlier efforts to understand motivated per-
ling suggests that motivational effects on perceptual judgements ception using computational models. An earlier study33 similarly
could be attributed to both a response bias and a bias in perceptual decomposed motivational biases into response and perceptual
processing. While the response bias was associated with anticipa- components by mapping them respectively onto biases in the
tory activity in the NAcc, the bias in perceptual processing was starting point and drift rate of a DDM. However, there are non-per-
associated with the modulation of category-selective neural activity ceptual explanations for a bias in drift rate. For example, a response
in the ventral visual stream. These results provide converging evi- bias that becomes stronger over the course of a trial (that is, a
dence for two distinct contributions to motivational influences on dynamic response bias) could also result in a biased drift rate34,35.
perceptual judgements and shed light on the neurocomputational As such, a bias in the drift rate alone is insufficient evidence of a bias
mechanisms underlying each bias. in perception.
)enecs(
ytilibaborp
reifissalC
saib
lanoitavitoM etamitsE
Neural bias ~ βz z bias + βv v bias + β0 + ε
Neural bias
)enecs(
ytilibaborp
reifissalC
a
Cooperation Competition Cooperation Competition
1.00
Bet scene
Bet face
0.75
0.50
0.25
Bet × condition interaction Bet × condition interaction
0 P = 0.003 0 P = 0.953
0 25 50 75 100 0 25 50 75 100 0 25 50 75 100 0 25 50 75 100
Scene (%) Scene (%)
b c
r = 0.69 0.75
P < 0.001 **
4
0.50
2
0.25
0 0
–0.25
–0.2 0 0.2 βz βv
Fig. 7 | motivation biases face-selective and scene-selective neural activity during visual categorization. a, Classifier probability that the presented
image was a scene rather than a face, based on the BOLD response in the ventral visual stream, separately for participants with high (left) and low (right)
behavioural bias. For high-bias participants, the scene probability was higher when participants were motivated to see a scene (that is, a teammate bets
scene or an opponent bets face) than when participants were motivated to see a face (that is, a teammate bets face or an opponent bets scene). There was
no effect of motivation in low-bias participants. Error bars denote between-subjects s.e.m. b, The effect of motivation on classifier probability (neural bias)
was correlated with the extent to which a participant was biased in their categorizations (motivational bias). c, Regression coefficients of the response bias
(βz) and perceptual bias (βv) when both were entered into the same model to predict participants’ neural bias. Only the perceptual bias was significantly
associated with participants’ neural bias. Two-tailed, one-sampled t (2,378) = 2.96, **P = 0.003, b = 0.07, 95% CI = 0.03–0.13. Error bars denote s.e.
Nature HumaN BeHaviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NatURE HUMaN BEHavIOUR
A strength of the current work is that, in addition to modelling the biasing responses towards the option associated with larger reward
behavioural data using a DDM, we used functional neuroimaging to would result in greater cumulative reward over the course of the
measure the level of sensory evidence in visual areas of the brain. experiment44,48. Hence, the bias in these earlier experiments prob-
We found that motivation enhances the sensory evidence of the ably reflects a strategic shift in responses to maximize reward on the
motivationally consistent category in the ventral visual stream, and task, and thus not affect sensory processing.
the degree of sensory enhancement was associated with the bias in By contrast, in our task, the additional reward associated with
drift rate but not with the bias in starting point. In relating the neural the motivationally consistent category was independent of partic-
data to the modelling results, we achieve two complementary goals: ipants’ responses. For example, if the teammate bet that the next
(1) the neural results provide convergent validity of our interpreta- image would have more face, participants would receive the bonus
tion of the bias in drift rate as a perceptual bias, and (2) the model- if the upcoming image indeed had more face, regardless of how they
ling results provide a computational description of how the bias in responded on the trial. In this case, a bias towards the motivationally
sensory activity contributes to biases in perceptual judgements. consistent category would lower participants’ earnings by hurting
Perceptual judgements are thought to be computed by comparing their accuracy on the categorization task. Thus, the biases observed
the activity of neurons selective to different perceptual features19,20. in our task cannot be explained by existing normative models of
Within this framework, the nervous system ‘reads out’ the activity judgement and decision-making that assume organisms adjust their
of face-selective and scene-selective neurons as sensory evidence for choice strategies to maximize expected reward. Instead, they high-
faces and scenes, respectively. A perceptual judgement can then be light a motivational component to perceptual judgements—wanting
determined by comparing the activity of face-selective and scene- an outcome to be true can impinge on one’s perceptual judgement,
selective neurons. Our results indicate that motivation biases this even when doing so could lead to lower rewards in the long run.
comparison by enhancing the activity of the neurons selective to the Our results suggest that this bias reflects not only a response bias
category that participants were motivated to see. This enhancement but also a perceptual bias.
could in turn reflect the biased processing of incoming sensory At a broader level, this work provides a novel bridge between
information, with the biasing signal originating from frontoparietal social psychology and cognitive neuroscience. Using tools and ana-
attention regions36. lytical techniques from cognitive neuroscience, we examine the
Indeed, we found that the IPS and FEFs were more active when neurocomputational mechanisms underlying an age-old phenom-
participants made motivationally consistent judgements. The IPS enon of interest in social psychology. In doing so, we offer a fresh
and FEFs are part of the dorsal attention network associated with perspective on a classic debate. Unlike earlier work that assesses
the top-down control of attention37,38. Their involvement in our whether motivation biases perception, we provide a neurocomputa-
task suggests that the bias in perceptual processing might be in part tional account of how motivation biases perception. The results also
mediated by dynamic changes in the focus of attention39. In addi- complement the existing literature on motivated person percep-
tion to the frontoparietal activations, the dACC and the insula were tion, which has focused primarily on the neural and computational
also more active on motivation consistent trials. The dACC and the mechanisms by which people form overly positive evaluations of
insula are part of a salience network involved in the detection of themselves and close others49–51. Our work extends the phenome-
motivationally salient stimuli40,41, and the dACC has been recently non beyond the domain of social attributions, and show that moti-
implicated in determining what stimulus feature to attend to in a vated visual perception can be similarly characterized as a change
perceptual decision-making task42. The increased activity in the in initial beliefs (that is, starting point) and information updating
salience network on motivation consistent trials might be responsi- (that is, drift rate).
ble for the selection of motivationally relevant features for enhanced Desires and wants exert a powerful influence over how peo-
processing. However, this interpretation is speculative, and future ple make sense of the world. Recent studies have examined the
studies will be needed to clarify the role of each region in biasing neural mechanisms underlying motivational biases across vari-
perceptual judgements. ous human reasoning and evaluative processes52, including how
Conversely, participants’ response bias was associated with activ- the brain learns more from positive outcomes than from negative
ity in the NAcc. This is consistent with behavioural neuroscience outcomes53 and why people form unrealistically optimistic expecta-
work suggesting that dopaminergic projections to the NAcc biases tions about future events54. Here, we demonstrate that motivation
animals towards responses associated with greater reward12–14,16. biases human cognition as early as visual perception, and provide
Both human neuroimaging and animal physiology studies have also a neurocomputational account of this effect. The current work
shown that the NAcc is activated in anticipation of reward10,11. Our extends our understanding of motivational biases and provides a
results suggest a functional role for this anticipatory activity. In par- starting point to explore how motivation acts on different neural
ticular, they suggest that the NAcc increases participants’ readiness systems at different stages of information processing to influence
to respond in a motivation consistent manner. When the motiva- human cognition.
tion consistent response is aligned with task demands (for example,
pressing a lever for reward), this preparatory response facilitates methods
faster responding for reward15,43. However, when the motivationally Participants. Thirty-three participants were recruited from the Stanford
community and provided written, informed consent before the start of the study.
consistent response conflicts with task demands, as was the case in
All experimental procedures were approved by the Stanford University Institutional
our task, the preparatory response is maladaptive and impairs per-
Review Board. Participants were paid between US$30 and $50 depending on their
formance on the task. performance on the task. Data from 3 participants were discarded because of
Our results add to the rich literature on perceptual decision- excessive head motion (>3 mm) during ≥1 scanning sessions, yielding an effective
making in cognitive neuroscience by dissociating motivation sample size of 30 participants (17 male, 13 female, 18–43 years of age, mean
age = 22.3 years).
(‘wanting to see’) from optimal task performance (‘reward maximi-
zation’). Previous studies have manipulated the reward associated Stimuli. For each participant, seven sets (one for the practice task and six for the
with different perceptual alternatives and found that reward biases experimental task) of composite stimuli were created. Each stimulus set consists
responses but not perceptual processing44–47. We speculate that these of 40 greyscale images, each comprising a mixture of a face image and a scene
results differ markedly from ours because our paradigm tapped into image in varying proportions (1 × 100% scene, 3 × 65% scene, 5 × 60% scene,
7 × 55% scene, 8 × 50% scene, 7 × 45% scene, 5 × 40% scene, 3 × 35% scene and
distinct biasing mechanisms. In these earlier studies, participants
1 × 0% scene). Scene images comprised half indoor scenes and half outdoor scenes,
would earn the additional reward if they correctly categorized whereas face images comprised half male faces and half female faces. All faces were
the stimulus as the rewarded category. Under this payoff scheme, frontal photographs posing a neutral expression, and were taken from the Chicago
Nature HumaN BeHaviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NatURE HUMaN BEHavIOUR Articles
Face Database55. Stimuli were presented using MATLAB software (MathWorks) fitting a separate model for each participant57. Three separate GLME were fit to
and the Psychophysics Toolbox56. participants’ data to estimate the effect of the motivation manipulation (that is, the
‘bet’ by the teammate or opponent) on participants’ categorizations. The first two
Practice task. Participants first performed 40 practice trials in which they were models (M1 and M2; see Supplementary Table 3 for full model specification) were
presented with composite face/scene images (see ‘Stimuli’). Each image was fit to data from the cooperation and competition condition to estimate the effect
presented for 4 s, during which participants had to judge whether the image of the teammate’s and opponent’s bet, respectively, while the third model (M3)
contained a greater proportion of face (more face) or a greater proportion of scene was fit to data from both conditions to estimate the bet × condition interaction.
(more scene). Participants earned 10 cents for each correct categorization. They then All models included the percentage scene in the image as a covariate. All
indicated how confident they were in their classification on a 1–5 scale. If they did models also included random intercepts and random slopes for the effects of the
not respond within 4 s, the trial timed out and they would not earn a bonus on that teammate’s or opponent’s bet (scene/face) to account for random variability across
trial. After a variable inter-trial interval (ITI; 2–4 s), they moved on to the next trial. participants. The third model also included random intercepts and slopes for the
We collected participants’ anatomical scans while they performed the practice task. condition and the condition × bet interaction. To obtain a measure of individual
participants’ motivational bias, we added the estimate of each participant’s random
Experimental task. The experimental task consists of four fMRI runs, each effect on the condition × bet interaction to the estimate of the corresponding
approximately 8-min long. Participants performed two runs of the cooperation fixed effect. This individual effect reflects the extent to which a participant’s
condition and two runs of the competition condition (interleaved order, categorizations were biased by the motivation manipulation. Models were estimated
counterbalanced across participants; Fig. 1a). Each run consisted of 40 trials. In using the glmer function in the lme4 package in R58, with P values computed from
the cooperation condition, participants were told that they would perform a visual t-tests with Satterthwaite approximation for the degrees of freedom as implemented
categorization task with a teammate. At the start of each trial, their teammate in the lmerTest package59.
would make a bet on the image type of the upcoming image (more face or more
scene, presented for 4 s). Participants were then presented with a composite image Reaction time analyses. We ran a series of LME to examine the effect of
created by averaging a face image and a scene image in different proportions motivation on the pattern of reaction times. Reaction times were log-transformed
(see ‘Stimuli’). If the teammate’s bet was correct, both the teammate and the before being entered into the model. We first examined whether reaction times
participant would earn 40 cents. If the teammate’s bet was wrong, both the were faster when making motivationally consistent responses than when making
teammate and the participant would lose 40 cents. motivationally inconsistent responses, controlling for the absolute difference
Participants then had 4 s to make a categorization on whether the image between percentage scene and percentage face as a measure of stimulus uncertainty
contained more face or more scene. Participants earned 10 cents for each correct (M4; see Supplementary Table 4 for full model specification). Next, we examined
categorization. They then indicated how confident they were in their classification motivational effects on reaction times separately for trials in which participants
on a 1–5 scale. If they did not respond within 4 s, the trial timed out and they responded face (M5) and those in which they responded scene (M6). For each
would not earn a bonus on that trial (although the bet would still be implemented). group, we tested whether the reaction times differed depending on the category
After a variable ITI (2–4 s), they moved on to the next trial. In the competition that participants were motivated to see, again controlling for stimulus uncertainty.
condition, participants performed the task with an opponent. The trial structure To visualize these results, we plot the average reaction time for face and scene
was identical to the cooperation condition, except that if the opponent’s bet responses at each level of percentage scene, separately for when participants were
was correct, the opponent would earn 40 cents, whereas participants would lose motivated to see more face and when participants were motivated to see more
40 cents. If the opponent’s bet was wrong, the opponent loses 40 cents, whereas scene. We then repeated the analyses with simulated reaction time data generated
participants would earn 40 cents. As such, participants were motivated to see the from the z & v model (M7–M9).
image type their teammate bet on and to see the image type opposite of what their
opponent bet on. Participants were told that the teammate and the opponent would Robust regression analysis. We ran robust regression models to supplement
not be informed about their responses, and would thus not be motivated by a our correlational tests. Robust regression has been shown to be less sensitive to
desire to appease or defy their teammate or opponent. outliers60. We fit three linear models by robust regression. The first model regressed
Crucially, the outcome of the bets was contingent on whether the image participants’ earnings on their motivational bias (Fig. 2c), the second model
objectively contained more face or more scene, and was not contingent on regressed participants’ drift bias on their starting point bias, and the third model
participants’ subjective categorization. Hence, the reward-maximizing strategy regressed participants’ motivational bias on their neural bias (Fig. 7b). Model fitting
was to ignore the bets and categorize the images as accurately as possible (Fig. 1b). was performed using the rlm function from the ‘MASS’ package in R. Statistical
Bets by both the teammate and the opponent were pseudo-randomized such that significance of the regression coefficient was assessed by performing a robust F-test.
they were accurate on exactly 50% of the trials. As such, participants’ earnings
in the experiment depended solely on their performance on the categorization DDM. The DDM assumes that decisions are made by accumulating evidence over
task. We computed participants’ performance as the average number of time until it crosses one of two decision bounds9 (Fig. 3a). The starting point and
correct categorizations. the rate of evidence accumulation were determined by the free parameters z and
v, respectively. The distance between the two boundaries depended on the free
Localizer task. To identify BOLD activation associated with viewing faces or parameter a, while time not related to decision process (for example, stimulus
scenes, we had participants perform a localizer task at the end of the experiment. encoding or motor response) was modelled by the free parameter t.
Participants viewed 5 blocks of 15 unambiguous faces and 5 blocks of 15 Model parameters were estimated from participants’ categorizations and
unambiguous scenes (blocks were interleaved, and the order was counterbalanced reaction time distributions using hierarchical Bayesian estimation as implemented
across participants). In the face blocks, participants were sequentially presented by the HDDM toolbox25. Parameters for individual participants were assumed to
with face images and had to indicate whether each face was male or female. In the be randomly drawn from a group-level distribution. In the fitting procedure, each
scene blocks, participants were sequentially presented with scene images and had participant’s parameters both contributed to and were constrained by the estimates
to indicate whether each scene was indoors or outdoors. Each image was presented of group-level parameters. Markov chain Monte Carlo sampling methods were
for 2 s, with a 2-s ITI. Participants took a self-timed break between blocks. The used to estimate the joint posterior distribution of all model parameters (100,000
localizer task was split into two scans. samples; burn-in = 10,000 samples; thinning = 2). We estimated both group-level
parameters as well as parameters for each individual participant, which allowed us
fMRI data acquisition and preprocessing. MRI data were collected using a 3 T to examine biases in both the entire sample and in each individual participant. To
General Electric MRI scanner. Functional images were acquired in interleaved account for outliers generated by a process other than that assumed by the model
order using a T2*-weighted echo planar imaging pulse sequence (46 transverse (for example, lapses in attention and accidental button press), we estimated a
slices, repetition time = 2 s, echo time = 25 ms, flip angle = 77° and voxel mixture model in which 5% of trials were assumed to be distributed according to a
size = 2.9 mm3). Anatomical images were acquired at the start of the session with uniform distribution.
a T1-weighted pulse sequence (repetition time = 7.2 ms, echo time = 2.8 ms, flip In the z & v model, we modelled z as a function of the motivationally consistent
angle = 12° and voxel size = 1 mm3). Image volumes were preprocessed using category and an intercept term. The HDDM package implements z as the relative
FSL/FEAT v.5.98 (FMRIB software library, FMRIB, Oxford, UK). Preprocessing starting point, bound between 0 and 1, with 0.5 reflecting an unbiased starting
included motion correction, slice-timing correction, removal of low-frequency point. As such, we used the inverse logit link function to restrict z to values
drifts using a temporal high-pass filter (100-ms cut-off) and spatial smoothing between 0 and 1:
(4-mm full-width at half-maximum). For multivoxel classification analyses, we
trained and tested our classifier in each participant’s native space. For all other z= 1
analyses, functional volumes were first registered to participants’ anatomical image 1+exp(−(β Motivation+β ))
z1 z0
(using boundary-based registration) and then to a template brain in the Montreal
Neurological Institute (MNI) space (affine transformation with 12 d.f.). where Motivation denotes the motivationally consistent category, and was coded as
+1 when participants were motivated to see more scene, and −1 when participants
Psychometric functions. We modelled participants’ behavioural data using were motivated to see more face. Thus, βz1 reflects the effect of motivation on the
GLME, which allows for the modelling of all of the data in one step rather than starting point (z bias), while βz0 denotes an intercept term.
Nature HumaN BeHaviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NatURE HUMaN BEHavIOUR
We modelled v as a linear combination of the category that participants were To examine how the NAcc response unfolded across a trial, we extracted
motivated to see, the level of percentage scene and an intercept term: and z-scored the mean time course in the NAcc ROI from each run. Each time
course was shifted by two repetition times (4 s) to correct for haemodynamic lag.
v=β v1Motivation+β v2%scene+β v0 We extracted the data from 8 s before stimulus onset to 8 s after stimulus onset
to obtain the time course of a single trial, and computed the average time course
where Motivation was again coded as +1 (motivated to see more scene) and −1 of activity separately for motivation consistent trials and motivation inconsistent
(motivated to see more face). βv1 reflects the effect of motivation on the drift rate trials. At each time point, we assessed whether activity was higher on motivation
(v bias) and βv2 reflects the effect of percentage scene on the drift rate. We demeaned consistent trials than on motivation inconsistent trials using a paired sample t-test.
percentage scene before entering it into the model such that the intercept term, βv0,
would also reflect the intrinsic drift bias. For each of the bias parameters (z bias and Multivoxel pattern analyses. Multivoxel pattern analyses were performed using
v bias), we computed the proportion of posterior samples that were greater than 0 tools available as part of the nilearn Python module63. An L1-regularized logistic
(Fig. 3c,d). If more than 95% of the posterior distribution were to be greater than 0, regression model (C = 1) was trained on BOLD data from the localizer task to classify
we consider it to be strong evidence that the estimate was positive. the image category that participants were seeing on each localizer trial. Notably, the
To examine whether either of the biases were sufficient for explaining the data, localizer task was unrelated to face versus house discrimination (see ‘Localizer task’).
we fit two additional comparison models in which only z (z model) or only v Hence, the category-selective patterns identified by the classifier were specific to
(v model) was biased by motivation. In the z model, βz1 was fixed at 0, and in the seeing faces or scenes, and not confounded by response-related information.
v model, βv1 was fixed to 0. As a baseline for comparison, we also fit a null model Analysis was restricted to voxels in a ventral visual stream mask consisting
in which neither the starting point nor the drift rate was biased by motivation. of the bilateral occipital lobe and ventral temporal cortex. The ventral occipito-
We then compared the four models using DIC, which is a measure of model temporal regions of the brain are thought to be important in perceiving object
performance that appropriately penalizes for model complexity in hierarchical categories such as faces and scenes22. The mask was created in MNI space using
models26. To verify that DIC is an accurate metric for model comparison, we also anatomical masks defined by the Harvard–Oxford Cortical Structural Atlas. The
ran a model recovery study to examine whether DIC correctly recovers the model mask was then transformed into each participant’s native space using FSL’s FLIRT
used to generate simulated data (Supplementary Note 3) implementation, and classification was performed in participants’ native space.
Model convergence of all models was formally assessed using the Gelman– The trained model was then applied to the single-trial activation patterns in the
Rubin R ̂statistic61, which runs multiple Markov chains to compare within-chain experimental task (GLM 2). On each trial, the classifier returned the probability
and between-chain variances. Large differences (R ̂> 1.1) between these variances that the participant was seeing a scene rather than a face based on activity in
would signal non-convergence. In addition, we examined each trace to check that the ventral visual stream mask. We then modelled classifier probability on each
there were no drifts or large jumps, which would also suggest non-convergence. We trial using a LME with the percentage scene of an image, the task condition
report model convergence metrics, posterior means and 95% credible intervals of (cooperation/competition), the teammate’s or opponent’s bet (face/scene) and
all parameters in Supplementary Table 1. the interaction between condition and bet as predictor variables (M10; see
Supplementary Table 5 for full model specification). The models included random
Model simulations. We generated 500 simulated datasets, each comprising the intercepts and random slopes for each of the predictor variables to account for the
same number of participants performing the same number of trials as the real random variability across participants. We computed each participant’s individual
dataset. Each dataset was generated with parameter values sampled from the effect on the condition × bet interaction by adding the estimate of a participant’s
posterior distribution estimated by the z & v model. These datasets reflect the random effect to the estimate of the fixed effect. This individual effect reflects the
pattern of choice and reaction time data if participant’s behaviour was perfectly extent to which classifier probability was biased by the motivation manipulation for
described by the model. To compare the simulations to real data, we averaged over that particular participant and was taken as a measure of neural bias.
the 500 simulations to obtain the average reaction time of face and scene responses To examine the relationship between motivation, participants’ behavioural bias
at each level of percentage scene, separately for when participants were motivated and classifier probability, we ran a second model to test for the triple interaction
to see more face and when participants were motivated to see more scene. of condition, bet and behavioural bias on classifier probability (M11). To better
Given that the DDM was fitted to reaction time distributions (rather understand the directionality of this interaction, we performed a median split
than the mean), we also assessed how well the model accounts for the shape of on participants’ behavioural bias, and tested for the condition × bet interaction
participants’ reaction time distributions. For each participant, we overlay the on classifier probability separately for high-bias (M12) and low-bias (M13)
distribution of simulated reaction times with the true reaction time distributions, participants. Finally, we tested for the triple interaction of group (high bias or low
separately for face and scene responses. These plots serve as posterior bias) × condition × bet (M14) on classifier probability.
predictive checks to assess how well the model aligns with participants’ data
(Supplementary Fig. 7). Relating model parameters to behaviour and neural measures. We used linear
regression to examine the relationship between model parameters and neural
GLM. We implemented a linear model (GLM 1) to contrast BOLD activity activity. We entered participant-level estimates of the starting point bias (z ) and
bias
on motivation consistent trials and that on motivation inconsistent trials. A the drift bias (v ) as predictor variables in regression models. The first model
bias
motivation consistent trial was defined as a trial on which participants categorized was used to predict participants’ NAcc response to the motivation consistent–
an image as the category they were motivated to see. Thus, this contrast would motivation inconsistent contrast (GLM 1), and assessed the extent to which each
identify voxels in the brain that were significantly more active when participants bias was associated with NAcc activity. The second model was used to predict
reported seeing what they wanted to see, versus what they did not want to see. participants’ neural bias and assessed the extent to which each bias contributed to
Stimulus onset, the objective percentage scene, reaction time and head movement the modulation of category-selective activity in the ventral visual stream.
parameters were included as nuisance regressors. With the exception of head
movement parameters, all regressors were convolved with a haemodynamic Statement on statistics and reproducibility. All statistical tests were two-tailed
response function. The GLM was estimated throughout the whole brain and used an alpha level of 0.05. Data distribution was assumed to be normal but
using FSL/FEAT v.5.98, which is available as part of the FMRIB software library. this was not formally tested. Sample size was determined to be comparable to other
Correction for multiple comparisons was performed using threshold-free cluster fMRI studies of motivational biases64 and perceptual decision-making45. The study
enhancement with an alpha level of 0.05, as implemented by the randomize employed a within-subject design and participants were not assigned to different
tool in FSL62. experimental conditions.
We implemented a second linear model (GLM 2) in which the onset of each
trial was modelled as a separate regressor. This model allowed us to estimate a Reporting Summary. Further information on research design is available in the
separate statistical map for each trial (that is, single-trial activation patterns). We Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.
then used these maps as inputs to the multivoxel pattern analyses (see below).
As was the case in GLM 1, reaction time and head movement parameters were Data availability
included as nuisance regressors.
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the
corresponding author on request. Behavioural data of both the reported
NAcc ROI analyses. We defined an independent NAcc ROI using the Harvard–
experiment and the in-lab replication are available at: https://github.com/ycleong/
Oxford subcortical structural atlas (available for download at https://neurovault.
MotivatedPerception. The unthresholded p-map of the motivation consistent–
org/collections/EAAXGDRJ/). For each participant, we extracted the average
motivation inconsistent contrast is available at: https://neurovault.org/collections/
z-statistic of the motivation consistent > motivation inconsistent contrast (GLM 1)
EAAXGDRJ/images/62743/.
within the NAcc ROI. This average z-statistic reflects the extent to which an ROI is
more reliably active on motivation consistent trials than on motivation inconsistent
trials for that participant, and was taken as the participant’s NAcc response. The Code availability
NAcc response was then regressed against estimates of starting point and drift bias The custom code for the modelling and neuroimaging analyses is included in the
estimated by the z & v model (see ‘Relating model parameters to behaviour and Supplementary Software. The live version of the code is available at https://github.
neural measures’). com/ycleong/MotivatedPerception.
Nature HumaN BeHaviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NatURE HUMaN BEHavIOUR Articles
Received: 10 July 2018; Accepted: 20 May 2019; 32. van Koningsbruggen, G. M., Stroebe, W. & Aarts, H. Through the eyes of
Published: xx xx xxxx dieters: biased size perception of food following tempting food primes. J. Exp.
Soc. Psychol. 47, 293–299 (2011).
33. Voss, A., Rothermund, K. & Brandtstädter, J. Interpreting ambiguous stimuli:
references separating perceptual and judgmental biases. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 44,
1. Bruner, J. S. & Goodman, C. C. Value and need as organizing factors in 1048–1056 (2008).
perception. J. Abnorm. Soc. Psychol. 42, 33–44 (1947). 34. Moran, R. Optimal decision making in heterogeneous and biased
2. Dunning, D. & Balcetis, E. Wishful seeing: how preferences shape visual environments. Psychon. Bull. Rev. 22, 38–53 (2015).
perception. Curr. Dir. Psychol. Sci. 22, 33–37 (2013). 35. Hanks, T. D., Mazurek, M. E., Kiani, R., Hopp, E. & Shadlen, M. N. Elapsed
3. Hastorf, A. H. & Cantril, H. They saw a game; a case study. J. Abnorm. Soc. decision time affects the weighting of prior probability in a perceptual
Psychol. 49, 129–134 (1954). decision task. J. Neurosci. 31, 6339–6352 (2011).
4. Balcetis, E. & Dunning, D. See what you want to see: motivational influences 36. Serences, J. T. Value-based modulations in human visual cortex. Neuron 60,
on visual perception. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 91, 612–625 (2006). 1169–1181 (2008).
5. Kunda, Z. The case for motivated reasoning. Psychol. Bull. 108, 37. Corbetta, M. & Shulman, G. L. Control of goal-directed and stimulus-driven
480–498 (1990). attention in the brain. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 3, 201–215 (2002).
6. Goldiamond, I. Indicators of perception: I. Subliminal perception, subception, 38. Petersen, S. E. & Posner, M. I. The attention system of the human brain: 20
unconscious perception: an analysis in terms of psychophysical indicator years after. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 35, 73–89 (2012).
methodology. Psychol. Bull. 55, 373–411 (1958). 39. Leong, Y. C., Radulescu, A., Daniel, R., DeWoskin, V. & Niv, Y. Dynamic
7. Firestone, C. & Scholl, B. J. Cognition does not affect perception: evaluating interaction between reinforcement learning and attention in multidimensional
the evidence for ‘top-down’ effects. Behav. Brain Sci. 39, e229 (2016). environments. Neuron 93, 451–463 (2017).
8. Forstmann, B. U., Ratcliff, R. & Wagenmakers, E.-J. Sequential sampling 40. Menon, V. in Brain Mapping (ed. Toga, A. W.) 597–611 (Academic Press, 2015).
models in cognitive neuroscience: advantages, applications, and extensions. 41. Sridharan, D., Levitin, D. J. & Menon, V. A critical role for the right
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 67, 641–666 (2016). fronto-insular cortex in switching between central-executive and default-
9. Ratcliff, R. & McKoon, G. The diffusion decision model: theory and data for mode networks. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 105, 12569–12574 (2008).
two-choice decision tasks. Neural Comput. 20, 873–922 (2008). 42. Shenhav, A., Straccia, M. A., Musslick, S., Cohen, J. D. & Botvinick, M. M.
10. Berridge, K. C. The debate over dopamine’s role in reward: the case for Dissociable neural mechanisms track evidence accumulation for selection of
incentive salience. Psychopharmacology 191, 391–431 (2007). attention versus action. Nat. Commun. 9, 2485 (2018).
11. Knutson, B., Adams, C. M., Fong, G. W. & Hommer, D. Anticipation of 43. Niv, Y., Daw, N. D., Joel, D. & Dayan, P. Tonic dopamine: opportunity
increasing monetary reward selectively recruits nucleus accumbens. costs and the control of response vigor. Psychopharmacology 191,
J. Neurosci. 21, RC159 (2001). 507–520 (2007).
12. Floresco, S. B. The nucleus accumbens: an interface between cognition, 44. Feng, S., Holmes, P., Rorie, A. & Newsome, W. T. Can monkeys choose
emotion, and action. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 66, 25–52 (2015). optimally when faced with noisy stimuli and unequal rewards? PLoS Comput.
13. Ikemoto, S. & Panksepp, J. The role of nucleus accumbens dopamine in Biol. 5, e1000284 (2009).
motivated behavior: a unifying interpretation with special reference to 45. Mulder, M. J., Wagenmakers, E.-J., Ratcliff, R., Boekel, W. & Forstmann, B. U.
reward-seeking. Brain Res. Rev. 31, 6–41 (1999). Bias in the brain: a diffusion model analysis of prior probability and potential
14. Nicola, S. M. The nucleus accumbens as part of a basal ganglia action payoff. J. Neurosci. 32, 2335–2343 (2012).
selection circuit. Psychopharmacology 191, 521–550 (2007). 46. Rorie, A. E., Gao, J., McClelland, J. L. & Newsome, W. T. Integration of
15. McGinty, V. B., Lardeux, S., Taha, S. A., Kim, J. J. & Nicola, S. M. sensory and reward information during perceptual decision-making in lateral
Invigoration of reward seeking by cue and proximity encoding in the nucleus intraparietal cortex (LIP) of the macaque monkey. PLoS One 5, e9308 (2010).
accumbens. Neuron 78, 910–922 (2013). 47. Summerfield, C. & Koechlin, E. Economic value biases uncertain perceptual
16. Stopper, C. M. & Floresco, S. B. Contributions of the nucleus accumbens and choices in the parietal and prefrontal cortices. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 4,
its subregions to different aspects of risk-based decision making. Cogn. Affect. 208 (2010).
Behav. Neurosci. 11, 97–112 (2011). 48. Bogacz, R., Brown, E., Moehlis, J., Holmes, P. & Cohen, J. D. The physics of
17. Gold, J. I. & Shadlen, M. N. The neural basis of decision making. Annu. Rev. optimal decision making: a formal analysis of models of performance in
Neurosci. 30, 535–574 (2007). two-alternative forced-choice tasks. Psychol. Rev. 113, 700–765 (2006).
18. Heekeren, H. R., Marrett, S. & Ungerleider, L. G. The neural systems that 49. Flagan, T., Mumford, J. A. & Beer, J. S. How do you see me? The neural basis
mediate human perceptual decision making. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 9, of motivated meta-perception. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 29, 1908–1917 (2017).
467–479 (2008). 50. Hughes, B. L. & Beer, J. S. Orbitofrontal cortex and anterior cingulate
19. Shadlen, M. N., Britten, K. H., Newsome, W. T. & Movshon, J. A. A cortex are modulated by motivated social cognition. Cereb. Cortex 22,
computational analysis of the relationship between neuronal and behavioral 1372–1381 (2012).
responses to visual motion. J. Neurosci. 16, 1486–1510 (1996). 51. Korn, C. W., Prehn, K., Park, S. Q., Walter, H. & Heekeren, H. R. Positively
20. Heekeren, H. R., Marrett, S., Bandettini, P. A. & Ungerleider, L. G. A general biased processing of self-relevant social feedback. J. Neurosci. 32,
mechanism for perceptual decision-making in the human brain. Nature 431, 16832–16844 (2012).
859–862 (2004). 52. Hughes, B. L. & Zaki, J. The neuroscience of motivated cognition.
21. Summerfield, C. & Egner, T. Expectation (and attention) in visual cognition. Trends Cogn. Sci. 19, 62–64 (2015).
Trends Cogn. Sci. 13, 403–409 (2009). 53. Lefebvre, G., Lebreton, M., Meyniel, F., Bourgeois-Gironde, S. & Palminteri, S.
22. Grill-Spector, K. The neural basis of object perception. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. Behavioural and neural characterization of optimistic reinforcement learning.
13, 159–166 (2003). Nat. Hum. Behav. 1, 0067 (2017).
23. Hasson, U., Hendler, T., Bashat, D. B. & Malach, R. Vase or face? A neural 54. Sharot, T., Korn, C. W. & Dolan, R. J. How unrealistic optimism is
correlate of shape-selective grouping processes in the human brain. J. Cogn. maintained in the face of reality. Nat. Neurosci. 14, 1475–1479 (2011).
Neurosci. 13, 744–753 (2001). 55. Ma, D. S., Correll, J. & Wittenbrink, B. The Chicago face database: a
24. White, C. N. & Poldrack, R. A. Decomposing bias in different types of simple free stimulus set of faces and norming data. Behav. Res. Methods 47,
decisions. J. Exp. Psychol. Learn. Mem. Cogn. 40, 385–398 (2014). 1122–1135 (2015).
25. Wiecki, T. V., Sofer, I. & Frank, M. J. HDDM: hierarchical Bayesian estimation 56. Brainard, D. H. The Psychophysics Toolbox. Spat. Vis. 10, 433–436 (1997).
of the drift-diffusion model in Python. Front. Neuroinform. 7, 14 (2013). 57. Knoblauch, K. & Maloney, L. T. Modeling Psychophysical Data in R
26. Spiegelhalter, D. J., Best, N. G., Carlin, B. P. & Van Der Linde, A. Bayesian (Springer, 2012).
measures of model complexity and fit. J. R. Stat. Soc. Ser. B Stat. Methodol. 58. Bates, D., Mächler, M., Bolker, B. & Walker, S. Fitting linear mixed-effects
64, 583–639 (2002). models using lme4. J. Stat. Softw. 67, 1–48 (2015).
27. Boehm, U. et al. Estimating across-trial variability parameters of the diffusion 59. Kuznetsova, A., Brockhoff, P. B. & Christensen, R. H. B. lmerTest: tests in
decision model: expert advice and recommendations. J. Math. Psychol. 87, linear mixed effects models. J. Stat. Softw. 82, 1–26 (2017).
46–75 (2018). 60. Venables, W. N. & Ripley, B. D. Modern Applied Statistics with S
28. Allport, F. H. Theories of Perception and the Concept of Structure: A Review (Springer, 2003).
and Critical Analysis with an Introduction to a Dynamic-Structural Theory of 61. Gelman, A. & Rubin, D. B. Inference from iterative simulation using multiple
Behavior (John Wiley & Sons, 1955). sequences. Stat. Sci. 7, 457–472 (1992).
29. Bruner, J. S. On perceptual readiness. Psychol. Rev. 64, 123–152 (1957). 62. Smith, S. M. & Nichols, T. E. Threshold-free cluster enhancement: addressing
30. Balcetis, E., Dunning, D. & Granot, Y. Subjective value determines initial problems of smoothing, threshold dependence and localisation in cluster
dominance in binocular rivalry. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 48, 122–129 (2012). inference. Neuroimage 44, 83–98 (2009).
31. Balcetis, E. & Dunning, D. Wishful seeing: more desired objects are seen as 63. Abraham, A. et al. Machine learning for neuroimaging with scikit-learn.
closer. Psychol. Sci. 21, 147–152 (2010). Front. Neruoinform. 8, 14 (2014).
Nature HumaN BeHaviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NatURE HUMaN BEHavIOUR
64. Hughes, B. L., Zaki, J. & Ambady, N. Motivation alters impression Competing interests
formation and related neural systems. Soc. Cogn. Affect. Neurosci. 12, The authors declare no competing interests.
49–60 (2017).
additional information
acknowledgements
Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/
We thank I. Ballard and members of the Stanford Social Neuroscience Laboratory for
s41562-019-0637-z.
scientific discussions and helpful comments on earlier versions of the manuscript. The
research was supported by the Wu Tsai Neuroscience Institute NeuroChoice Initiative. Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Y.C.L.
or preparation of the manuscript.
Peer review information: Primary Handling Editor: Mary Elizabeth Sutherland.
author contributions Publisher’s note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.
Y.C.L., B.L.H. and J.Z. designed the study. Y.C.L. and Y.W. collected and analysed the
data. Y.C.L. and J.Z. wrote the manuscript, with revisions from Y.W. and B.L.H. © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2019
Nature HumaN BeHaviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
1
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Corresponding author(s): Yuan Chang Leong
Last updated by author(s): May 1, 2019
Reporting Summary
Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency
in reporting. For further information on Nature Research policies, see Authors & Referees and the Editorial Policy Checklist.
Statistics
For all statistical analyses, confirm that the following items are present in the figure legend, table legend, main text, or Methods section.
n/a Confirmed
The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
A statement on whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided
Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.
A description of all covariates tested
A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
A full description of the statistical parameters including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient)
AND variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)
For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted
Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.
For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated
Our web collection on statistics for biologists contains articles on many of the points above.
Software and code
Policy information about availability of computer code
Data collection Behavioral data were collected using custom code written in MATLAB (2016b) and the Psychophysics Toolbox (Version 3).
Data analysis Choice, reaction time and confidence data were analyzed using custom code written in R (version 3.3.2). Drift diffusion models were
implemented using the HDDM toolbox (version 0.6.0) with custom code written in python 2.7.13. Preprocessing and general linear
modeling of fMRI data was performed using FSL (version 5.98). Multivariate classification analyses were implemented using tools
available as part of the nilearn (version 0.3.1) module with custom code written in python 2.7.13. All custom code are available at:
https://github.com/ycleong/MotivatedPerception.
For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors/reviewers.
We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Research guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.
Data
Policy information about availability of data
All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable:
- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets
- A list of figures that have associated raw data
- A description of any restrictions on data availability
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon request. Behavioral data of both the reported experiment as well
as the in-lab replication are available at: https://github.com/ycleong/MotivatedPerception. Unthresholded p-map of the Motivation Consistent – Motivation
Inconsistent contrast is available at: https://neurovault.org/collections/EAAXGDRJ/images/62743/.
2
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Field-specific reporting
Please select the one below that is the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.
Life sciences Behavioural & social sciences Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences
For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/documents/nr-reporting-summary-flat.pdf
Behavioural & social sciences study design
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
Study description This is a quantitative study. We collected choice and reaction time data on a two-alternative-forced-choice task, while also measuring the
blood-oxygenation-level-dependent response using fMRI.
Research sample A convenience sample of thirty-three participants were recruited from the Stanford community. Participants provided written, informed
consent prior to the start of the study. All experimental procedures were approved by the Stanford Institutional Review Board. Data
from three participants were discarded because of excessive head motion (> 3mm) during one or more scanning sessions, yielding an
effective sample size of thirty participants (17 male, 13 female, ages 18-43, mean age = 22.3).
Sampling strategy Convenience sampling. Participants signed up for the study on an online platform. All participants who passed the safety screening for
MRI were enrolled in the study. Sample size was determined to be comparable to other fMRI studies of motivational biases (e.g.,
Hughes, Zaki & Ambady, 2016, SCAN) and perceptual decision-making (e.g., Mulder et al,. 2012, J. Neuro)
Data collection Participants performed the task in the MRI scanner while researchers operated the scanner in a separate room. Data were collected
using button presses with custom code written in MATLAB (2016b) and the Psychophysics Toolbox (Version 3). The study employed a
within-subject design, so participants were not assigned to experimental condition. Researchers were not blind to the study hypothesis,
but had minimal contact with participants beyond safety screening for MRI as instructions were delivered on screen while participants
were in the scanner.
Timing May 10th 2016 - July 1st 2016
Data exclusions Data from three participants were discarded because of excessive head motion (> 3mm) during one or more scanning sessions. Exclusion
criteria were predetermined.
Non-participation None.
Randomization The study employed a within-subject design, so participants were not assigned to groups.
Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods
We require information from authors about some types of materials, experimental systems and methods used in many studies. Here, indicate whether each material,
system or method listed is relevant to your study. If you are not sure if a list item applies to your research, read the appropriate section before selecting a response.
Materials & experimental systems Methods
n/a Involved in the study n/a Involved in the study
Antibodies ChIP-seq
Eukaryotic cell lines Flow cytometry
Palaeontology MRI-based neuroimaging
Animals and other organisms
Human research participants
Clinical data
Human research participants
Policy information about studies involving human research participants
Population characteristics A convenience sample of thirty-three participants were recruited from the Stanford community. Participants provided written,
informed consent prior to the start of the study. All experimental procedures were approved by the Stanford Institutional Review
Board. Data from three participants were discarded because of excessive head motion (> 3mm) during one or more scanning
sessions, yielding an effective sample size of thirty participants (17 male, 13 female, ages 18-43, mean age = 22.3).
Recruitment Convenience sample. Participants signed up for the study on an online platform. All participants who passed the safety screening
for MRI were enrolled in the study.
3
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Ethics oversight Stanford University Institutional Review Board
Note that full information on the approval of the study protocol must also be provided in the manuscript.
Magnetic resonance imaging
Experimental design
Design type Event-related task design
Design specifications Participants performed 4 blocks (2 of each condition) of 40 trials each. Each block was approximately 8 minutes long.
Each trial was 8 seconds long (4 seconds of motivation manipulation + 4 seconds for response). There was a variable
inter-trial interval of 2-4seconds.
Behavioral performance measures We recorded both button presses (face or scene) and response times. All participants were more likely to indicate that
they saw more scene with increasing proportion of scene in an image, indicating that they were appropriately
performing the perceptual categorization task.
Acquisition
Imaging type(s) Functional and structural
Field strength 3T
Sequence & imaging parameters Functional images were acquired in interleaved order using a T2*-weighted echo planar imaging (EPI) pulse sequence
(46 transverse slices, TR=2s, TE=25ms, flip angle=77°, voxel size 2.9 mm^3).
Anatomical images were acquired at the start of the session with a T1-weighted pulse sequence (TR = 7.2ms, TE =
2.8ms, flip angle=12°, voxel size 1 mm^3).
Area of acquisition Whole brain
Diffusion MRI Used Not used
Preprocessing
Preprocessing software Preprocessing was performed using FSL (v. 5.98). Brain extraction was performed using the BET routine available as part
of the FSL software. Preprocessing consists of motion correction, slice-timing correction, removal of low-frequency
drifts using a temporal high-pass filter (100ms cutoff), and spatial smoothing with a 4-mm FWHM kernel.
Normalization For multivariate classification analyses, we trained and tested our classifier in each participant’s native space. For all
other analyses, functional volumes were first registered to participants’ anatomical image (Boundary-Based
Registration) and then to a template brain in Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) space (affine transformation with 12
degrees of freedom).
Normalization template MNI152
Noise and artifact removal Stimulus onset, reaction time and head movement parameters were entered into the general linear models as nuisance
regressors. With the exception of head movement parameters, all regressors were convolved with a hemodynamic
response function.
Volume censoring N.A.
Statistical modeling & inference
Model type and settings We implemented two whole-brain mass univariate models using FSL/FEAT v.5.98. At the first level (i.e. runs from the
same participant), we estimated fixed effects models. At the second level (i.e. across participants), we estimated mixed
effects models. We also estimated a multivariate model to classify whether participants were seeing a face or a scene
based on BOLD activity (see below).
Effect(s) tested We implemented a linear model (GLM 1) to contrast BOLD activity on Motivation Consistent trials and that on
Motivation Inconsistent trials. A Motivation Consistent trial was defined as a trial on which participant categorized an
image as the category they were motivated to see.
We implemented a second linear model (GLM 2) in which the onset of each trial was modeled as a separate regressor.
This model allowed us estimate a separate statistical map for each trial (i.e. single trial activation patterns).
Specify type of analysis: Whole brain ROI-based Both
The nucleus accumbens region of interest (ROI) was defined using the Harvard-Oxford subcortical
Anatomical location(s) structural atlas. The ROI can also be downloaded from the following NeuroVault collection: https://
neurovault.org/collections/EAAXGDRJ/.
Statistic type for inference Threshold-free-cluster-enhancement
(See Eklund et al. 2016)
4
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Correction FWE Corrected
Models & analysis
n/a Involved in the study
Functional and/or effective connectivity
Graph analysis
Multivariate modeling or predictive analysis
Multivariate modeling and predictive analysis Multivoxel pattern analyses were performed using tools available as part of the nilearn Python module. An
L1-regularized logistic regression model (C = 1) was trained on BOLD data from the localizer task to classify
the image category (face or scene) participants were seeing on each localizer trial. Analysis was restricted
to voxels in a ventral visual stream mask consisting of the bilateral occipital lobe and ventral temporal
cortex. The mask was created in MNI space using anatomical masks defined by the Harvard-Oxford Cortical
Structural Atlas. The mask was then transformed into each participant’s native space using FSL’s FLIRT
implementation, and classification was performed in participants’ native space. The trained model was
then applied to the single trial activation patterns in the experimental task (GLM 2). On each trial, the
classifier returned the probability that the participant was seeing a scene rather than a face based on
activity in the ventral visual stream mask.