Articles
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-019-0730-3
Niche diversity can explain cross-cultural
differences in personality structure
Paul E. Smaldino 1*, Aaron Lukaszewski2, Christopher von Rueden 3 and Michael Gurven 4*
The covariance structure of personality traits derived from statistical models (for example, Big Five) is often assumed to be a
human universal. Cross-cultural studies have challenged this view, finding that less-complex societies exhibit stronger covaria-
tion among behavioural characteristics, resulting in fewer derived personality factors. To explain these results, we propose
the niche diversity hypothesis, in which a greater diversity of social and ecological niches elicits a broader range of multi-
variate behavioural profiles and, hence, lower trait covariance in a population. We formalize this as a computational model,
which reproduces empirical results from recent cross-cultural studies and also yields an additional prediction for which we find
empirical support. This work provides a general explanation for population differences in personality structure in both humans
and other animals and suggests a substantial reimagining of personality research: instead of reifying statistical descriptions of
manifest personality structures, research should focus more on modelling their underlying causes.
P
ersonality refers to persistent patterns of behaviour that are argues that personality trait factors reflect patterns of specific
reasonably stable within individuals across time or contexts1–8. behaviours, which are influenced by other aspects of an indi-
Within populations, specific behavioural indicators often vidual’s phenotype as well as by the physical and social environ-
covary, motivating researchers to reduce the personality landscape ment23–31. From the emergentist perspective, there is no theoretical
into structural models. This statistical approach organizes patterns basis for expecting universal personality trait factors; in principle,
of behavioural covariation within broad personality dimensions. many different behavioural covariance patterns could be elicited
For example, the five-factor model, or ‘Big Five,’ postulates five within a local ecology. For example, Nettle32 suggests that ambi-
orthogonal, broadband dimensions—agreeableness, conscientious- tion and sociability covary as part of an extraversion continuum
ness, extraversion, neuroticism and openness to experience6–9— because they tend to have synergistic effects on individuals’ goal
each of which encompasses specific behavioural indicators that achievement. If the synergism of particular behaviours differs
tend to loosely covary. An alternative HEXACO model of personal- across societies, we need not expect a universal structure of per-
ity structure contains six factors that are rotated slightly differently sonality covariation. Rather, the number and phenotypic content
in factor space1. However, all of our claims about the Big Five model of broadband personality dimensions would be expected to vary
apply equally to the HEXACO model and, indeed, to any other across human populations.
inductively derived covariance structures. These trait dimensions One way to compare human populations is in terms of the vari-
are identified inductively by factor analysing covariance patterns ety of social and ecological niches available to individuals as ave-
among comprehensive sets of person descriptors; the resulting per- nues to social or material productivity. In ecological biogeography,
sonality factors are frequently regarded as (1) being cross-culturally a niche generally describes the fit of a species to particular environ-
universal, and (2) reflecting species-typical latent psychological mental conditions33. Closely related organisms sharing a common
traits (for example, see refs. 7,8,10,11). niche tend to possess similar functional traits, although narrower
To date, the vast majority of data collected to generate structural definitions of niche describe the biotic and abiotic relationships for
models of personality comes from large, modern, industrialized each species34. For our purposes, a niche refers to a particular way
societies. Yet, the five-factor structure has failed to replicate when of extracting resources from the environment and/or from other
tested within smaller-scale societies12–14, in several low-income individuals, and thus is situated with respect to the socioecologi-
country samples15 or across a more inclusive set of natural lexi- cal features of the local surroundings. Theoretically, niches define
cons16. Moreover, while many studies have looked at cultural dif- incentive structures for doing certain things or behaving in certain
ferences in levels of specific traits (for example, see refs. 17,18), few ways. Different niches create different payoffs to particular person-
have explicitly considered how social and ecological forces shape ality profiles. An industrialized society with advanced communica-
the emergence of personality covariance structures (for example, tion and transportation infrastructure, extensive division of labour
factors) in a population. and high economic mobility would present many more available
In recent years, a growing number of researchers have rejected niches to the average person than would a small-scale foraging soci-
the theory that inductively derived personality dimensions corre- ety in which there may be fewer opportunities for social differentia-
spond directly to latent psychological traits, and have adopted an tion beyond sex-based and age-based division of labour14. Following
alternative paradigm that views patterns of personality trait cova- previous research35,36, we refer to a culture with a greater or smaller
riance as emerging dynamically from many distinct psychological number of such niches as more or less complex, respectively. Note
mechanisms and processes4,5,14,19–22. This ‘emergentist’ perspective that no assumptions are made about the complexity, psychological
1Department of Cognitive and Information Sciences, University of California, Merced, CA, USA. 2Department of Psychology, California State University,
Fullerton, CA, USA. 3Jepson School of Leadership Studies, University of Richmond, Richmond, VA, USA. 4Department of Anthropology, University of
California, Santa Barbara, CA, USA. *e-mail: paul.smaldino@gmail.com; gurven@anth.ucsb.edu
NAtuRE HuMAN BEHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTure HumaN BeHaviour
or otherwise, of individuals within each culture, or of the sophisti- inter-correlated among nations of lower estimated complexity and
cation of particular cultural traits. niche diversity, even after adjusting for several potential confounders.
Our targets of explanation are the relatively stable distributions While this preliminary evidence for the niche diversity hypoth-
of adult personality traits. Some studies have indicated that children esis is suggestive, conclusive empirical tests are hindered by the dif-
appear to exhibit more complex personality structures relative to ficulty of accurately operationalizing the niche diversity of societies
adults37. Childhood is often a time of intense exploration and varia- and by the paucity of personality data from smaller-scale societies.
tion, involving broad search in the space of possible actions and out- For example, Lukaszewski et al.35 used product sectoral diversity,
comes38. We focus on adult personality traits because by adulthood urbanization and human development indices as their proxies of
there is substantial canalization into roles and routines. socioecological diversity. While these indirect proxies may be rea-
If individuals’ personality traits are at least moderately plas- sonable indicators of economic diversification, they do not include
tic and influenced by their social and ecological niches, then the the wide range of social niches that may be available in a population.
diversity of multivariate trait profiles in a population should reflect Moreover, as a verbal theory, the niche diversity hypothesis suffers
the diversity of niches. Specifically, we propose that a greater diver- from a relative lack of precision regarding specific predictions about
sity of niches available in a population’s local ecology will cause the relationships between niche structures and population-level
there to be a greater diversity of unique personality profiles and, patterns of personality covariation. More generally, there are few
hence, a more variegated personality structure in that population. other extant theories that can explicitly predict or explain the emer-
We call this the niche diversity hypothesis. The logic is that, at the gence of different manifest personality covariance structures across
individual level, a closer fit between niche and personality should populations (for steps in this direction, see refs. 5,20).
result in higher payoffs, whether in the currency of performance, To help overcome these hurdles and push towards a more precise
productivity, popularity or reproductive fitness. Thus, individuals theory of personality trait distributions and structure, we develop
are incentivized to adjust their behavioural traits to the demands of and analyse a simple formal model to study the relationships
their niche through a mixture of learning (for example, via state– between niche diversity, emergent personality covariation and fac-
behaviour feedbacks39) and assortment towards niches that provide tor structure. Most formal models of personality traits have either
a closer fit to their current personalities. At the population level, a concerned traits at the individual level only49 or focused on the
greater diversity of personality profiles due to greater niche diversity persistence of multiple traits (usually two) in a population due to
should result in a population-level factor structure that is character- frequency-biased selection or payoffs to division of labour50–55. Our
ized by (1) lower overall trait covariance and (2) the emergence of a model instead concerns the proposal that cross-cultural variation in
larger number of explanatory factors, each of which accounts for a personality trait structure can be largely explained by differences in
smaller proportion of the overall variance. the diversity of niches exerting an influence on individual traits. We
The literature on non-human animals contains many examples assume only that (1) individuals possess a large number of behav-
of individual behavioural traits responding adaptively to aspects of ioural traits that act as a source of inter-individual variation; (2)
a niche26,40–43, including a recent study showing dramatic between- during development, individuals assort into socioecological niches,
population variation in within-population trait correlations in each of which is characterized by an ideal set of trait values that cor-
delicate skinks44. However, the empirical literature on niche spe- responds to optimal success in that niche; and (3) individuals’ traits
cialization and personality in humans is rather sparse. Nevertheless, are sufficiently plastic, such that during development, they partially
several recent studies provide preliminary evidence to support the conform to the ideal trait profiles of their niche. We show that our
core premises and predictions of the niche diversity hypothesis. For model not only explains the existing empirical results but also pro-
example, consistent with the premise that the payoffs of occupy- duces testable hypotheses for the cross-cultural study of personality
ing specific niches is a function of niche–personality fit, Denissen at both the individual and the population level.
et al.45 reported that the match between Germans’ personality pro-
files and the expert-rated personality demands of their occupations Results
uniquely predicted their actual earnings. These findings are consis- Consider a population of N individuals. Each is defined by a set of K
tent with certain premises from social investment theory46–48, which traits, which are represented by real numbers in [0, 1]. These traits
holds that personality trait levels may change in response to occu- should be viewed as specific behavioural or cognitive tendencies,
pying specific social roles (for example, parenthood or an occupa- such as those that are involved in comprising an individual’s per-
tion). However, social investment theorists have always assumed the sonality. An individual’s trait profile (that is, their personality) can
phenotypic reality of the Big Five trait factors, and employed these be viewed as a position in a K-dimensional trait space. We consider
as their units of analysis for personality change. an individual’s initial trait profile to be their temperament, to reflect
Two recent studies provide specific evidence for the niche variation in individuals’ proclivities to develop certain characteris-
diversity hypothesis, which predicts larger correlations among tics. The socioecological environment consists of M niches. Niches
personality indicators in smaller-scale societies than in industri- represent social or economic roles or group settings that involve
alized societies. First, Gurven et al.14 translated the 44-item Big a subset of the total population, and so the number of niches, M,
Five Inventory (BFI) into the language of the Tsimane, forager- provides a simple measure of the socioecological complexity of the
horticulturalists living in the Bolivian Amazon. After 1 question society. Each niche, which is defined by an ideal trait profile, con-
was removed after the researchers failed to find a culturally appro- sists of (randomly assigned) values for all K traits. That is, for each
priate equivalent, the inventory was administered to 632 Tsimane niche, there is a particular sort of individual optimally suited for
adults. Exploratory and confirmatory factor analyses suggested participation. Unlike the traits of individuals, ideal traits of a niche
that observed personality covariation was best described by just are not mutable, but fixed. Niche traits remain fixed because of the
two very broad and heterogeneous factors, tentatively labelled ‘pro- niche’s intrinsic ecological and social characteristics—traits may be
sociality’ and ‘industriousness.’ Second, considering only industrial- useful for successful completion of tasks associated with the niche
ized societies studied using the same BFI, Lukaszewski et al.35 found (such as persistence and critical thinking in academia) or may be
larger correlations among the Big Five personality factors in less normatively reinforced through social feedback.
complex societies. These researchers employed a large international The model dynamics consist of two stages: assortment and influ-
data set to demonstrate that cross-national variation in the aver- ence (Fig. 1). First, each individual assorts into a niche, preferring
age degree of personality covariation tracks nation-level proxies for niches with ideal trait profiles close to their own temperament.
socioecological complexity. Big Five dimensions were more strongly This represents division into cultural roles, in which an individual
NAtuRE HuMAN BEHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTure HumaN BeHaviour Articles
a b 1.00
Individuals Niches
t 2 0.75
0.50
t
1 0.25
0
2 3 5 10 20 50 100
Number of niches
Fig. 1 | illustration of the model dynamics. a, Individuals first assort into
niches that best match their trait profile. Here we see two agents and two
niches, with K = 3. Although neither agent is a perfect match with either
niche, the average distance is minimized when the top agent engages
with the top niche and the bottom agent engages with the bottom niche.
b, Niches influence individuals. The trait space is represented here by a
Cartesian plane centred on the niche’s ideal values (green square; K = 2 in
this example). Five agents are represented by light orange circles, each at
an initial location (temperament). Each trait value for each agent moves a
proportion p of the distance between its initial value and the niche’s ideal
value, yielding each agent a new position in the trait space represented by
the darker orange circles. P < 0.001, 95% confidence interval: 0.187–0.625; Fig. 4). This
relationship holds even after adjusting for potential confounders,
including sample size, whether the BFI was conducted in the native
preferentially engages with a certain set of tasks, scenarios and language, two measures of scale use biases (acquiescence bias and
social partners determined by their niche. Note that this assump- negative item bias) and an indicator of socially desirable respond-
tion is valid even for cases where individuals spend much of their ing (agreeableness) (Table 1). Accounting for continent of residence
time outside the confines of their niche, as long as the niche repre- in mixed models does not substantively alter these results. See the
sents the specific influences felt only by its members. Each individ- Supplementary Information for more details.
ual is then influenced by their niche, adjusting their traits towards For our theory to be robustly applicable to personality research, it
those values that are most appropriate to successful participation must also explain the finding that factor analysis on a fixed number
in the niche. Specifically, each of an individual’s traits is adjusted a of traits yields fewer explanatory factors in less complex societies14.
fraction p of the difference between its initial value and the niche’s We performed exploratory factor analysis (EFA) with varimax rota-
ideal value, where p is the available plasticity to adjust one’s traits. A tion across sets of 30 simulation runs, each set varying in combi-
plasticity of p = 1 permits individuals to perfectly alter their traits to nations of M and p. We kept the number of traits fixed at K = 50,
match their niche, while a plasticity of p = 0 disallows any updating similar to the number of items in the BFI. Figure 5a plots the num-
whatsoever (implying fixed, genetically determined trait distribu- ber of factors with eigenvalues greater than 1 as a function of M
tions). Intermediate values of p reflect both some inertia imparted for p = 0.9. This is a common (although imperfect) heuristic in EFA
by individuals’ temperaments as well as the malleability of traits and for counting factors. We find that the number of explanatory fac-
characteristics that occur through the process of development. See tors increases with the number of niches, and also illustrate how the
the ‘Methods’ section for full model details. number of factors varies inversely with the average inter-trait cor-
We find that increased niche diversity, M, reduces correlations relation. As the number of niches increases, the variance explained
between traits (Fig. 2). This is strongly moderated by plasticity, by any particular factor diminishes precipitously, as observed in the
p, with higher plasticity producing higher correlations, especially scree plots shown for a range of M and p values (Fig. 5b). For lower
for low M. At high M, plasticity becomes less critical for finding values of plasticity, less variance is explained by each factor, but the
an appropriate niche. This result is consistent with observed popu- number of emergent factors appears insensitive to plasticity.
lation differences in personality trait covariation seen in country- Our results are robust to variation in the number of traits
level data for industrialized nations35. We note that lower p is most (Supplementary Fig. 2) and population size (Supplementary Fig. 3).
consistent with the inter-trait correlations observed in those data. Although the ability of agents to initially assort into their best-fitting
We also find that with increased niche diversity comes more niche increases inter-trait correlations for low levels of plasticity, it
general variation in trait values (Fig. 3). We examined the average is not necessary to produce our main result that inter-trait correla-
variance in trait values as a function of both p and M. We find a tion decreases as a function of the number of niches. Random initial
strong positive relationship between niche number and trait vari- assortment to niches irrespective of temperament shows a similar
ance. When p is low, the influence of M is muted, as more of the inverse relationship between inter-trait correlation and the number
initial random variation is preserved. The non-monotonic relation- of niches (Supplementary Fig. 4).
ship between trait variance and p (Fig. 3b) is discussed further in the
Supplementary Information. Discussion
That greater niche diversity should lead to more trait variance is By focusing on the socioecological causes of behavioural variation,
a prediction that arises directly from our analysis. We test this pre- the niche diversity hypothesis helps to explain observed patterns
diction using the same 55-nation sample of ref. 35. Nations scoring of personality trait variation across populations and cultures. Our
higher in a proxy of ‘socioecological complexity’ (an index derived simulation model in which agents adjust personality traits to suit
from principal components analysis of urbanization, human devel- their nearest niche is very simple, but illustrates how such sorting
opment index and product sectoral diversity; see ref. 35) show can result in alteration of the number and structure of personality
higher levels of personality trait variance (standardized β = 0.431, types at the population level. With such simple rules in place, our
)2r(
noitalerroc
tiart-retnI
Plasticity
0.1 0.6
0.2 0.7 0.3 0.8
0.4 0.9
0.5 0.99
Fig. 2 | Lower inter-trait correlations with more niches. Inter-trait
correlation plotted as a function of M for varying values of p. Correlations
decrease with the number of niches (note that the x axis is log-scaled).
This effect is exacerbated by increased p, which allows for large
correlations at low M. The circles are individual model runs, and the solid
lines are means. Data are from 100 simulation runs for each parameter
combination. Here, N = 1,000 and K = 5.
NAtuRE HuMAN BEHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTure HumaN BeHaviour
10
9
8
7
−3 −2 −1 0 1
Socioecological complexity index
usually think of as personality characteristics. Strong evidence exists
that personality factors are at least somewhat plastic, supported by
both age-related changes61 and those resulting from traumatic or
otherwise meaningful events62, and more broadly by the logic that,
because personality traits quantify patterns of behaviour, their man-
ifestation must be influenced by the affordances provided by the
physical and social environment25–29,31,47,48. However, most previous
studies of personality plasticity have assumed the phenotypic real-
ity of personality factors such as the Big Five and HEXACO traits
(for example, see refs. 46–48). Our analysis implies that, if we are to
understand how the environment shapes personality covariance, we
model shows how increasing the number of niches in a population’s must ask about the plasticity of individual behavioural traits, rather
environment can reduce the correlations between personality attri- than composite factors based on patterns of behavioural covariance
butes and, in turn, increase the number of emergent factors required observed in societies of similar niche diversity.
to explain patterns of behavioural covariance. These simulation Given these considerations, we are forced to reconsider the
results expand the scope of existing cross-cultural studies that focus universality of the Big Five model of personality traits. Why does
on explaining variation in personality trait values13–16,35, to address personality research regularly obtain five factors? Is the Big Five
broader questions concerning cross-cultural variability in personal- simply a coincidence of the large niche diversity found throughout
ity structure. In addition, niche diversity potentially offers a consil- large-scale, urban societies? Will we obtain more factors if popu-
ient way in which to think about disparate descriptors of societal lations become even more complex? Or is there some other force
complexity. For example, Gurven56 recently showed that higher that is restraining the number of factors? Perhaps certain suites of
national-level personality trait covariation is also associated with psychological mechanisms really are intrinsically coordinated in
greater cultural tightness57, lower individualism58 and lower gender ways that create particular covariance patterns, which would mani-
egalitarianism59, all of which may reflect stricter constraints limit- fest as universal factors (see ref. 11). Whatever the answers are, we
ing the availability of diverse socioecological niches to individuals must further reconcile them with the fact that personality traits are
within those societies. entangled with their linguistic categories63. Personality is not just
Our analysis suggests important directions for both future mod- clustering of behavioural traits, it is about how useful, locally salient
elling efforts and empirical research. First, we predict that the vari- descriptive labels aid behavioural prediction64,65. Indeed, several
ance in personality trait values should be higher in more complex small-scale populations lack in their lexicon the broad range of per-
societies with higher niche diversity. Our preliminary analysis of sonality descriptors so prevalent in languages commonly spoken in
one of the largest cross-cultural data sets supports this prediction. large-scale societies16. Niche diversity may reflect what is relevant
In addition, a previous study based on a different cross-national to people in a society, and so our labels may end up being more or
data set found that various economic performance indicators less diverse based on how we need to describe people36. Thus, it is
also positively associate with variance in personality trait values60. possible that personality instruments developed in Western coun-
Nevertheless, a full investigation of this prediction may require tries are failing to capture some of the important variation. This is a
the collection of new empirical data: both systematic comparative problem that can only be solved by the development of richer, cul-
data assessing niches and personality, and longitudinal data assess- turally sensitive instruments. Meanwhile, we note that the analyses
ing changes in personality structure in relation to changes in niche by Lukaszewski et al.35 did include controls for linguistic differences
number and diversity. Second, we should ask more precise questions (as well as for psychometric response biases), which provide evi-
about the plasticity of the behavioural traits that compose what we dence that language use neither explains inter-factor covariance as
.d.s
tiart
egarevA
Fig. 4 | trait variance increases with socioecological complexity. The
average s.d. among each of the five factors as measured by the BFI for 55
nations plotted against each nation’s index of socioecological complexity
(a proxy for niche diversity). The green line is the best-fit linear regression,
and the shaded region is the 95% confidence interval. Standardized
β = 0.431, P < 0.001.
ecnairav
tiart
naeM
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
2
Number of niches
M
3
10
100
ecnairav
tiart
naeM
a
Plasticity
0.3
0.6
0.9
3 5 10 20 50 100
b
0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Plasticity
Fig. 3 | Mean trait variance as a function of niche diversity and plasticity.
a,b, The mean variance of each trait value plotted as a function of M (a) for
varying values of p, and p for varying M (b). The circles are individual model
runs, and the solid lines are means. Data are from 30 simulation runs for each
parameter combination. Here, N = 1,000 and K = 50. The dashed grey line in
b is at 1/12, the expected variance of a uniform distribution in [0, 1]. Thus,
trait variance in the model is closest to random when niches either exert no
influence or exert such a strong influence that the distribution of individuals’
trait values approaches the random distribution of niche ideal values.
NAtuRE HuMAN BEHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTure HumaN BeHaviour Articles
Table 1 | Multivariate regression with trait s.d. versus socioecological complexity, with additional predictors
variable Parameter estimate 95% Ci t value Pr > |t| Standardized estimate (β)
Socioecological complexity index 0.311 0.087–0.535 2.79 0.007 0.438
Total sample size 0 0–0.001 0.62 0.535 0.075
BFI language −0.145 −0.607 to 0.318 −0.63 0.533 −0.079
Acquiescence bias 0.070 0.024–0.117 3.02 0.004 0.354
Negative item bias −0.257 −0.515 to 0.001 −2.00 0.051 −0.271
Agreeableness 0.051 −0.012 to 0.114 1.63 0.109 0.196
Intercept 3.826 0.117–7.474 2.11 0.040 0
Model R2 = 0.4157, adjusted R2 = 0.3426; F = 5.69, d.f. = 6, P < 0.001.
20
0.6
15
0.4
10
0.2 5
0 0
2 3 5 10 20 50 100
Number of niches
measured by the BFI nor alters the relationship between inter-factor behavioural variation may be more constrained by strict social
covariance and socioecological complexity. norms. For example, in some small-scale societies, it has been noted
We have proposed one mechanism to explain the observed asso- that certain emotional expressions are proscribed, such as proscrip-
ciation between behavioural trait diversity and niche diversity, based tions against crying among the Ache and against anger among the
on assortment and plasticity. However, evolutionary biologists have Matsigenka67. Our simulations indicate that differences in plastic-
long been aware of another mechanism. If niches are inherited ity would be sufficient to lower the average inter-trait correlations
through assortment or limited dispersal, so that parents and off- in a way similar to variation in niche diversity, as seen in Fig. 2.
spring have similar niches, then natural selection can stabilize phe- However, if variation in plasticity was driving cross-cultural differ-
notypic variation at the genetic level. Evolutionary ecologists have ences, EFA would not uncover more factors as plasticity decreased,
provided support for the proposal that increased phenotypic varia- as indicated by the robustness to plasticity seen in the scree plots in
tion, at the species level, will be associated with increased diversity Fig. 5. In addition, our empirical analysis reveals a monotonically
of ecological niches41,66. Nevertheless, human psychology is highly increasing relationship between trait variance and niche diversity,
plastic, our social structure is malleable, our intra-population which supports the linear relationship predicted by the niche diver-
genetic variation is high and our cultures vary tremendously. Thus, sity hypothesis and not the curvilinear relationship predicted by the
we doubt that variation across populations in personality structure plasticity hypothesis (Fig. 3). Thus, while variation in plasticity may
is primarily caused by the maintenance of heritable variance in spe- indeed be an important part of explaining cross-cultural variation
cific patterns of trait covariance. in personality structure, its influence is not sufficient to replace the
Another alternative hypothesis is based on the possibility that niche diversity hypothesis. Moreover, even if existing measures do
populations might not vary substantially in their number of socio- not capture all of the relevant socioecological niche diversity in a
ecological niches, but only in the character of those niches. That is, population (and they surely do not), there are still good reasons to
cultures might vary in the extent to which individuals’ behavioural believe that such variation exists and is important35,36.
traits are shaped by their socioecological niches. We might call this Our model used very simplified representations of niches and
the plasticity hypothesis. In more complex societies, there might their influence on individuals’ traits. Such simplification is neces-
be relatively low plasticity, because individuals have more relative sary to characterize the behaviour of a complex system as a for-
freedom to express their initial temperaments. In simpler societies, mal model, providing a critical scaffolding for the development
srotcaf
fo
rebmuN
6
4
2
20
15
10
5
0
40
30 20
10
0
Factor number
Inter-trait
correlation
(r ) 2
eulavnegie
naeM
b
M = 2 M = 3 M = 5 M = 10 M = 20 M = 50 M = 100
a
1 4 7 10 1 4 7 10 1 4 7 10 1 4 7 10 1 4 7 10 1 4 7 10 1 4 7 10
p
=
0.3
p
=
0.6
p = 0.9
Fig. 5 | More niches, more factors. a, The number of factors with eigenvalues greater than one plotted as a function of M for p = 0.9 (the x axis is
log-scaled). The circles are individual runs, and the black line connects the means. The grey line is the mean inter-trait correlation for p = 0.9, taken
from Fig. 2. b, Scree plots showing the mean eigenvalues from EFA for the first ten factors, for varying values of p and M. Data in both plots are from
30 simulation runs for each parameter combination, N = 1,000, K = 50.
NAtuRE HuMAN BEHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTure HumaN BeHaviour
of richer theories about the emergence of personalities68,69. In real distribution U[0, 1]. We call the initial trait profile the individual’s temperament, to
life, individuals may simultaneously engage with multiple niches, reflect the variation in individuals’ proclivities to develop certain characteristics.
The socioecological environment consists of M niches, which influence the
may change niches over the course of their life, may be influenced
traits of the agents that engage with them. Niches reflect social or economic roles
directly by individuals both in terms of conformity (as implied by or group settings that involve a subset of the total population, and so the number
our model) and in terms of differentiation, and may be constrained of niches, M, provides a simple measure of the socioecological complexity of
in their choice of niche by socioeconomic and demographic factors. the society. Each niche j has an ideal trait profile characterized by K ideal traits,
These considerations complicate the hypothesis, but do not damage T j = {τi1, …, τiK}, where each trait is a real number in [0, 1]. An ideal trait profile can
be thought of as the unique personality type resulting in the highest payoff in that
it. For one thing, these considerations remain consistent with the
niche. Unlike the traits of individuals, the ideal traits of a niche are not mutable,
general idea that some populations are characterized by more socio- but fixed. Niche traits remain fixed because of the niche’s intrinsic ecological and
ecological niches, and this variation in niche diversity influences the social characteristics—traits may be useful for successful completion of tasks
degree of covariation among behavioural traits in a population. For associated with the niche (such as persistence and critical thinking in academia),
or may be normatively reinforced through social feedback. Niche traits are drawn
another, endless consideration of nuance can harm theory develop-
at random from a uniform distribution U[0, 1].
ment70, and it has been increasingly acknowledged that more formal
theory is sorely needed in the behavioural sciences71. Nevertheless, Dynamics. Model dynamics consist of two stages: (1) assortment, and (2)
it is important to examine the assumptions made by such a formal- influence (Fig. 1). In the assortment stage, each agent chooses to engage with a
ization, such that future work can deepen the conclusions that we particular niche. This represents division into cultural roles, in which an individual
preferentially engages with a certain set of tasks, scenarios and social partners
make and assess the robustness of our claims.
determined by their niche. Note that this assumption is valid even for cases where
First, we represented a niche by a fixed set of trait values towards
individuals spend much of their time outside the confines of their niche, as long
which individuals are influenced. However, people are also social as the niche represents the specific influences felt only by its members. We assume
creatures and will be influenced by each other, both positively, that each niche has a fixed capacity—a maximum number of individuals that can
becoming more similar, as well as differentiating themselves due engage with it without compromising efficiency or any other functional loss. This
capacity reflects the idea that the number of available niches is determined by the
to a desire to distinguish themselves from others72,73. That said, our
requirements of a society. Therefore, on the one hand, niches should not remain
model’s assumption that all participants in a niche are similarly
empty, and on the other hand, too many individuals engaging with a single niche can
influenced could also be viewed as a sort of conformist social influ- hinder communication and cooperation. The capacity c of each niche is given by
ence, and so the phenotypic plasticity featured in the model could
c ceilN=M 1
reflect social learning as much as asocial learning. ¼ ð Þ ð Þ
Second, we represented individuals as each belonging to a sin- where ceil(x) is the ceiling function, such that a real number x is rounded up to the
gle niche, for which joining is an individual decision and in which smallest integer greater than or equal to x. Thus, an environment with M niches
they remain forever. In reality, individuals are drawn to or excluded will observe the same maximal capacity for each of its M niches. For temperament
to play a role, we assume that individuals assort into niches that best fit their initial
from multiple niches based on their social networks, lineage and
temperaments. We do this by adopting a measure of distance from models of
status74,75. They may participate in multiple niches simultaneously opinion dynamics81,82 so that the distance d between individual i and niche j is
ij
and over time36. More broadly, we do not model the developmen-
t wa hl ip cr ho ic ne dss i vo idf un aic lsh ae l ta ed ra tp ht ea it ri o nn ic i hn e sd .e Fta ui tl u, rn eo wr oc ro kn s ci od ue lr d d iy nn coam rpi oc rs a i tn e dij¼K1 kK 1jtik�τ jkj ð2 Þ
X¼
a more complex representation of niche structure and social influ-
Each agent, in turn, evaluates each niche and chooses the niche with the
ence to tease out how different components influence the nature of
shortest distance from itself that is not already at capacity. In the Supplementary
trait variation, as well as a more nuanced consideration of develop- Information, we also consider an alternative distance metric as well as what
ment (for example, see refs. 76–78). That said, our model is simple but happens when individuals choose niches at random.
captures what we believe is the quintessential feature of the niche After they have all assorted into niches, each individual is influenced by
diversity hypothesis. its niche. Here, each individual in the niche updates their traits towards those
values that are most appropriate to successful participation in the niche. For each
Last, the model does not deal with social and cultural changes
individual i in niche j, each trait k is updated as follows:
(that is, changes in the number and complexity of niches), nor
with the genetic foundations of personality variation. Instead, we tik tikþp ðτ jk�tikÞ ð3 Þ
assumed a fixed number of niches with fixed size. In other words,
where p is the plasticity available to each individual to adjust their traits. The
niche diversity was treated as an exogenous variable. Over gen-
mathematical form of the influence rule is drawn from psychological theories of
erational time, the distribution of traits may influence the avail- reinforcement learning83,84, and is often implemented in computational models
able niches, creating a feedback loop39. If we are interested in how of social influence81,82,85,86. A plasticity of p = 1 permits individuals to perfectly
cultural evolution interacts with trait distributions, future models alter their traits to match their niche, while a plasticity of p = 0 disallows any
updating whatsoever (implying fixed, genetically determined trait distributions).
will have to incorporate this feedback and consider evolutionary
Intermediate values of p reflect both some inertia imparted by individuals’
dynamics. Both new theoretical work and longitudinal empirical
temperaments as well as the malleability of traits and characteristics that occur
studies of personality structure in populations undergoing socio- through the process of development.
economic change will be necessary to further elaborate and test the
niche diversity hypothesis. Outcome measures. We considered the extent to which greater niche diversity
reduces the constraints on trait development by assessing three outcomes from our
The biology of inheritance enforces some intrinsic variation
simulations. First, we considered the average inter-trait correlations, as used in ref. 35.
among individuals. However, social and ecological forces also shape
That is, at the end of each simulation, we take the squared Pearson correlation
and constrain behaviour and the cognitive schemas and proclivities between every pair of traits and report the average of this correlation for the
that produce it79,80. The logical consequence of this premise is that the entire population. Second, we consider the mean trait variance at the end of each
structure of behavioural trait covariation—the essence of personal- simulation, with the general prediction that higher niche diversity should lead to
greater variance in personality traits. Third, we performed EFA on our simulation
ity—should reflect the structure of the socioecological environment.
results, because we were interested in how many separate ‘factors’ comprising
bundled combinations of traits may be meaningfully characterized in different
Methods simulated societies, to compare our results with empirical cross-cultural variation14.
Consider a population of N individuals. Each individual i has a trait profile T The Java code used to generate our data, the SAS scripts used to perform
i
defined as a set of K traits, T i = {t i1, …, t iK}, where each trait is a real number in the EFA and the R scripts used to generate our plots are all available at
[0, 1]. These traits should be viewed as specific behavioural or cognitive tendencies, https://osf.io/pyhq7/.
such as those that are involved in comprising an individual’s personality. An
individual’s trait profile (that is, personality) can be viewed as a position in a Reporting Summary. Further information on research design is available in the
K-dimensional trait space. Initially, all traits are drawn at random from a uniform Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.
NAtuRE HuMAN BEHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTure HumaN BeHaviour Articles
Data availability 26. Montiglio, P.-O., Ferrari, C. & Réale, D. Social niche specialization under
Our empirical analysis was performed on data previously published, which can be constraints: personality, social interactions and environmental heterogeneity.
retrieved from Table 5 in Schmitt et al.15 and Supplement S2 in Lukaszewski et al.35. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 368, 20120343 (2013).
27. Kagan, J. in Social Anxiety 3rd edn (eds Hofman, S. G. & DiBartolo, P. M.)
Code availability 377–418 (Elsevier, 2014).
28. von Rueden, C. R., Lukaszewski, A. W. & Gurven, M. Adaptive personality
The Java code for the agent-based model, the SAS scripts used to perform the EFA
calibration in a human society: effects of embodied capital on prosocial traits.
and the R scripts used to generate our plots are all available on the Open Science
Behav. Ecol. 26, 1071–1082 (2015).
Framework repository (https://osf.io/pyhq7/).
29. Jokela, M., Pekkarinen, T., Sarvimäki, M., Terviö, M. & Uusitalo, R. Secular
rise in economically valuable personality traits. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 114,
Received: 7 January 2019; Accepted: 14 August 2019;
6527–6532 (2017).
Published: xx xx xxxx
30. Quinlan, R. J., Dira, S. J., Caudell, M. & Quinlan, M. Culture and
psychological responses to environmental shocks. Curr. Anthropol. 57,
References 632–652 (2016).
1. Ashton, M. C. & Lee, K. Empirical, theoretical, and practical advantages of 31. Sng, O., Neuberg, S. L., Varnum, M. E. & Kenrick, D. T. The behavioral
the HEXACO model of personality structure. Pers. Soc. Psychol. Rev. 11, ecology of cultural psychological variation. Psychol. Rev. 125, 714–743 (2018).
150–166 (2007). 32. Nettle, D. in The Evolution of Personality and Individual Differences (eds Buss,
2. Buss, D. M. & Craik, K. H. The act frequency approach to personality. D. M. & Hawley, P. H.) 5–28 (Oxford Univ. Press, 2011).
Psychol. Rev. 90, 105–126 (1983). 33. Schoener, T. in The Princeton Guide to Ecology (eds Levin, S. A. et al.)
3. Fleeson, W. Toward a structure-and process-integrated view of personality: traits 3–13 (Princeton Univ. Press, 2009).
as density distributions of states. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 80, 1011–1027 (2001). 34. Pocheville, A. in Handbook of Evolutionary Thinking in the Sciences
4. Mischel, W. & Shoda, Y. A cognitive–affective system theory of personality: (eds Heams, T. et al.) 547–586 (Springer, 2015).
reconceptualizing situations, dispositions, dynamics, and invariance in 35. Lukaszewski, A. W., Gurven, M., von Rueden, C. R. & Schmitt, D. P. What
personality structure. Psychol. Rev. 102, 246–268 (1995). explains personality covariation? A test of the socioecological complexity
5. Wood, D. & Denissen, J. J. in Psychology of Change: Life Contexts, hypothesis. Soc. Psychol. Pers. Sci. 8, 943–952 (2017).
Experiences, and Identities (eds Branscrombe, N. R. & Reynold, K.) 36. Smaldino, P. E. Social identity and cooperation in cultural evolution.
97–115 (Psychology Press, 2015). Behav. Process. 161, 108–116 (2019).
6. John, O. P., Naumann, L. P. & Soto, C. J. in Handbook of Personality: Theory 37. Halverson, C. F. et al. Personality structure as derived from parental ratings
and Research 3rd edn (eds John, O. P. et al.) 114–158 (Guilford Press, 2008). of free descriptions of children: the inventory of child individual differences.
7. McCrae, R. R. & Costa, P. T.Jr. Personality trait structure as a human J. Pers. 71, 995–1026 (2003).
universal. Am. Psychol. 52, 509–516 (1997). 38. Gopnik, A., Griffiths, T. L. & Lucas, C. G. When younger learners can be
8. McCrae, R. R. & Costa, P. T. in The SAGE Handbook of Personality Theory better (or at least more open-minded) than older ones. Curr. Dir. Psychol. Sci.
and Assessment (eds Boyle, G. et al.) 273–294 (Sage, 2008). 24, 87–92 (2015).
9. Goldberg, L. R. The development of markers for the Big-Five factor structure. 39. Sih, A. et al. Animal personality and state–behaviour feedbacks: a review and
Psychol. Assess. 4, 26–42 (1992). guide for empiricists. Trends Ecol. Evol. 30, 50–60 (2015).
10. Bouchard, T. J. & Loehlin, J. C. Genes, evolution, and personality. 40. Bergmüller, R. & Taborsky, M. Animal personality due to social niche
Behav. Genet. 31, 243–273 (2001). specialisation. Trends Ecol. Evol. 25, 504–511 (2010).
11. Nettle, D. Personality: What Makes You the Way You Are (Oxford 41. Araújo, M. S., Bolnick, D. I. & Layman, C. A. The ecological causes of
Univ. Press, 2009). individual specialisation. Ecol. Lett. 14, 948–958 (2011).
12. Alvergne, A., Jokela, M. & Lummaa, V. Personality and reproductive success 42. Webster, M. M. & Ward, A. J. Personality and social context. Biol. Rev. 86,
in a high-fertility human population. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 107, 759–773 (2011).
11745–11750 (2010). 43. Stamps, J. & Groothuis, T. G. The development of animal personality:
13. Bailey, D. H. et al. Heritability and fitness correlates of personality in the relevance, concepts and perspectives. Biol. Rev. 85, 301–325 (2010).
Ache, a natural-fertility population in paraguay. PLoS One 8, e59325 (2013). 44. Michelangeli, M., Chapple, D. G., Goulet, C. T., Bertram, M. G. & Wong, B.
14. Gurven, M., von Rueden, C., Massenkoff, M., Kaplan, H. & Lero Vie, M. Behavioral syndromes vary among geographically distinct populations in a
How universal is the Big Five? Testing the five-factor of personality variation reptile. Behav. Ecol. 30, 393–401 (2018).
among forager–farmers in the Bolivian Amazon. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 104, 45. Denissen, J. J. et al. Uncovering the power of personality to shape income.
354–370 (2013). Psychol. Sci. 29, 3–13 (2018).
15. Schmitt, D. P., Allik, J., McCrae, R. R., Benet-Martinez, V. & Ault, L. The 46. Bleidorn, W. et al. Personality maturation around the world: a
geographic distribution of the Big Five personality traits: patterns and profiles cross-cultural examination of social-investment theory. Psychol. Sci. 24,
of human self-description across 56 nations. J. Cross Cult. Psychol. 38, 2530–2540 (2013).
173–212 (2007). 47. Hudson, N. W., Roberts, B. W. & Lodi-Smith, J. Personality trait development
16. Saucier, G. et al. A basic bivariate structure of personality attributes evident and social investment in work. J. Res. Pers. 46, 334–344 (2012).
across nine languages. J. Pers. 82, 1–14 (2014). 48. Roberts, B. W., Wood, D. & Smith, J. L. Evaluating five factor theory and
17. Schaller, M. & Murray, D. R. Pathogens, personality, and culture: disease social investment perspectives on personality trait development. J. Res. Pers.
prevalence predicts worldwide variability in sociosexuality, extraversion, and 39, 166–184 (2005).
openness to experience. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 95, 212–221 (2008). 49. Nowak, A., Vallacher, R. R. & Zochowski, M. The emergence of personality:
18. Schmitt, D. P., Realo, A., Voracek, M. & Allik, J. Why can’t a man be more dynamic foundations of individual variation. Dev. Rev. 25, 351–385 (2005).
like a woman? Sex differences in Big Five personality traits across 55 cultures. 50. McElreath, R. & Strimling, P. How noisy information and individual
J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 94, 168–182 (2008). asymmetries can make ‘personality’ an adaptation: a simple model.
19. Baumert, A. et al. Integrating personality structure, personality process, and Anim. Behav. 72, 1135–1139 (2006).
personality development. Eur. J. Pers. 31, 503–528 (2017). 51. Dubois, F., Giraldeau, L.-A. & Réale, D. Frequency-dependent payoffs and
20. Cramer, A. O. et al. Dimensions of normal personality as networks in search sequential decision-making favour consistent tactic use. Proc. R. Soc. B 279,
of equilibrium: you can’t like parties if you don’t like people. Eur. J. Pers. 26, 1977–1985 (2012).
414–431 (2012). 52. Lake, M. W. & Crema, E. R. The cultural evolution of adaptive-trait
21. Lukaszewski, A. W. Testing an adaptationist theory of trait covariation: diversity when resources are uncertain and finite. Adv. Complex Syst. 15,
relative bargaining power as a common calibrator of an interpersonal 1150013 (2012).
syndrome. Eur. J. Pers. 27, 328–345 (2013). 53. Vásárhelyi, Z., Meszéna, G. & Scheuring, I. Evolution of heritable behavioural
22. Uher, J. Personality psychology: lexical approaches, assessment methods, and differences in a model of social division of labour. PeerJ 3, e977 (2015).
trait concepts reveal only half of the story? Why it is time for a paradigm 54. Wolf, M., Van Doorn, G. S., Leimar, O. & Weissing, F. J. Life-history
shift. Integr. Psychol. Behav. Sci. 47, 1–55 (2013). trade-offs favour the evolution of animal personalities. Nature 447,
23. Buss, D. M. Selection, evocation, and manipulation. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 53, 581–584 (2007).
1214–1221 (1987). 55. Wolf, M. & McNamara, J. M. On the evolution of personalities via
24. De Vries, R. E., Tybur, J. M., Pollet, T. V. & van Vugt, M. Evolution, frequency-dependent selection. Am. Nat. 179, 679–692 (2012).
situational affordances, and the HEXACO model of personality. Evol. Hum. 56. Gurven, M. D. Broadening horizons: sample diversity and socioecological
Behav. 37, 407–421 (2016). theory are essential to the future of psychological science. Proc. Natl Acad.
25. Denissen, J. J. & Penke, L. Motivational individual reaction norms underlying Sci. USA 115, 11420–11427 (2018).
the five-factor model of personality: first steps towards a theory-based 57. Gelfand, M. J. et al. Differences between tight and loose cultures: a 33-nation
conceptual framework. J. Res. Pers. 42, 1285–1302 (2008). study. Science 332, 1100–1104 (2011).
NAtuRE HuMAN BEHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
Articles NaTure HumaN BeHaviour
58. Hofstede, G. Cultures and Organizations: Software of the Mind 79. Smaldino, P. E. & Richerson, P. J. The origins of options. Front. Neurosci. 6,
(McGraw-Hill, 1991). 50 (2012).
59. House, R. J, Hanges, P. J, Javidan, M, Dorfman, P. W. & Gupta, V. Culture, 80. Heyes, C. Cognitive Gadgets: The Cultural Evolution of Thinking
Leadership, and Organizations: The GLOBE Study of 62 Societies (Sage, 2004). (Harvard Univ. Press, 2018).
60. Bartram, D. Scalar equivalence of OPQ32: Big Five profiles of 31 countries. 81. Flache, A. & Macy, M. W. Small worlds and cultural polarization.
J. Cross Cult. Psychol. 44, 61–83 (2013). J. Math. Sociol. 35, 146–176 (2011).
61. Caspi, A., Roberts, B. W. & Shiner, R. L. Personality development: stability 82. Turner, M. A. & Smaldino, P. E. Paths to polarization: how extreme views,
and change. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 56, 453–484 (2005). miscommunication, and random chance drive opinion dynamics. Complexity
62. MacLean, K. A., Johnson, M. W. & Griffiths, R. R. Mystical experiences 2018, 2740959 (2018).
occasioned by the hallucinogen psilocybin lead to increases in the personality 83. Rescorla, R. A. & Wagner, A. R. in Classical Conditioning II: Current Research
domain of openness. J. Psychopharmacol. 25, 1453–1461 (2011). and Theory (eds Black, A. H. & Prokasy, W. F.) 64–99 (Appleton-Century-
63. Contreras Kallens, P. A., Dale, R. & Smaldino, P. E. Cultural evolution of Crofts, 1972).
categorization. Cogn. Syst. Res. 52, 765–774 (2018). 84. Sutton, R. S. & Barto, A. G. Reinforcement Learning (MIT Press, 1998).
64. Buss, D. M. in The Evolution of Personality and Individual Differences 85. Epstein, J. M Agent_Zero: Toward Neurocognitive Foundations for Generative
(eds Buss, D. M. & Hawley, P. H.) 29–57 (Oxford Univ. Press, 2011). Social Science (Princeton Univ. Press, 2014).
65. Wood, D. Testing the lexical hypothesis: are socially important traits 86. Smaldino, P. E. & Epstein, J. M. Social conformity despite individual
more densely reflected in the English lexicon? J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 108, preferences for distinctiveness. R. Soc. Open Sci. 2, 140437 (2015).
317–335 (2015).
66. Van Valen, L. Morphological variation and width of ecological niche. Acknowledgements
Am. Nat. 99, 377–390 (1965).
We thank audiences at UC Merced and MPI-EVA for discussion of these ideas, and B.
67. Hill, K. & Hurtado, A. M. Aché Life History: The Ecology and Demography of
Beheim, J. Bunce, J. Chung, E. Fried, A. Kandler, D. Lukas, J. Rohrer, B. Roberts and M.
a Foraging People (Routledge, 2017).
Turner for helpful comments on earlier drafts of this manuscript. The authors received
68. Haldane, J. B. S. A defense of beanbag genetics. Perspect. Biol. Med. 7,
no specific funding for this work.
343–360 (1964).
69. Smaldino, P. E. in Computational Social Psychology (eds Vallacher, R. R. et al.)
311–331 (Routledge, 2017). Author contributions
70. Healy, K. Fuck nuance. Sociol. Theory 35, 118–127 (2017). P.E.S., A.L., C.v.R. and M.G. designed the research plan. P.E.S. built and analysed the
71. Muthukrishna, M. & Henrich, J. A problem in theory. Nat. Hum. Behav. 3, computational model. M.G. analysed the empirical data and performed the EFA on the
221–229 (2019). simulated data. P.E.S., A.L., C.v.R. and M.G. wrote the manuscript.
72. Brewer, M. B. The social self: on being the same and different at the same
time. Pers. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 17, 475–482 (1991). Competing interests
73. Berger, J. & Heath, C. Who drives divergence? Identity signaling, outgroup
The authors declare no competing interests.
dissimilarity, and the abandonment of cultural tastes. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 95,
593–607 (2008).
74. Krause, J., James, R. & Croft, D. Personality in the context of social networks. Additional information
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 365, 4099–4106 (2010).
Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/
75. McPherson, M., Smith-Lovin, L. & Cook, J. M. Birds of a feather: homophily
s41562-019-0730-3.
in social networks. Annu. Rev. Sociol. 27, 415–444 (2001).
76. Frankenhuis, W. E. & Panchanathan, K. Balancing sampling and Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
specialization: an adaptationist model of incremental development. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to P.E.S.
Proc. R. Soc. B 278, 3558–3565 (2011). or M.G.
77. Panchanathan, K. & Frankenhuis, W. E. The evolution of sensitive periods in Peer review information Primary handling editor: Stavroula Kousta.
a model of incremental development. Proc. R. Soc. B 283, 20152439 (2016).
78. Frankenhuis, W. E., Panchanathan, K. & Belsky, J. A mathematical model of Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
the evolution of individual differences in developmental plasticity arising published maps and institutional affiliations.
through parental bet-hedging. Dev. Sci. 19, 251–274 (2016). © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2019
NAtuRE HuMAN BEHAviouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
1
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Corresponding author(s): PE Smaldino
Last updated by author(s): Jan 14, 2019
Reporting Summary
Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency
in reporting. For further information on Nature Research policies, see Authors & Referees and the Editorial Policy Checklist.
Statistics
For all statistical analyses, confirm that the following items are present in the figure legend, table legend, main text, or Methods section.
n/a Confirmed
The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
A statement on whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided
Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.
A description of all covariates tested
A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
A full description of the statistical parameters including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient)
AND variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)
For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted
Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.
For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated
Our web collection on statistics for biologists contains articles on many of the points above.
Software and code
Policy information about availability of computer code
Data collection All original data for this study was generated by simulation code, written in Java. That code is provided on an OSF page linked in the
manuscript. We also analyze previously published data, to which we direct the reader.
Data analysis Most analyses were done in R (v. 3.3.2), with the exception of the exploratory factor analysis, which was done in SAS (v. 9.4).
For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors/reviewers.
We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Research guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.
Data
Policy information about availability of data
All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable:
- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets
- A list of figures that have associated raw data
- A description of any restrictions on data availability
Our empirical analysis was performed on data previously published, which can be retrieved from Table 5 in Schmitt et al. (2007) and Supplement S2 in Lukaszewski
et al. (2017).
2
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Field-specific reporting
Please select the one below that is the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.
Life sciences Behavioural & social sciences Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences
For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/documents/nr-reporting-summary-flat.pdf
Behavioural & social sciences study design
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
Study description Data are quantitative and generated by computer simulation. Empirical analyses are of previously published data.
Research sample We analyze data from a global sample of over 19,000 participants from 55 countries, published in 2007.
Sampling strategy N/A.
Data collection Simulations were run in Java, with 100 runs for each parameter combination.
Timing All simulations were run in the Spring of 2018.
Data exclusions No data were excluded.
Non-participation N/A.
Randomization N/A.
Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods
We require information from authors about some types of materials, experimental systems and methods used in many studies. Here, indicate whether each material,
system or method listed is relevant to your study. If you are not sure if a list item applies to your research, read the appropriate section before selecting a response.
Materials & experimental systems Methods
n/a Involved in the study n/a Involved in the study
Antibodies ChIP-seq
Eukaryotic cell lines Flow cytometry
Palaeontology MRI-based neuroimaging
Animals and other organisms
Human research participants
Clinical data